6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 1/258
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Mountain Home, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 1678, passed March 11, 2019.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY CODE OF
MOUNTAIN HOME IDAHO
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Mountain Home, Idaho, an Idaho Municipal Corporation:
SECTION 1: The City Code of the City of Mountain Home, Idaho, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., containing the compilation of all ordinances of
a general nature together with the changes made in said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of the City is hereby adopted as the
official City Code of the City of Mountain Home, Idaho, and from and after the date of passage of this ordinance shall be accepted in all courts without
question as the Official Code and law of the City as enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
SECTION 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement
service, provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or
deleting provisions of the Official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, three (3)
copies of which shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said
office is regularly open.
SECTION 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official City Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision
and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said Official City Code. All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances,
franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision
of the City Code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the Official City Code.
SECTION 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
SECTION 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
SECTION 6: This Ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval in
accordance with law, as printed and published in book form by order of the Mayor and City Council.
PASSED by the City Council of the City of Mountain Home, Idaho, this 22nd day of October, 1990.
APPROVED by the Mayor of the City of Mountain Home, Idaho, this 22nd day of October, 1990.
Title 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official code of the city. This code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the MOUNTAIN HOME CITY CODE and is hereby published by authority of the council and shall be kept up to
date as provided in section 1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the
position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself,
when reference is made to this code by title in any legal documents. (1990 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 2/258
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this state
as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section 1-2-1 of this title. (1990 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this
code. (1990 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when ordinances
are amended or repealed or new ordinances passed by the city council. The city clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the
official copies maintained in the office of the city clerk. Any person having in his custody a copy of this code shall make every effort to maintain said
code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered to him or
made available to him through the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 1561, 2-14-2011)
1-1-5: CITY CODE WEBSITE:
This code shall also be available through the city website at www.mountain-home.us by clicking on the city code and ordinance link. (Ord. 1561, 2-14-
2011)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or
are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement
ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the City; and
all special ordinances. (1990 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as the City Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this City Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1990 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any
offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall
conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable, if any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance
takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon
the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of
the same provisions; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting
the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this City Code. (1990 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 3/258
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining
portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or
phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1990 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party
or person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and
females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any
section of this City Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant
thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been changed in the content of this City Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1990 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such
meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The City of Mountain Home, County of Elmore, State of Idaho.
CODE: The Municipal Code of the City of Mountain Home.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
City of Mountain Home".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
INFRACTION: A civil public offense, not constituting a crime, punishable by a penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and for which no
incarceration may be imposed1.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense not defined as a felony or infraction under State law2.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the City; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or
with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City
of Mountain Home".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidences of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every
right of interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 4/258
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such buildings or land, whether alone or with
others.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise,
articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law to any official or public writing or bond it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper
mark. (1990 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended
or reenacted. (1990 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
A. Violations Deemed Misdemeanors Unless Otherwise Specified: It shall be unlawful to violate any provision, requirement, duty or standard contained
in this Code. Any violation of this Code shall be deemed a misdemeanor unless otherwise specified.
1. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this Code deemed a misdemeanor may
be fined in a sum not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any offense and no imprisonment may be imposed; and in addition thereto,
any person so convicted shall pay such costs as the court may assess.
2. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor violation of sections 4-6-17, 6-2-9, or 6-2-12 of this Code may be fined in a sum not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and may be confined in jail for a period of not more than six (6) months, or both, and in addition thereto, any person
so convicted shall pay such costs as the court may assess.
B. Violations Deemed Infractions: When the offense is designated as an infraction by any section or provision of this Code or by State law, it is
punishable only by the penalties set forth below or as provided in State Code and no incarceration may be imposed.
1. For a first offense infraction violation of any provision of this Code, a fixed penalty of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), plus any such costs as
the court may assess.
2. For second and subsequent infraction violations of this Code, a fixed penalty of three hundred dollars ($300.00), plus any such costs as the court
may assess.
C. Failure To Pay Infraction A Misdemeanor: Failure to pay any infraction within thirty (30) days of the date of entry of a guilty plea or conviction shall be
deemed a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1675, 12-27-2018)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this Code the same as though it
were a part of each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code where any duty is prescribed or
obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, unless it is designated as an infraction. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains
unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code.
This chapter shall not be applicable to violations of the Idaho Transparent and Ethical Government Act, specifically, the Idaho Public Records Act1, the
Idaho Open Meeting Laws2, the Idaho Ethics in Government Act3 and the Idaho Prohibitions Against Contracts With Officers4. Violations of these Acts
shall be subject to the punishment as provided in each separate Act.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code, the City Attorney or City Prosecutor
may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the
revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this Code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 1636, 8-24-2015)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 5/258
Except as otherwise provided by the laws of the State of Idaho, no provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee of the City of
Mountain Home shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty,
unless the intention of the City Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section
creating the duty. (Ord. 1636, 8-24-2015)
Chapter 5
MAYOR
1-5-1: ELECTION:
The mayor shall be elected for a four (4) year term, and shall serve until his successor is elected and qualified as provided by statute. If there are three
(3) or fewer candidates on the ballot for mayor, the candidate receiving the greater or greatest number of votes shall be elected mayor. If there are four
(4) or more candidates on the ballot for mayor, a majority of the votes for any candidate running for the office of mayor shall be required for election to
that office. In the event that there are four (4) or more candidates for mayor and no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast, there shall be a
runoff election between the two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes cast. Such runoff election shall be conducted as in the general
election in a manner and at such time, within thirty (30) days of the general election, as provided by this code and state statute, and shall be exempt
from the limitation upon the dates of elections as provided in Idaho Code section 34-106. (Ord. 1564, 5-23-2011)
1-5-2: CONFLICTING INTEREST:
The mayor shall devote his full time and attention to the affairs of the city and shall not, during the term of office, operate, keep, maintain, or be
employed at or in any business, establishment, concern or enterprise that shall in any way conflict with his duties as mayor of the city as herein set
forth. (Ord. 976, 2-22-1982)
1-5-3: WORK HOURS:
The mayor shall keep and maintain regular hours of work, with reasonable scheduled hours at the city offices. (Ord. 976, 2-22-1982)
1-5-4: OFFICE:
The mayor and council shall provide offices in the city hall for the mayor. (Ord. 648, 9-30-1965, eff. 1-31-1966)
1-5-5: DUTIES:
The mayor shall be the chief administrative official of the city, preside over the meetings of the city council and determine the order of business, subject
to such rules as the council may prescribe, have a vote only when the council is equally divided, have the superintending control of all officers and
affairs in the city, preserve order, and take care that the ordinances of the city and the provisions of title 50, Idaho Code, are complied with and
enforced. The mayor shall, from time to time, communicate to the city council such information and recommend such measures as, in his opinion, may
tend to the improvement of the finances, the protection, the health, the security, the ornament, the comfort and the general welfare and prosperity of the
city. The mayor shall have and exercise such other powers, prerogatives and authority as is conferred by the laws of the state or as may be conferred
upon him by the city council, and shall have the power to administer oaths, and shall sign all contracts and conveyances in the name and on behalf of
the city. (Ord. 976, 2-22-1982)
1-5-6: APPOINTMENTS:
The mayor shall appoint, by and with the consent and advice of the council, a city clerk, a city treasurer, a city attorney and such other officers or
department heads as may be deemed necessary for the efficient operation of the city as provided in Idaho Code section 50-204. Any vacancies
occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner. Any refusal of the council to confirm the mayor's nomination for appointment shall be
handled in accordance with Idaho Code section 50-205. For the purpose of clarification, a library director is appointed by the board of trustees of the city
library as provided in Idaho Code section 33-2608. (Ord. 1616, 2-24-2014)
1-5-7: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
Any appointed officer or department head may be removed from office by the Mayor for any cause deemed sufficient by the Mayor, but such removal
shall be by and with the affirmative vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the full Council; provided, that the City Council, by the unanimous
vote of all its members, may upon their own initiative remove any appointed officer or department head as provided in Idaho Code section 50-206. Any
member of any board, committee or commission may be removed as provided in section 2-2-4 of this Code. (Ord. 1667, 2-26-2018)
1-5-8: DESIGNATION OF DUTIES:
Whenever there is a question or dispute as to the respective duties or powers of any appointed officer of the City, the question or dispute shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 6/258
settled by the Mayor, and the Mayor shall have the power to delegate to any appointed officer any duty which is to be performed when no specific officer
has been directed to perform that duty. (Ord. 648, 9-30-1965, eff. 1-31-1966)
1-5-9: VACANCY IN OFFICE OF MAYOR:
In case of a temporary vacancy in the Office of Mayor due to absence or disability, the President of the Council shall exercise the Office of Mayor during
such disability or temporary absence, and until the Mayor shall return. When a vacancy occurs in the Office of Mayor by reason of death, resignation or
permanent disability, the City Council shall fill the vacancy from within or without the Council as may be deemed in the best interests of the City, which
appointee shall serve until the next general City election, at which election a Mayor shall be elected for the full four (4) year term. (Ord. 976, 2-22-1982)
1-5-10: VACATION AND BENEFITS:
The Mayor shall have fifteen (15) working days' paid leave time per year during his term or terms of office. The Mayor, being a full time employee of the
City for his elected term, shall receive medical benefits, sick leave and other benefits provided by the City for employees or elected officials. (Ord. 976,
2-22-1982)
1-5-11: VETO:
The Mayor shall have the power to veto or sign any ordinance passed by the Council; provided, that any ordinance vetoed by the Mayor may be passed
over his veto by a vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the full Council, and should the Mayor neglect or refuse to sign any ordinance and
return the same, with his objections in writing, at the next regular meeting of the Council, the same shall become a law without his signature. (Ord. 976,
2-22-1982)
1-5-12: ABSENCE OF MAYOR AND CITY CLERK:
The Mayor and the Clerk shall not voluntarily absent themselves from their duties in the City at the same time for more than twenty four (24) hours,
except for official conferences which contribute to their knowledge and skills in their respective duties to the City. (Ord. 976, 2-22-1982)
1-5-13: REWARD:
The Mayor, whenever he deems it expedient, is hereby empowered to offer a reward not exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for information
leading to the arrest and conviction of any person charged with violating any of the provisions of this Code or damaging any City property. (Ord. 1187,
11-8-1993)
Chapter 6
CITY COUNCIL
1-6-1: COMPOSITION OF CITY COUNCIL:
There shall be a mayor and four (4) city council members, one-half (1/2) of whom shall be elected at each general city election and who shall be elected
to four (4) year terms at the time and in the manner as provided by chapter 7 of title 50 of the Idaho Code. (Ord. 1549, 7-12-2010)
1-6-2: ELECT PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL:
At the time of taking office and each January thereafter, the council shall elect one of its members president of the council who shall preside at all
meetings of the council and perform all other duties of the mayor in the absence of the mayor, such position shall rotate annually between the council
members; and, in the absence of the president the council shall elect one of their members to occupy his place temporarily, who shall be styled acting
president of the council, and the president and acting president, when occupying the place of the mayor1, shall have the same privileges as other
members of the council and all actions of the president and acting president, while so acting, shall be binding upon the council and upon the
municipality as if performed by the mayor. (Ord. 1574, 12-12-2011)
1-6-3: HOW TO CONDUCT COUNCIL MEETINGS:
Council meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the laws of the state of Idaho. (Ord. 1549, 7-12-2010)
1-6-4: MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings: The city council shall hold regular meetings at such place in the city as is designated in the notice, at six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and
thereafter until further action of the council, as follows: the second and fourth Mondays of each month, unless such day be a legal holiday, in which
event such meeting shall be held on the day following such holiday. The city council may cancel or change the date of a meeting for good cause
upon a motion of the council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 7/258
B. Special Meetings: The mayor or a majority of the council shall have the power to call special meetings of the city council, the object of which shall be
submitted to the council members in writing at least twenty four (24) hours before the meeting. Notice of the meeting shall also be posted.
C. Meetings Open To The Public: All meetings of the council shall be open to the public, except that executive sessions may be closed pursuant to
Idaho Code section 74-206.
D. Presiding Officer: In the event of the mayor's absence, the council meetings shall be presided over by a council president to be selected by the
council from its members each January. Such position shall rotate yearly.
E. Meetings Using Telecommunications Devices: Meetings of the city council may be conducted using telecommunications devices which enable all
council members participating in the meeting to communicate with each other. Such devices may include, but are not limited to, telephone or video
conferencing devices and similar communications equipment. Participation by a member of the city council through telecommunications devices
shall constitute presence in person by such member at the meeting; provided, however, that at least one member of the city council or the mayor
shall be physically present at the location designated in the meeting notice, as required under section 74-204, Idaho Code, to ensure that the public
may attend such meeting in person. The communications among members of the city council must be audible to the public attending the meeting in
person and the members of the council. (Ord. 1636, 8-24-2015)
1-6-5: QUORUM, ATTENDANCE OF MEMBERS:
At all meetings of the city council, a majority of the members shall constitute a quorum to do business; a smaller number may adjourn from day to day.
Whenever at or during any meeting less than a quorum shall be present, the members present may, by order entered upon the minutes, direct any
absent member or members to attend forthwith or at a stated time and place and cause said direction to be communicated orally or in writing to, or
served upon, such absent member or members. Successive directions may be ordered, communicated or served. (1990 Code)
1-6-6: ORDINANCES OF THE CITY:
All ordinances shall be presented and voted upon in the manner and style and shall be subject to the terms and conditions of section 50-901 et seq., of
the Idaho Code. (1990 Code)
Chapter 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-7-1: BONDS:
A. Bonds Or Coverage In Lieu Of Bonds Required: The city clerk and city treasurer are hereby required to give and furnish official bonds or provide
coverage in compliance with Idaho Code section 59-804 in an amount not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the faithful performance of
their respective duties.
B. City To Pay Premium On Bonds Or Coverage In Lieu Of Public Officials Surety Bond: If a surety company, authorized under the laws of Idaho to
become surety on such bonds, becomes surety on any bond delivered to the city under the provisions of this section, or if the city purchases
insurance coverage in lieu of a public official surety bond, the premium on such bond or insurance policy shall be paid by said city out of its general
fund. (Ord. 1579, 2-13-2012)
1-7-2: SALARIES:
A. Generally: The monthly salaries paid to officers and employees of the city are established by the city council through budget and appropriation
provisions.
B. Part Time Employees: The compensation to be paid to part time employees of the city shall from time to time be fixed by the mayor and the
department head. (1990 Code)
ARTICLE A. CITY CLERK
1-7A-1: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city clerk shall have and perform all of the duties provided by state law1. (1990 Code)
1-7A-2: DEPUTY CITY CLERK:
A. Office Created: There is created and established in the city an office to be generally known and designated as deputy city clerk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 8/258
B. Duties: The duties of said deputy city clerk shall be such as may from time to time be assigned by the city clerk, and in the absence of the city clerk
or inability to perform the duties of his office, said deputy city clerk shall temporarily perform the duties of city clerk. (1990 Code)
ARTICLE B. CITY TREASURER
1-7B-1: DUTIES:
The city treasurer shall have and perform all of the duties provided in state law1. (1990 Code)
1-7B-2: DEPUTY CITY TREASURER:
A. Office Created: There is created and established in the city an office to be generally known and designated as deputy city treasurer.
B. Duties: The duties of said deputy city treasurer shall be such as may from time to time be assigned by the city treasurer, and in the absence of the
city treasurer or inability to perform the duties of his office, said deputy city treasurer shall temporarily perform the duties of city treasurer. (Ord. 1626,
12-22-2014)
ARTICLE C. CITY ATTORNEY
1-7C-1: APPOINTMENT:
Appointment of a city attorney shall be accomplished as provided in section 1-5-6 of this title. His appointment shall continue until he is removed from
office as provided in section 1-5-7 of this title. (Ord. 1627, 12-22-2014)
1-7C-2: SUITS AND ACTIONS:
The city attorney may represent the city in all suits or proceedings in which the city is interested. (Ord. 1627, 12-22-2014)
1-7C-3: DUTIES:
The city attorney shall perform such duties as are prescribed by ordinance of the council and/or by state law, together with the following:
A. It shall be the duty of the attorney to see to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the city, and of all similar
interlocutory orders.
B. He shall draft or supervise the phraseology of any contract, lease or other document or instrument to which the city may be a party and, upon request
of the council, shall draft ordinances covering any subjects within the power of the city.
C. He shall attend all meetings of the council unless excused by the mayor and in absence of the mayor may be excused by the council president.
D. He shall submit legal opinions when requested to do so by the mayor and/or council to any city official or employee.
E. He shall perform any further service, civil or criminal, required by statute or ordinance of the city. (Ord. 1627, 12-22-2014)
ARTICLE D. SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
1-7D-1: APPOINTMENT:
The mayor may appoint, with the approval of the council, a superintendent of public works, who shall hold office for the duration of his appointment,
unless sooner removed by the mayor with the concurrence of the council. (Ord. 565, 5-2-1960)
1-7D-2: DUTIES:
The superintendent of public works shall have the following duties:
A. Water: He shall supervise the installation and maintenance of all water mains and water services.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 9/258
B. Sewer: He shall supervise the installation and maintenance of all sewer lines of the municipality and installation, maintenance and operation of
sewage disposal facilities of the municipality.
C. Streets And Alleys: He shall supervise the grading, surfacing, repairs and maintenance of all streets and alleys.
D. Parks: He shall have supervision over all public parks and playgrounds within the city.
E. Equipment: He shall supervise the repair, upkeep and maintenance of all equipment placed under his control.
F. Employment And Supervision: He may employ, with the consent of the mayor and council, such help as is needed to carry on the work of the city,
including a water and sewer superintendent and superintendent for streets, such help to be under the supervision of the superintendent of public
works.
G. Other Duties: The Superintendent of Public Works shall be responsible for the accomplishment of such other work of the City which the Mayor and
Council may, from time to time, assign to him.
H. Reports: The Superintendent shall present to the Council, at its regular meeting each month, a written report of the public work accomplished the
preceding month, and also, as far as can be foreseen, public work planned for the current month. (Ord. 565, 5-2-60)
ARTICLE E. CITY ENGINEER
1-7E-1: APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATION:
The City Engineer shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council. Said Engineer shall be licensed by the State of Idaho1.
(1990 Code)
1-7E-2: DUTIES:
The Engineer shall make or cause to be made the necessary surveys, plats, drawings and estimates, together with suitable specifications, for all public
works and improvements, when ordered to do so by the Mayor or City Council. He shall also make, or cause to be made, all necessary surveys of
streets, alleys and public grounds, the lines and corners of which he shall make in some approved, permanent manner, and shall make a plat of all
surveys. This plat is to be filed in his office and recorded in a book kept for that purpose, together with the field notes used in making such surveys.
(1990 Code)
1-7E-3: STREET GRADES; SURVEY:
It shall also be the duty of the City Engineer to report grades for all streets, alleys and sidewalks as may be required by the Mayor or Council, and to
report any changes required or advisable in the grade of any street, sidewalk or alley. In locating any street or public way, he shall make suitable
surveys in order to establish corners and lines and shall erect suitable, permanent monuments from which such grades and surveys may be readily
ascertained. (1990 Code)
1-7E-4: PLATS:
The city engineer shall preserve and file in a convenient place and manner for reference in his office all maps, plats, surveys, books, reports, papers
and other records pertaining to his office, all of which shall be delivered to his successor in office. (1990 Code)
1-7E-5: SUPERINTENDENT OF CONSTRUCTION:
The city engineer shall superintend the construction and repair of all public improvements as may be directed by the mayor or city council. (1990 Code)
1-7E-6: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
In all cases where private property is proposed to be assessed for public improvements, it shall be the duty of the engineer to advise the council with
reference to the value of the respective lots, parts of lots or parcels of land, and to determine the amount which may be assessed against the owners
thereof. (1990 Code)
1-7E-7: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the engineer to see that all contracts for construction work on public improvements are strictly fulfilled and complied with by the
contractor. He shall make, or cause to be made, suitable tests of materials used and shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, all work as the same
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 10/258
progresses, to the end that the same shall be done strictly in accordance with the specifications and approved practices. Whenever any person
engaged in doing work for the city shall violate any specifications or approved practices in the construction in which he is engaged, the engineer shall
immediately make full report of such matter to the mayor, together with his recommendations with reference thereto. (1990 Code)
ARTICLE F. APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS
1-7F-1: APPOINTMENTS:
Appointment of a City Clerk, City Treasurer, City Attorney, Public Works Director, Police Chief, Fire Chief, Parks and Recreation Director, Economic
Development Director and building official shall be accomplished as provided in section 1-5-6 of this title. The Mayor may appoint, subject to approval
by the Council, such other officers or department heads as may be deemed necessary for the efficient operation of the business of the Municipality. For
the purpose of clarification, a Library Director is appointed by the Board of Trustees of the City library as provided in Idaho Code section 33-2608. (Ord.
1615, 2-24-2014)
1-7F-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
All appointments shall continue until the appointee is removed from office as provided in section 1-5-7 of this title and section 1-7F-3 of this article. (Ord.
1615, 2-24-2014)
1-7F-3: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
Any appointed officer or department head may be removed from office by the Mayor for any cause by him deemed sufficient, but such removal shall be
in accordance with section 1-5-7 of this title. Any member of any board, committee or commission may be removed as provided in section 2-2-4 of this
Code. (Ord. 1667, 2-26-2018)
ARTICLE G. SALARIES
1-7G-1: SALARIES AND BENEFITS, GENERAL:
A. The authorized salaries and benefits of elective officers of the City shall be as follows, and said salary, benefits and expenses shall be effective as of
January 1, 2018:
1. The Mayor shall receive as compensation the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per month salary. In addition to a monthly salary, the
Mayor shall receive City benefits, including health, dental and vision insurance; PERSI retirement; eight (8) hours of sick leave each month; and
shall have fifteen (15) working days paid vacation leave time per year during his/her term of office.
2. The City Council persons shall receive the sum of eight hundred fifty dollars ($850.00) per month salary. In addition to a monthly salary, City
Council members shall receive City benefits, including PERSI retirement, and shall have available to them at each member's option, health, dental
and vision insurance. City Council members shall not receive sick leave or vacation leave time benefits.
B. The minimum hourly wage shall be as provided by the United States Department of Labor, except for employees employed by a recreational or
amusement establishment if it does not operate for seven (7) months in any calendar year and transient employees.
C. The mileage reimbursement rate shall be the then current maximum amount allowed by the Internal Revenue Service per mile. (Ord. 1662, 8-14-
2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
1-7G-2: NORMAL NECESSARY EXPENSES:
The Mayor and Council persons shall submit vouchers to the City Clerk for reimbursement of normal and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their official duties. (Ord. 1058, 8-26-1985)
1-7G-3: EXTRAORDINARY EXPENSES:
When authorized by the Mayor and City Council and properly vouchered, the Mayor and members of the Council shall be reimbursed for extraordinary
expenses incurred in the course of their official duties. (Ord. 753, 8-27-1973)
Chapter 8
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
1-8-1: DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 11/258
The city treasurer is hereby ordered, required and directed to keep monies belonging to the city and in the care of the city treasurer in official
depositories maintaining branch offices within the city; provided, however, when so authorized by resolution of the mayor and council, said funds may
be invested by said treasurer in bonds, accounts, treasury bills, notes, debentures, securities, repurchase agreements, commercial paper, funds and
other obligations authorized by law. The persons authorized as signatories on those accounts shall be the mayor, city treasurer and the city council
member serving as president of the city council at the time the account is opened, which person shall be a signatory on those accounts until that council
member is no longer a member of the city council. (Ord. 1573, 11-28-2011)
1-8-2: ADMINISTRATIVE FEES:
A. In order to defray part of the cost to the city of the following matters, an application or request for any of the following matters shall be accompanied
by the fee set forth opposite each item:
Application for sewer service outside of city $50.00
Copies (after first 100 pages)
(If the copying requested requires more than
2 hours' labor, additional charges shall be charged based on the hourly rate of the lowest paid employee or official who is
necessary and qualified to process the request.)
0.10 per
page
Copy of meeting CD 10.00 each
In addition to the fees set forth above, the person making the request shall also pay all costs for postage if required.
B. The council may waive any fees due to the city by any nonprofit organization or public entity if the council finds that the project being undertaken for
which the fees are charged or levied will benefit the community as a whole, rather than just the nonprofit organization or public entity.
C. The city shall comply with Idaho Code sections 74-101 through 74-119 concerning all public records requests. In compliance with these sections of
the Idaho Code the city shall not charge any cost or fee to a "requester" for copies or labor when the requester demonstrates that the requester's
examination and/or copying of public records:
1. Is likely to contribute significantly to the public's understanding of the operations or activities of the government;
2. Is not primarily in the individual interest of the requester including, but not limited to, the requester's interest in litigation in which the requester is or
may become a party; and
3. Will not occur if fees are charged because the requester has insufficient financial resources to pay such fees. (Ord. 1636, 8-24-2015)
1-8-3: RETURNED CHECKS:
Whenever the city receives a check, draft or order for the payment of money which has been dishonored for lack of funds or credit to pay the same, or
the maker has no account with the drawee, or for any other reason, then the maker of the check, draft or order shall pay to the city a fee of twenty
dollars ($20.00) for the special handling of the account by the city because of the returned check. (Ord. 1550, 8-23-2010)
Chapter 9
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
1-9-1: INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM; STATE LAW APPLICABLE:
Petitions for initiative or referendum shall be as currently provided by the Idaho Code. (Ord. 1559, 1-24-2011)
Chapter 10
PUBLIC HEARINGS
1-10-1: RULES OF PROCEDURE1 ESTABLISHED:
The following rules are hereby established and shall be observed in the conduct of any public hearing before the city council of the city or any other
board or commission of the city, and shall be known as the "rules of procedure for public hearings".
A. No person shall be permitted to testify or speak at a public hearing unless such person has signed his or her name and written his or her residential
address thereafter on sign up sheets to be provided by the city. This rule shall not apply to staff or technical witnesses directed by the mayor to give
evidence or information at the public hearing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 12/258
B. No person shall be permitted to speak at a public hearing until such person has been recognized by the presiding officer.
C. All public hearing proceedings shall be recorded electronically or stenographically, and all persons speaking at such public hearings shall speak
before a microphone in such a manner as will assure that the recorded testimony or remarks will be accurate and trustworthy.
D. At the commencement of the public hearing, the city council, board or commission may establish a time limit to be observed by all speakers. The
time limit shall be established, depending on the number of speakers who sign up for each public hearing, and shall apply only to the speaker's
comments.
E. The speaker shall not be interrupted by members of the city council, board or commission until his or her time limit has expired or until he or she has
finished his statement.
F. At the conclusion of a speaker's comments, each member of the city council, board or commission, when recognized by the presiding officer, shall be
allowed to question the speaker and the speaker shall be limited to answers to the questions asked. The question and answer period shall not be
included in the speaker's time limit.
G. Any person not conforming to any of the above rules may be prohibited from speaking during a public hearing. Should any person refuse to comply
with such prohibition, he may be removed from the room by order of the presiding officer.
H. The presiding officer shall have the authority to interpret and apply the foregoing rules, subject to an appeal to the city council, board or commission
which decision shall be determined by a majority vote of the members present. (Ord. 988, 8-9-1982)
Chapter 11
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
1-11-1: CITY LIMITS:
The City map, on file in the Office of the Public Works Director/City Engineer, is hereby constituted and designated as the official map of the City of
Mountain Home, Idaho. (Ord. 1560, 1-24-2011)
1-11-2: CITY IMPACT AREA:
(Rep. by Ord. 1208, 4-24-1995)
1-11-3: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED:
A. The current Comprehensive Plan for the City as adopted by the City as provided in chapter 65 of title 67 of the Idaho Code as the long range plan for
the future development of Mountain Home and the City impact area shall be utilized to manage new development and to make improvements in
existing areas.
B. Each City department and citizen commission shall use the plan in the implementation of their work programs and in making decisions.
C. Other governmental agencies responsible for public improvements and services affecting the City or its impact area are urged to become acquainted
with the plan and to utilize it in making improvements; the citizens of the City are hereby urged to acquaint themselves with the Comprehensive
Plan.
D. A copy of the current Comprehensive Plan and amendments thereto shall be available for the use and examination by the public in the Office of the
City Clerk and/or City Planner. (Ord. 1560, 1-24-2011)
1-11-4: MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS:
A. Conduct Of Elections: All Municipal general or special elections shall be conducted in accordance with and in conformity with the election code for
the State of Idaho. (Ord. 1571, 11-28-2011)
1-11-5: CORPORATE SEAL; DESIGN:
The Corporate Seal of the City shall be circular in form with an inner and an outer circle. The outer circle shall be one and one-half inches (11/2") and
the inner circle shall be one inch (1") in diameter. It shall bear upon the upper and outer portion the words "City of Mountain Home" in roman style type
and upon the lower and outer portion the words "Incorporated 1946" in roman style type. In the inner circle on the upper portion shall bear the words
"Official Seal" in roman style type, upon the middle portion shall bear the official City logo with the words "City of Mountain Home" and upon the lower
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 13/258
portion shall bear the word "Idaho" in roman style type.
A facsimile of the above described seal is as follows:
A. Adoption Of Seal: The seal hereinabove described is hereby adopted as the Corporate Seal of the City of Mountain Home, Elmore County, Idaho.
B. Custodian: The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the Corporate Seal and shall affix said seal's imprint upon all official documents, records, and
licenses. (Ord. 1657, 3-27-2017)
1-11-6: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
The "Mountain Home News", a weekly newspaper printed and published in the city is hereby appointed, designated and constituted as the official
newspaper and such writings as are required under and by virtue of the municipal government of the said city to be given publication in a newspaper
shall be published in said "Mountain Home News". (1958 Code)
Chapter 12
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
1-12-1: CORPORATION CREATED:
The City of Mountain Home (the "City") does hereby create a public corporation, as authorized by section 50-2703, Idaho Code, to carry out the
purposes of the Municipal Industrial Development Program Act, the same being chapter 27, title 50, Idaho Code (the "Act"). The City reserves the
power, as provided in section 50-2703, Idaho Code, to alter or change the structure, organization and programs, or activities of the public corporation, or
to dissolve the same, at any time. (Ord. 1083, 7-30-87)
1-12-2: NAME OF CORPORATION:
The name of the public corporation shall be the Industrial Development Corporation of the City of Mountain Home, Idaho (the "Corporation"). (Ord.
1083, 7-30-87)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 14/258
1-12-3: POWERS OF CORPORATION:
A. The Corporation shall have all of the powers and shall be subject to all of the requirements and limitations contained in the Act and as set forth in this
Chapter.
B. The Corporation shall have all the powers granted by the Act, including, without limitation, all powers set forth in the charter. The Corporation shall be
subject to all of the requirements and limitations set forth in the Act, in this Chapter and in the charter. (Ord. 1083, 7-30-87)
1-12-4: CHARTER ISSUED BY CITY:
A charter is hereby issued to the Corporation by the City, which shall grant to the Corporation all powers authorized by the Act. A copy of the charter
granted hereby is annexed to Ordinance 1083 as Exhibit "A" and is by reference incorporated herein. The charter may be amended from time to time by
ordinance duly adopted by the City. The existence of the Corporation shall commence upon the effective date of this Chapter. (Ord. 1083, 7-30-87)
1-12-5: BOARD OF DIRECTORS:
The Board of Directors of the Corporation (the "Board") shall consist of the Mayor and the four (4) City Councilpersons. If a vacancy occurs during an
unexpired term, the Mayor shall appoint a member to serve the remainder of the unexpired term. Each member shall serve until his or her successor is
appointed and qualified. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum, and the approval of a majority of a quorum shall be
necessary for the Board to take any action. (Ord. 1083, 7-30-87)
1-12-6: OFFICERS, DUTIES AND COMPENSATION OF THE BOARD:
The business affairs of the Board shall be conducted and carried out by the Board. The Board shall elect officers from among its own members, which
officers shall serve until their successors have been duly elected. Officers shall include a president, vice-president, and a secretary-treasurer. An officer
may hold more than one office. The Board shall adopt bylaws, rules, and regulations governing the conduct of the Corporation, which may be amended
from time to time by the Board. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses as
provided by the bylaws, rules and regulations of the Board. (Ord. 1083, 7-30-87)
1-12-7: FINANCIAL INTEREST PROHIBITED:
No director, officer, agent, or employee of the Corporation shall have, directly or indirectly, any financial interest in any property to be included in, or any
contract for property, services, or materials to be furnished or used in connection with, any industrial development facility financed through the
Corporation. (Ord. 1083, 7-30-87)
1-12-8: RESTRICTIONS ON CORPORATION:
A. The Corporation may not operate any industrial development facilities as a business other than as lessor, seller, or lender, but may purchase and
hold mortgages, deeds of trust, or other security interests and contract for any servicing thereof.
B. The Corporation shall not issue revenue bonds or other financing obligations except upon the approval of the City Council of the City. The
Corporation may not exercise any powers or issue any revenue bonds or other obligations with respect to any industrial development facility unless
such facility is located wholly within the boundaries of the City, except as expressly set forth in the Act. (Ord. 1083, 7-30-87)
1-12-9: CITY POWERS:
The City shall not give or lend any money in aid of the Corporation except as expressly authorized by the Act, nor exercise its powers of sovereignty,
including the police power, the power of taxation, or the power of eminent domain, for or on behalf of the Corporation. This provision shall not preclude
the City from contracting with the Corporation for the provision of services to the Corporation or otherwise dealing with the Corporation on an armslength
basis. The City may, as authorized by section 50-2706, Idaho Code, accept grants from the United States and apply grants in connection with
industrial development facilities. (Ord. 1083, 7-30-87)
1-12-10: DISPOSITION OF EARNINGS:
Any net earnings of the Corporation beyond those necessary for retirement of indebtedness incurred by it shall inure to the City and not for the benefit
of any other person. Upon dissolution of the Corporation, as provided by the Act, title to all property owned by the Corporation shall vest in the City.
(Ord. 1083, 7-30-87)
Chapter 13
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE PROGRAM
1-13-1: PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 15/258
A. The City is committed to the promotion of quality development in all parts of the City and to improving the quality of life for its citizens. In order to help
meet these goals, the City will consider providing incentives for the retention and/or expansion of existing businesses located within the City and to
encourage the establishment of new targeted businesses within the City. It is the policy of the City that such incentives will be provided in
accordance with the procedures and criteria outlined in this chapter. However, nothing in this chapter shall imply or suggest, by implication or
otherwise, that the City is under any obligation to provide any incentive to any applicant; and all such decisions and actions shall be at the sole
discretion of the City Council. All applicants for economic development incentives will be considered on an individual basis.
B. It is the intent of the City to offer economic development incentives on an individual basis so that the total package of incentives, if any, may be
designed specifically for each project which is proposed. This approach will allow the City the flexibility necessary to satisfy the unique needs and
concerns of each applicant and the needs and concerns of the City and its citizens. (Ord. 1670, 5-14-2018)
1-13-2: ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS AND CRITERIA:
A. The following are the minimum requirements that must be satisfied for any application for economic development incentives to be considered:
1. Any request for incentives shall be initiated prior to beginning construction of the proposed project(s).
2. The proposed project shall create three (3) or more full-time jobs or equivalent for individuals who will be working at the applicant's proposed
project located within the City as evidenced by the project's business application and Idaho Department of Labor filings.
3. The applicant's project must provide a capital investment that increases the taxable value of the project property. The capital investment must be
in new construction, improvements to an existing facility, or capital improvements. For purposes of this section, "capital investments" or "capital
improvements" mean property improvements that either will enhance the property value or will increase the useful life of the property.
B. The City is not required to offer incentives to any person, organization, joint venture, partnership, association or corporation.
C. The City reserves the right to review and change the Incentive Program at any time, except that where an incentive agreement has been duly
executed, the incentive agreement shall remain in force. (Ord. 1670, 5-14-2018)
1-13-3: AVAILABLE INCENTIVES:
The City offers a variety of incentives and assistance options for qualifying businesses. The specific type of incentive or assistance will depend upon the
needs of the business as well as the benefits created by the proposed business. Incentives available for qualifying businesses are:
A. Expedited Permitting Process: The City may expedite the permitting process required for business location or expansion, but State statutory
requirements regarding public notice, public hearings and timelines for publication and mailing of required notices cannot be altered or waived.
B. Waiver Of Fees: The City may waive all or part of the following fees associated with the relocation or expansion of businesses: annexation fees; land
use application and plan review fees; and building permit fees. (Ord. 1670, 5-14-2018)
1-13-4: APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
A. Any person, organization, joint venture, partnership, association, or corporation desiring that the City consider providing economic development
incentives shall submit a written application to the City containing the following information:
1. A complete legal description of the property, and a site and vicinity map of the project location.
2. A brief description of the proposed improvements or expansion along with the project's estimated cost, the type of business operation proposed,
the number and type of jobs created, the expected source of labor to fill such jobs, the projected date of the beginning operation and the type of
incentives requested.
3. Other information as required or requested by the City. (Ord. 1670, 5-14-2018)
1-13-5: EVALUATION:
A. Each request for incentives will be evaluated by City staff based on the following factors:
1. Ongoing revenue benefit to the City from Property Taxes and other fees.
2. Number and quality of jobs created. Job quality factors include rate of pay, full or part-time status, benefits offered and longevity of job.
3. Overall public benefit to the City in terms of new or enhanced commercial or retail services available to the public.
4. Ability of the project to spur additional economic development in the City.
5. Impact of the proposed development on existing City infrastructure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 16/258
B. City staff shall provide a written recommendation on whether to approve the incentive to the City Council based upon review of the application and
the criteria set forth in this chapter.
C. The City Council may adopt the recommendation of City staff or otherwise approve economic development incentives based upon its review of the
application under the criteria set forth in this chapter.
D. Projects receiving a Property Tax exemption in Elmore County under the provisions of Idaho Code section 63-602NN shall not be eligible for these
incentives until the Property Tax exemption has lapsed, unless the economic impact to the City is so great that it warrants both the Property Tax
exemption and further incentives from the City of Mountain Home. (Ord. 1670, 5-14-2018)
1-13-6: INCENTIVE AGREEMENT:
A. If the City Council determines in its sole discretion that it is in the best interest of the City to grant incentives to an applicant, the Council shall adopt a
resolution providing the terms and conditions of the incentive agreement with the applicant. The incentive agreement will enumerate the types of
incentives to be provided and the conditions applicable to such incentives, if any.
B. All such incentive agreements must, at a minimum, be in writing and include:
1. The types of incentive to be provided under this section.
2. A legal description of the property indicating its location.
3. Detailed information regarding the type, number, location and cost of planned improvements.
4. A certification in writing to the City that the business is in compliance with the incentive agreement, including documentation substantiating
compliance with subsection 1-13-2A2 of this chapter.
5. Agreement by the applicant to reimburse the City for all waived fees and costs approved under this chapter if the applicant fails to perform its
obligations under the agreement.
6. Such other provisions as the City Council shall deem appropriate. (Ord. 1670, 5-14-2018)
1-13-7: DISCONTINUANCE OF INCENTIVES:
The City Council may modify, amend, or discontinue the Economic Development Incentive Program at any time. Should the Incentives Program be
discontinued, the City Council will honor any incentive agreement to which it committed before the discontinuance of the Incentive Program. In case the
Incentive Program is expanded or otherwise modified, no retroactive application shall be considered or approved. (Ord. 1670, 5-14-2018)
Title 2
COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
Chapter 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is hereby created a planning and zoning commission for the city, which commission shall be known and designated as the Mountain Home
planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 727, 2-26-1973; amd. 1990 Code)
2-1-2: CLERK OF THE COMMISSION:
The planning and zoning commission shall have authority to designate a clerk who may be an officer or employee of the city and who shall act as such
clerk or secretary of all proceedings of said commission and shall file when ordered by the commission with the council a report of all transactions of the
planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 727, 2-26-1973)
2-1-3: MEMBERS, APPOINTMENT:
The planning and zoning commission shall consist of not less than seven (7) nor more than eleven (11) members, to be appointed by the mayor and
confirmed by the council. Not more than one-third (1/3) of such membership may be ex officio members by virtue of public office or position held in the
city. At least one member may be an Idaho resident living outside the city, pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6526(g). The term of office for the first
appointive members appointed to such commission shall be two (2), four (4) and six (6) years to be determined by lot. Thereafter, the term of office for
each appointive officer shall be six (6) years. Vacancies occurring shall be filled by a majority vote of the council. Members shall be selected without
respect to political affiliation and shall be paid forty dollars ($40.00) per diem for each regular monthly meeting that he or she attends. Said payment
shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) for any one month. In addition to the payment of forty dollars ($40.00) for each regular monthly meeting
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 17/258
attended, members traveling outside Elmore County on official planning and zoning commission business may receive such mileage and per diem
compensation as may, from time to time, be determined by the council. (Ord. 1451, 8-28-2006)
2-1-4: ORGANIZATION, RULES, MEETINGS:
The commission shall elect its own chairman and create and fill such other offices as it may determine necessary. One regular meeting shall be held
each month not less than nine (9) months in each year. A majority of the appointive members of the commission shall be necessary to constitute a
quorum at any meeting. Written rules consistent with sections 67-6501 through 67-6529 and the laws of this state for the transaction of business of the
commission shall be adopted and a written record of meetings, resolutions, findings and determinations shall be kept. All meetings and records shall be
open to the public. (Ord. 727, 11-22-1971)
2-1-5: EMPLOYEES AND EXPENDITURES:
Upon approval of the city council, said commission may accept, receive and expend funds, grants and services from the federal government or those
agencies and instrumentalities of state or local governments or from civic sources and may contract with respect thereto and provide such information
and reports as may be necessary to secure such financial aid. Expenditures of the commission shall, exclusive of gifts, grants, funds and services as
theretofore set out, be within the amounts appropriated and set aside by the city for the purposes of the commission as set forth in section 67-6504(d),
Idaho Code. Within such limits, the commission, subject to the approval of the city council, is authorized to employ such employees and technical
advisors as are deemed necessary for its work. (Ord. 727, 11-22-1971; amd. 1990 Code)
2-1-6: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the commission to recommend and make suggestions to the city council for the adoption of a long range comprehensive plan for
the physical development of the city, for the formation of zoning districts, to make suggestions concerning the layout, widening and extending and
locating of streets, roads and highways for the relief of traffic, to make suggestions concerning density of population and development of land within the
jurisdiction of the city, to make suggestions concerning the future, growth, development and beautification of the city in respect to its public buildings,
streets, parks, grounds and lands consistent with the future growth and development of the city, in order to promote the public health, morals, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants thereof, to suggest regulations and restrictions as to height, number of stories, the size of buildings and other structures, the
percentage of each lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the location and use of buildings, structures and land for
trade, industry, residents, public utility or other purposes, to give suggestions and advice to individuals concerning landscaping or location of buildings,
structures or works to be erected, constructed or altered by or for such individual. The commission may cooperate with other and like commissions
along the lines and purposes prescribed in sections 67-6508 through 67-6509, Idaho Code. (Ord. 727, 11-22-1971; amd. 1990 Code)
2-1-7: JOINT PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
The commission is hereby empowered to cooperate with any other planning or zoning commission within Elmore County for the formation of a joint
planning or zoning commission. The number of members of such joint planning or zoning commission, their method of appointment and the proportion
of the cost of such regional planning to be borne respectively by the various participating governing bodies shall be such as may be agreed upon by
said joint commission and the governing bodies involved. Members of joint planning commission shall be residents of the county from which appointed.
(Ord. 727, 11-22-1971)
2-1-8: MAPS, PLATS AND REPLATS:
Any and all maps, plats and replats of lands which require the approval of the city council, or any official or employee thereof, shall first be submitted to
the planning and zoning commission of the city for its suggestion and the commission shall have a reasonable time, not to exceed one hundred twenty
(120) days, within which to examine such maps, plats or replats before returning the same with its suggestions. (Ord. 727, 11-22-1971)
2-1-9: CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS:
This chapter shall not be construed in any manner as infringing upon any authorization previously granted to any other commission or board of the city,
but all departments and officials of the city shall cooperate with the planning and zoning commission for the purpose of coordinating the efforts and
functions of all departments, commissions and boards of the city. (Ord. 727, 11-22-1971)
2-1-10: ACQUISITION AND DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY:
The planning and zoning commission is authorized to acquire by gift, devise or bequest lands and other property to carry out the purposes of this
chapter and shall likewise have power to sell or otherwise dispose of property so acquired. (1958 Code)
Chapter 2
ADVISORY COMMITTEES
2-2-1: ADVISORY COMMITTEES CREATED:
The following advisory committees are hereby created:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 18/258
A. Airport Committee.
B. Parks and Recreation Committee.
C. Golf Course Committee.
D. Traffic Safety Committee.
Advisory committees are created for the purpose of rendering advice in their respective areas to the Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council may
adopt, accept or reject findings or recommendations of such committees as the Mayor and Council deem appropriate. No finding or recommendation of
an advisory committee shall be considered binding on the City. The Mayor, with consent of the Council, may suspend or put on hiatus any advisory
committee at any time. Suspension or hiatus of an advisory committee does not affect advisory committee appointments which shall continue to run
their normal terms until expiration. The Mayor, with the consent of the Council may reinstate a committee previously suspended, the members of which
shall consist of the appointees still remaining from the time of the suspension, if any, with vacancies, if any, filled by the Mayor with the consent of the
Council. (Ord. 1666, 10-10-2017)
2-2-2: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The advisory committees of the City are only advisory in nature and shall have the following respective duties and responsibilities:
A. Airport Committee: The Airport Committee shall have the duty and responsibility to suggest and make recommendations to the Mayor, Council and
airport manager or fixed base operator (FBO) concerning the development, use and management of the Municipal airport.
B. Parks And Recreation Committee: The Parks and Recreation Committee shall have the duty and responsibility to suggest and make
recommendations to the Mayor, Council and other City officials on the overall vision and philosophy concerning all programs and facilities offered
and operated by the Parks and Recreation Department, supporting their mission of providing meaningful leisure opportunities and safe recreation
facilities that enhance the quality of life in our City by benefiting the health and well being of our people, our community, our economy and our
environment.
C. Golf Course Committee: The Golf Course Committee shall have the duty and responsibility to suggest and make recommendations to the Mayor,
Council, golf professional and golf course superintendent concerning the development, use and management of the Municipal golf course.
D. Traffic Safety Committee: The Traffic Safety Committee shall have the duty and responsibility to suggest and make recommendations to the Mayor,
City Council and Chief of Police concerning issues and/or projects relating to traffic safety in Mountain Home. (Ord. 1666, 10-10-2017)
2-2-3: MEMBERS:
Each committee shall consist of not more than seven (7) but not less than five (5) members and in addition shall also include one Mayor's Youth
Advisory Council member all who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. (Ord. 1666, 10-10-2017)
2-2-4: TERMS AND VACANCIES:
The members of each advisory committee, with the exception of the Mayor's Youth Advisory Council member, shall serve a term of four (4) years
commencing February 1 of even numbered years, or until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. The terms of the members of each committee
shall be staggered so that at least three (3) committee members are appointed every two (2) years. Vacancies on each committee shall be filled by the
Mayor with the approval of the Council. A member may be removed for cause at the request of the Mayor and by a majority vote of the Council, but only
after the cause or causes for the removal are presented to the member in writing and the member has an opportunity to be heard before the Council if
they so request. If a member is absent from three (3) consecutive meetings without the consent or approval of a majority of the remaining committee
members, that person shall be deemed to have resigned as a member and a new member shall be appointed. The Mayor's Youth Advisory Council
member shall serve on the appointed committee until removed or replaced by the Mayor with a future member. (Ord. 1666, 10-10-2017)
2-2-5: MEETINGS:
Each committee shall hold one regular meeting each month during not less than ten (10) months out of each year or may hold quarterly meetings, with
at least one meeting each quarter. The decision of whether to hold monthly meetings or quarterly meetings will be made by each committee in January
of each year. A majority of the members of each committee shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting. All meetings shall
be open to the public and subject to all open meeting laws.
No regular meeting shall be held earlier than six o'clock (6:00) P.M. All regular meetings shall be held on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays or
Thursdays. All meetings shall be held at the City Hall, if the Council room is available. A written record shall be kept of each meeting, which shall be a
public record. The record or minutes of each meeting, together with suggestions or recommendations for the Mayor's and Council's consideration, shall
be submitted in writing by the Secretary to the City Clerk within ten (10) days following each meeting. (Ord. 1661, 7-24-2017)
2-2-6: OFFICERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 19/258
Each committee shall elect its own Chairman and such other officers as it deems necessary. Such election shall be held during the first meeting in
February of each year. The Chairman shall preside over the meeting of the committee and shall have a vote only when the committee is equally divided.
The Secretary, who shall be hired by the City Clerk, shall cause minutes to be kept of each meeting. (Ord. 1661, 7-24-2017)
2-2-7: BYLAWS AND REGULATIONS:
Each committee shall have the authority to adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for the proper conduct of its meetings as it deems necessary, upon
the review and approval of the Mayor and the City Council. If bylaws, rules or regulations are adopted by a committee as approved by the Mayor and
City Council a copy shall be filed with the City Clerk. (Ord. 1661, 7-24-2017)
2-2-8: SALARY AND EXPENSES:
The members of each committee shall receive no salary for their services, but actual and necessary expenses incurred by committee members in the
performance of their duties for the committee may be allowed with prior approval of the Council. The committee Secretary shall receive compensation
for attending the meetings and preparing the minutes as set by the City Clerk and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 1661, 7-24-2017)
Chapter 3
LIBRARY BOARD
2-3-1: BOARD APPOINTMENT, TERM, AND COMPENSATION:
For the government of the public library there shall be a board of five (5) library trustees appointed by the mayor and council pursuant to Idaho Code
section 50-210 from among city residents. Appointment to the board shall be made solely upon consideration of the ability of such appointees to serve
the interests of the people, without regard to sex, age, race, nationality, religion, disability or political affiliation. A member of the city council shall not be
one of the five (5) appointed trustees of the library board, but each year the council shall appoint one of its members to be a liaison to the board, without
voting rights. The library trustees shall be appointed for five (5) year terms and until their successors are appointed. The terms of the trustees shall be
staggered so one term shall expire during each calendar year. Members of the board shall serve without salary but may receive their actual and
necessary budgeted expenses while engaged in authorized business of the library. (Ord. 1635, 6-22-2015)
2-3-2: BOARD VACANCIES AND REMOVAL:
The board shall report all vacancies to the city council within five (5) working days. All such appointments shall be made in the same manner as
appointments are originally made. Appointments to complete an unexpired term shall be for the remainder of the term only. Any trustee may be
removed by the city council by the unanimous vote of all of its members. (Ord. 1635, 6-22-2015)
2-3-3: BOARD OF TRUSTEES MEETINGS:
The board of trustees shall meet at least once in each quarter. One of the meetings shall be designated as the annual meeting. The purposes of the
annual meeting are to elect the officers of the board, to establish a regular meeting date, and to review, amend, repeal or adopt bylaws, policies and
procedures. Special meetings may be held from time to time as the board may determine, but written notice thereof shall be given to the members at
least two (2) days prior to the day of the meeting. A quorum shall consist of three (3) voting members, but a smaller number may adjourn. All library
board meetings are to be held pursuant to the Idaho open meeting law, sections 74-201 through 74-208, Idaho Code. (Ord. 1635, 6-22-2015)
2-3-4: POWERS AND DUTIES OF TRUSTEES:
In addition to the powers elsewhere contained in this chapter and notwithstanding the provisions of title 50, Idaho Code, the board of trustees of the
library shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To establish bylaws for its own governance;
B. To establish policies and rules of use for the governance of the library; to exclude from the use of the library any and all persons who violate such
rules;
C. To establish, locate, maintain and have custody of libraries to serve the city, and to provide suitable rooms, structures, facilities, furniture, apparatus
and appliances necessary for library service;
D. With the approval of the city:
1. To acquire real property by purchase, gift, devise, lease or otherwise;
2. To own and hold real and personal property and to construct buildings for the use and purposes of the library;
3. To sell, exchange or otherwise dispose of real or personal property when no longer required by the library; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 20/258
4. To insure the real and personal property of the library;
E. To prepare and adopt a budget for review and approval by the city council;
F. To control the expenditures of money budgeted for the library;
G. To accept or decline gifts of money or personal property, in accordance with library policy, and under such terms as may be a condition of the gift;
H. To hire, supervise and evaluate the library director;
I. To establish policies for the purchase and distribution of library materials;
J. To attend all meetings of the board of trustees;
K. To maintain legal records of all board business;
L. To exercise such other powers, not inconsistent with law, necessary for the orderly and efficient management of the library. (Ord. 1635, 6-22-2015)
2-3-5: LIBRARY DIRECTOR, DUTIES AND OTHER EMPLOYEES:
The board of trustees of the library shall appoint the library director, who shall serve at the pleasure of the board. The library director shall advise the
board, implement policy set by the board, supervise all library staff and shall acquire library materials, equipment and supplies. The library director shall
attend all board meetings but shall not vote. With the recommendation of the library director, the board shall hire other employees as may be necessary
for the operation of the library in accordance with city policies and procedures. The library director and library employees shall be employees of the city
and subject to the city's personnel policies and classifications unless otherwise provided by city ordinance or Idaho Code. (Ord. 1635, 6-22-2015)
2-3-6: ANNUAL APPROPRIATIONS AND CONTROL OF EXPENDITURES:
The board shall prepare and adopt an annual budget, stating anticipated revenues and expenditures, indicating what support and maintenance of the
library will be required for review and approval by the city council for the ensuing year. All funds for the library shall be in the custody of the city treasurer
unless otherwise provided by city ordinance, and shall be used only for library purposes. The board shall have control of library expenditures. Money
shall be paid for library purposes, only upon properly authenticated vouchers of the board of trustees. The board shall not make expenditures or incur
indebtedness in any year in excess of the amount of money appropriated for library purposes. The board may hold a separate checking account to be
used to pay petty expenses of the library. This account shall be audited along with other library funds. (Ord. 1635, 6-22-2015)
2-3-7: DONATIONS:
Donations or gifts for the benefit of the library shall be budgeted along with other library accounts and shall be used only for library purposes. Money or
other funds which are donated or given to the library may be expended by the board of trustees only in accordance with the city budget process. (Ord.
1635, 6-22-2015)
2-3-8: REPORTS OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
The board of trustees shall annually, not later than January 1, file with the state board of library commissioners a report of the operations of the library
for the fiscal year just ended. The report shall be of such form and contain such information as the board of library commissioners may require, but in all
cases must include a complete accounting of all financial transactions for the fiscal year being reported. The board shall also report to the city council
and mayor as required in Idaho Code section 50-210. (Ord. 1635, 6-22-2015)
Title 3
DEPARTMENTS
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
3-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a Police Department which shall consist of the Chief of Police and such other personnel as may be provided by the Council.
(Revised Code 1958)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 21/258
3-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. Appointment: The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the Council. He shall hold office for the duration of his
appointment unless sooner removed by the Mayor with a concurrence of the Council.
B. Rank: The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Department and have supervision over all the officers and members thereof. The Chief of Police
may, with the approval of the review board, appoint such reserve police officers as may be required from time to time.
C. Powers and Duties:
1. Duties of Chief: The Chief of Police shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities of his Department as may be
required by statute or by the Mayor. He shall be responsible for the performance of the Police Department and of its functions and all persons who
are members of the Police Department shall serve subject to his orders.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to see to the enforcement of all provisions of this City Code and of all applicable statutes and to preserve
order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest violators thereof. He shall have authority to call upon any citizen or bystander to assist him in
the execution of his duty. He shall serve all processes issued to him and enforce all orders and judgments of the court.
2. Stolen Property: The Chief of Police shall have the custody of all lost, abandoned or stolen property recovered within the Municipality. (Revised
Code 1958; 1990 Code)
3-1-3: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see to the enforcement of all of the laws of the City and all statutes applicable therein;
and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest violations thereof. (Revised Code 1958; 1990 Code)
3-1-4: WITNESS FEE:
Every member of the Police Department shall appear as witness whenever necessary in a prosecution for a violation of any law or of any State or
Federal law. Any police officer who appears in court other than during his regular duty hours may collect the statutory witness fee for his appearance.
The receipt of such witness fee shall be under the control and supervision of the Chief of Police. (Ord. 841, 5-9-77)
3-1-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Chief of the Police Department may make or prescribe such rules and regulations as he shall deem advisable; such rules, when approved by the
Council, shall be binding on such members. Such rules and regulations may cover, besides the conduct of the members, uniforms and equipment to be
worn or carried, hours of service, vacations and all other similar matters necessary or desirable for the better efficiency of the Department. (Revised
Code 1958)
3-1-6: REWARDS:
The Chief of Police, for meritorious service rendered by any member of the Police force in the due discharge of his duty, may permit such member to
retain for his own benefit, so far as he may be permitted by law, any reward or present tendered him therefor, and it shall be cause for removal for any
member of the force to receive any such reward or present without notice thereof to the Chief of Police and without his permission. (Revised Code
1958)
Chapter 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT
3-2-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a Fire Department which shall consist of a Fire Chief and such volunteer members as may be provided for by the governing
body of the Municipality. (Revised Code 1958)
3-2-2: CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT:
A. Appointment: The Chief of the Fire Department shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the Council. He shall hold office for the
duration of his appointment unless sooner removed by the Mayor with the concurrence of the Council.
B. Rank: The Chief of the Fire Department, commonly referred to as the Fire Chief, shall be the head of the Department and have supervision over all
officers and members thereof. The Fire Chief may, with the approval of the Mayor, appoint such other Fire Department officers as may be deemed
necessary.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 22/258
C. Duties: The Fire Chief shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities of his Department as may be required by statute or
by the Mayor. He shall be responsible for the performance of the Fire Department and of its functions and all persons who are members of the Fire
Department shall serve subject to his order. He shall be responsible for the control and custody of all Fire Department property and equipment. He
shall have the authority of a police officer while actively engaged in fighting a fire, or going to or from a fire. (Revised Code 1958; 1990 Code)
3-2-3: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of the volunteer members of the Fire Department to provide for the immediate answering of all fire calls and to fight all fires in the
best and most modern available methods. Members shall see to the care and maintenance of all firefighting equipment and have such equipment in
constant workable condition, and shall attend all meetings and drills called by the Chief. (Revised Code 1958; 1990 Code)
3-2-4: FIRE PREVENTION:
Every possible action shall be taken by the members of the Fire Department to eliminate fire hazards and to provide for fire prevention methods and
operations within the Municipality. (Revised Code 1958)
3-2-5: CHARGES FOR SPECIAL SERVICES:
A charge or fee is hereby imposed by the City for all contract and standby fires and services performed by the Fire Department relating to the same,
and for all fires on railroad cars that are brought into the City to be extinguished, according to the following schedule:
A. Equipment:
City Diesels (Numbers 12, 8, 9 and 10) $150.00 per hour
City Water Tanker 150.00 per hour
Rural Pumpers (Number 5 and Number 11) 150.00 per hour
Rural Tanker 150.00 per hour
Brush Truck 100.00 per hour
Salvage Truck 100.00 per hour
The maximum charge for equipment shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) per hour.
B. Labor: The labor for all firemen shall be charged according to the current hourly rate being charged for the City Fire Department at the time. A
schedule showing the current hourly rate shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours. (Ord. 1240, 4-8-1996)
Chapter 3
RECREATION DEPARTMENT
3-3-1: RECREATION DEPARTMENT, INSTRUCTORS:
Any person instructing a class or classes for the City Recreation Department shall pay to the City a fee as established by resolution of the Mountain
Home City Council. (Ord. 1664, 9-25-2017)
Title 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
LICENSES
4-1-1: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by this code shall be made in writing to the clerk, unless otherwise specifically provided by law. Each
application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be paid;
and each application shall contain such additional information as may be required by the issuing official. (1958 Code)
4-1-2: PERSON SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 23/258
Whenever in this code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or
engaging in any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to the requirement if by himself or through an agent, employee or
partner, he holds himself forth as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively; or performs or
attempts to perform any part of such business or occupation in the municipality. (1958 Code)
4-1-3: FORMS:
Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be prepared and kept on file by the clerk. (1958 Code)
4-1-4: SIGNATURES:
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signatures of the mayor and the clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary. (1958 Code)
4-1-5: INVESTIGATIONS:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit where laws of the municipality necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of
such permit or license, the clerk shall refer such application to the proper officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of the time of
such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten
(10) days after receiving the application or a copy thereof. The Central district health department shall make or cause to be made an inspection in
regard to such licenses in the connection of the care and handling of food and the preventing of nuisances and the spread of disease. For the protection
of health, the building inspector shall make or cause to be made any such inspections relative to the construction of buildings or other structures. All
other investigations, except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the chief of police or by some other officer designated by the mayor. (1958
Code)
4-1-6: TERMINATION OF LICENSE:
All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the calendar year of the municipality where no provision to the contrary is made. (Ord. 948, 12-22-
1980)
4-1-7: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall be issued for any thing, or act, if the premises and building to be used
for the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the municipality. No such license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business
or performance of any act which would involve a violation of the zoning act of the municipality. (1958 Code)
4-1-8: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any permitted act, may be changed, provided
ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the clerk; provided, the building and zoning requirements of this code are complied with. (1958 Code; amd. 1990
Code)
4-1-9: NUISANCES:
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact. (1958 Code)
4-1-10: POSTING OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the municipality to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises
used for such business at all times. (1958 Code)
4-1-11: FEES:
In the absence of specific provisions to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor
is made to the clerk. When an applicant has not engaged in the business until after the expiration of six (6) months of the current license year, the
license fee shall be in the sum of one-half (1/2) of the fee specified for the entire year. All license fees shall be deposited to the general fund. Licenses
shall be required for the activities and businesses upon payment of the fee indicated for the specific time:
Carnivals:
Annual $25.00
Daily 5.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 24/258
(Ord. 1623, 11-10-2014)
4-1-12: REVOCATION:
Any license, permit or business regulation certificate for a limited time may be revoked by the mayor and city council during the life of such license,
permit or business regulation certificate for the violation by the licensee, permittee or business certificate holder of any provision relating to the license,
permit or business regulation certificate, the subject of the license, permit or business regulation certificate, or the premises occupied; such revocation
may be in addition to any fine imposed. The mayor, city and the council shall be authorized to summarily order the cessation of business, the closing of
the premises, and the suspension of any business regulation certificate, license or permit for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days.
A. Hearing: Within ten (10) days after the city officials have so acted, the mayor shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the
business regulation certificate, license or permit should be revoked.
B. Notice Of Hearing: Notice of hearing for revocation of a business regulation certificate, license or permit shall be given in writing setting forth
specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be sent to the certificate holder or permittee at his last
known address at least five (5) days prior to the date for the hearing.
C. Hearing Procedures1: At the hearing, the certificate holder, licensee or permittee shall be permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit
evidence and cross examine witnesses. The mayor shall preside and shall render the decision and recommendation.
D. Causes For Revocation: Business regulation certificates, licenses and permits issued under the ordinances of the city, unless otherwise provided,
may be revoked by the mayor and city council after notice and hearing as provided in subsections B and C of this section for any of the following
causes:
1. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for the business regulation certificate, license or permit.
2. Any violation by the certificate holder, licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions or state law relating to the business regulation certificate,
license or permit, the subject matter of the business regulation certificate, license or permit, or the premises occupied.
3. Conviction of the certificate holder, licensee or permittee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
4. Failure of the certificate holder, licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty owing to the city.
5. Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling or any interference with a duly authorized city officer or employee while in the performance of his
duties in making such inspections, as provided in this code. (1990 Code)
Chapter 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
ARTICLE A. LIQUOR BY THE DRINK
4-2A-1: ADOPTION OF STATE LAWS:
There are hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the city as fully as though set forth at length herein for the purposes of governing the
licensing, sale and use of alcoholic beverages within the city, the laws of the state of Idaho, being particularly title 23, Idaho Code, as presently in effect
or as may hereafter be amended.
Three (3) copies of the Idaho liquor and beer laws, together with all amendments thereto, all duly certified by the clerk, shall be kept on file in the office
of the clerk for use and examination of and by the public. (1990 Code)
4-2A-2: APPLICATION:
Before there shall be any lawful sale of liquor by the drink, an application by the proposed licensee must be made for such license and filed with the
clerk. Such application shall provide for the name of the applicant, the location of the proposed business, and such other information as may be
prescribed and required by the governing body.
Applications for new licenses or for license renewals must be filed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the regular council meeting at which action thereon
is desired to allow sufficient time for the investigation and endorsement required.
All applications filed with the clerk shall be referred to the governing body for final approval. The clerk shall receive the license fee hereinafter provided
at the time of filing of the application, and upon approval of the application by the governing body, the license will be issued and delivered to the
applicant. (Ord. 687, 2-26-1968)
4-2A-3: FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 25/258
The license fee required of an applicant for the sale of liquor by the drink shall be in the sum of five hundred sixty two dollars fifty cents ($562.50) per
year or portion thereof payable in advance. The first payment shall be made with said application for the balance of the year in which the license is
issued. All licenses issued shall expire at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on September 30 of each year. Renewals may be granted upon application, if
the record of the applicant is satisfactory to the governing body and in accordance with the provisions of the law and this chapter and upon payment of
five hundred sixty two dollars fifty cents ($562.50) for the ensuing year. Any operation under an expired license shall constitute a violation of this code
for each day of operation. (Ord. 1557, 11-22-2010)
4-2A-4: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable to any person who meets the requirements of a license as set forth in this
chapter and the statutes of the state of Idaho upon the payment of ten dollars ($10.00) as transfer fee. Further, any licensee may, with the consent of
the governing body, move from the place of business license to some other place which may meet the requirements of this chapter, and there shall be
no fee for such exchange of premises. (1958 Code)
4-2A-5: LICENSES LIMITED:
The number of liquor licenses issued and operative within the city shall be limited to the number authorized by the statutes and regulations of the state
of Idaho. (1958 Code)
4-2A-6: REVOCATION:
The council shall retain the right at all times to revoke and cancel any license for just cause, pursuant to the suspension, notice and hearing provisions
of section 4-1-12 of this title. (1990 Code)
4-2A-7: ACCESS TO PREMISES:
All peace officers appointed by the state of Idaho or the city or the county shall have free access at all times to the licensed premises, and any
information touching the manner and method of the operation of said premises or the sale of said liquor may be submitted to the governing body upon
any investigation made of said licensee. (Revised Code 1958)
4-2A-8: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
Every licensee must conform to and abide by all regulations and laws of the state of Idaho regarding sale of liquor by the drink and the provisions of this
chapter. Liquor by the drink shall not be sold by any person except one duly licensed. All premises shall be adequately lighted and subject to periodic
sanitary inspection. With the exception of the state-run lottery as provided in Idaho Code, section 67-7401 et seq., no gambling of any kind or character
shall be operated upon said premises and no gambling devices shall be maintained thereon. (Ord. 1047, 4-22-1985; amd. 1990 Code)
ARTICLE B. BEER
4-2B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall be construed to have the meanings herein given:
BEER: Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley, malt and/or other ingredients in drinkable water of not
more than four percent (4%) of alcohol by weight.
RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of beer to the consumer. (1990 Code)
4-2B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of or sell beer without first obtaining a proper license therefor. (1990 Code)
4-2B-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a retail beer license shall be made under oath to the city clerk and the application shall show that the applicant possesses all of the
qualifications required by this code. Each application shall be forwarded, after proper and adequate investigation by the chief of police, to the council for
approval or disapproval. (1990 Code)
4-2B-4: QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSE:
A. No retail license shall be issued to any applicant who:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 26/258
1. Is not the bona fide owner of such business, or is not a citizen of the United States or has not been a bona fide resident of the state of Idaho for a
period of one year prior to the date of application; provided, that if the applicant is a partnership, all partners shall be such citizens, and at least
one thereof or the actual manager thereof shall have been such resident; and if the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall be qualified
to do business in the state of Idaho, and the manager of such business place shall be such citizen and shall have been such resident.
2. Has, or any partner or actual manager or officer or employee or spouse of which has, been convicted of the violation of any laws of the state of
Idaho or of the United States regulating, governing or prohibiting the sale of alcoholic beverages or intoxicating liquor, or has within two (2) years
forfeited or suffered the forfeiture of a bond for his appearance to answer charges of any such violation.
3. Has, or any partner or actual manager or officer of which has, been convicted of any felony within five (5) years or has paid any fine or completed
any sentence of confinement thereof within five (5) years.
B. A retailer licensee must continue throughout the license period to have all of the foregoing qualifications and none of the foregoing disqualifications,
and the failure therein, upon proof thereof to an issuer of a license, such issuer shall revoke the license issued, and in writing sent by United States
registered mail notifying each of the other issuers of the retailer's license to such licensee, stating sufficient facts for identification of the licensee and
grounds and date of revocation. (1990 Code)
4-2B-5: FEES:
A. The fee for the sale of beer shall be as follows:
1. Where draft beer or bottled beer or canned beer or draft and bottled beer and canned beer is sold to the customer and consumed on the premises
where sold, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per annum.
2. Where bottled beer and canned beer only is sold to the customer and not consumed on the premises where sold, fifty dollars ($50.00) per annum.
B. The license fees required herein shall be in addition to all other license fees required by other laws and provisions of this code. All licenses issued
shall expire at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on September 30 for each year of the issuance. (Ord. 1557, 11-22-2010)
4-2B-6: HOURS OF SALE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day. (Ord. 1315, 4-10-
2000)
4-2B-7: REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer beer to any person under the age limit set forth in section 23-1023, Idaho Code, and it shall be unlawful for
any person under the age limit set forth in section 23-1023, Idaho Code, to frequent, loiter in or about or patronize any beer dispensary and it shall
likewise be unlawful for any owner of such beer dispensary or his employees to permit any such person under the age limit set forth in section 23-1023,
Idaho Code, to be in or to be employed in such dispensary. (1990 Code)
4-2B-8: REVOCATION:
The council shall retain the right at all times to revoke and cancel any license for just cause, pursuant to the suspension, notice and hearing provisions
of section 4-1-12 of this title. (1990 Code)
4-2B-9: ADOPTION OF STATE LAWS:
There are hereby adopted for the purpose of governing the licensing, sale and use of alcoholic beverages within the city, the laws of the state of Idaho,
being particularly title 23, Idaho Code, as presently in effect, or as may hereafter be amended by the legislature and the same is hereby adopted and
incorporated as an ordinance of the city as fully as though set forth at length herein. (1990 Code)
ARTICLE C. WINE
4-2C-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms as used in this chapter are hereby defined as follows:
DIRECTOR: The director of the department of law enforcement of the state of Idaho.
PERSON: Includes an individual, firm, copartnership, association, corporation or any group or combination acting as a unit, and includes the plural as
well as the singular unless the intent to give a more limited meaning is disclosed by the context in which it is used.
RETAIL WINE LICENSE: A license issued by the director, authorizing a person to sell wine at retail.
RETAILER: A person to whom a retail wine license has been issued.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 27/258
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than fourteen percent (14%) alcohol by volume obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar
content of fruits or other agricultural products containing sugar. (1990 Code)
4-2C-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be lawful for any person to sell wine at retail within the corporate limits of the city after having first procured a license therefor. (1990 Code)
4-2C-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a license shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the applicant upon application forms furnished by the city clerk. Such application
shall be filed by the city clerk and presented to the mayor and council at the next meeting of the council for their approval, rejection or further
consideration. (1990 Code)
4-2C-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
The applicant for a license shall possess all of the qualifications and none of the disqualifications necessary to obtain a license from the director of the
department of law enforcement of the state, as prescribed by the laws of the state, and maintain such qualifications throughout the period for which
such license is issued. The possession of licenses regularly issued by the department of law enforcement and the county in addition to a city beer
license, shall be prima facie evidence of the applicant's qualifications to receive a license hereunder. (1990 Code)
4-2C-5: LICENSE FEE AND TERM:
A. The license fee imposed and collected for the sale of wine shall be as follows:
1. Where wine is sold to the customer and consumed on the premises where sold, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per annum.
2. Where bottled wine only is sold to the customer and not consumed on the premises where sold, the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
annum.
B. The license fees required herein shall be paid in addition to all other license fees required by other laws and provisions of this code, only if the
establishment does not hold a current liquor by the drink license, which wine is included therein. All licenses issued shall expire at twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight on September 30 for each year of the issuance. (Ord. 1557, 11-22-2010)
4-2C-6: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon filing of the application for a license and production of evidence as required by section 4-2C-4 of this article as to the qualifications of the applicant
and the payment of the required license fee, the city clerk shall, upon approval of the council, issue to the applicant a license to sell wine at retail within
the city for such year or the remainder thereof. (Ord. 1567, 7-25-2011)
4-2C-7: CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES:
Retailers who do not possess a valid license for the retail sale of liquor by the drink shall not permit consumption of wine on the licensed premises and
may sell the wine only in its original, unbroken, sealed container. Wine sold for consumption on the retailer's premises may be sold only during the
hours that liquor by the drink may be sold pursuant to the laws of this state1. Wine sold by the retailer for consumption off the premises of the retailer
may be sold only during the hours that beer may be sold pursuant to the laws of this state2. (1990 Code)
4-2C-8: POSSESSION:
No person may, while operating or riding in or upon a motor vehicle upon a public highway of this city, have in his possession any wine in an open or
unsealed container of any kind. (1990 Code)
4-2C-9: MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE:
A. No person under the age limit set forth in section 23-1023, Idaho Code, may purchase, consume or possess wine.
B. No person shall give, sell or deliver wine to any person under the age limit set forth in section 23-1023, Idaho Code.
C. No person under the age limit set forth in section 23-1023, Idaho Code, shall by any means represent to any retailer or distributor or to any agent or
employee of such retailer or distributor that he or she is within the age limit set forth in section 23-1023, Idaho Code, or more of age for the purpose
of inducing such retailer or distributor, or his agent or employee, to sell, serve or dispense wine to such person.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 28/258
D. No person shall, by any means, represent to any retailer or distributor or the agent or employee of such retailer or distributor, that any person is
within the age limit set forth in section 23-1023, Idaho Code, when in fact such other person is under the age limit set forth in section 23-1023, Idaho
Code, for the purpose of inducing such retailer or distributor to sell, serve or dispense wine to such other person. (1990 Code)
4-2C-10: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The council shall retain the right at all times to revoke and cancel any license for just cause, pursuant to the suspension, notice and hearing provisions
of section 4-1-12 of this title. (1990 Code)
ARTICLE D. WINE, SALE BY THE DRINK
4-2D-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
In accordance with the provisions of chapter 144 of the Idaho session laws of the first regular session of the 42nd legislature and under the provisions of
section 23-1315 of the Idaho Code, as amended, it shall be lawful for any person to sell wine at retail by the drink within the corporate limits of the city
after having first procured a license therefor. (1990 Code)
4-2D-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for license shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the applicant and upon application forms furnished by the clerk. Such application shall
be filed by the clerk and presented to the mayor and council at the next scheduled meeting of the council for their approval, rejection or further
consideration. (1990 Code)
4-2D-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
The applicant for a license shall possess all of the qualifications necessary to obtain a license from the director of the department of law enforcement of
the state as prescribed by the laws of the state1 and maintain such qualifications throughout the period for which such license is issued. The possession
of licenses regularly issued by the department of law enforcement and the county in addition to a city beer license, shall be prima facie evidence of the
applicant's qualifications to receive a license hereunder. A licensee for liquor by the drink shall not be required to obtain an additional license under the
provisions of this chapter. (1990 Code)
4-2D-4: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee imposed and collected shall be the sum set forth in subsection 4-2C-5A1 of this chapter. Should a license be issued for less than a full
year, the license fee shall be prorated in accordance with the actual months of issuance, but not less than one-half (1/2) of the annual fee. Licenses
shall be issued to expire at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on September 30 of each year. (Ord. 1557, 11-22-2010)
4-2D-5: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Upon filing the application for a license and production of evidence as required by section 4-2D-3 of this article as to the qualifications of the applicant
and by the payment of the required license fee, the clerk shall, upon approval of the council, issue to the applicant a license to sell wine at retail by the
drink within the city for such year or remainder thereof. (Ord. 1567, 7-25-2011)
4-2D-6: LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
The assignment or transfer of wine by the drink license issued hereunder shall be the same as provided for the assignment or transfer of beer licenses2.
(1990 Code)
4-2D-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The council shall retain the right at all times to revoke and cancel any license for just cause, pursuant to the suspension, notice and hearing provisions
of section 4-1-12 of this title. (1990 Code)
4-2D-8: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article or fails to comply with any of the terms and conditions hereof shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties in accordance with section 1-4-1 of this code. (1990 Code)
Chapter 3
CABLE ANTENNA TELEVISION
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 29/258
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall be construed to have the meanings herein given:
CATV (CABLE ANTENNA TELEVISION): The use of cables, wires, telephone lines and other means not including wireless means to carry television
signals within the City limits to residents and to other users by cable or other methods for which a subscription charge is paid by the user.
CABLE: Any wire used to carry television signals.
LOCAL STATIONS: Any television station which has a Class A Contour covering Mountain Home.
SUBSCRIBER: Anyone using CATV. (Ord. 974, 12-14-81)
4-3-2: INTENT:
It is the intention of the Mayor and Council to establish a policy and an ordinance for the issuance of CATV permits. Numerous applications have been
presented to the Council to grant permits to cable television organizations which would require the specialized use of the City's streets, alleys and other
City properties. In addition thereto, a solicitation shall be made to the residents of the City to subscribe to such service. The Council recognizes that
necessary steps must be taken to protect the public, that the use herein granted is not completely under the jurisdiction of the Idaho Public Utilities
Commission, the Federal Communications Commission or any other regulatory body. The City will not permit the use of its streets and alleys for cable
antenna television unless there is full compliance by the permittee with all of the terms of this Chapter, the application and permit. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
The application for permit shall be in writing and delivered to the Clerk and shall set forth:
A. The name of the individual, corporation or partnership seeking the permit.
B. A statement under oath made by applicant for the permit that no City official or member of his immediate family shall receive any monetary gain from
the issuance or operation of such permit.
C. The name and address of all persons having an equity in the business or permit (excepting that a list of corporation stockholders is not required).
D. The proposed service, supported by allied documents showing the area and extent of coverage within the City.
E. A complete list of maximum charges to be made to the subscribing public, including the installation fee and the monthly service charge to be paid by
subscribers and showing that free service will be given to nonprofit and public, religious and charitable organizations including, but not limited to,
schools, churches, hospitals and nursing homes.
F. That the system will be color capable and will carry full color as transmitted by the television station carried on CATV under this permit.
G. That the applicant does certify that a high quality signal of not less than five hundred (500) micro volts across three hundred (300) ohms will be
delivered to the subscribers' sets.
H. That the applicant does certify that the service will be rendered on a nondiscriminatory basis and will be offered without discrimination to any
subscriber.
I. That the applicant does offer service to all subscribers within the City limits; providing, however, that subscribers whose place of use does not adjoin
the cable system shall, in the event the installation will exceed the cost of fifteen dollars ($15.00), negotiate with the permit holder for the payment of
the additional costs of installation of such service.
J. The address of the business office of the applicant within the City and the hours and days the business office will be opened (the permit holder may
change address by written notice to City at any time).
K. The applicant will furnish adequate CATV maintenance service within the City.
L. The applicant will carry all local television stations, present and future, without degradation of signal and without duplicating regular schedule
broadcast programs; providing, the permit holder is notified by the local television station of the broadcast to be carried.
M. The applicant shall furnish one F.M. service for music and multiplex.
N. The applicant shall furnish one educational channel.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 30/258
O. The applicant shall provide at least three (3) television channels in addition to local stations with normal broadcasting time of sixteen (16) hours per
twenty four (24) hour day.
P. Applicant will carry a weather and news station.
Q. The number of days necessary to render service within the City from the date of the issuance of the permit.
R. The applicant shall specify the time and date of the completion of the various phases of the service proposed setting forth when each phase shall be
available to subscribers.
S. The application shall be accompanied by a one dollar ($1.00) fee for permit. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-4: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
Plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Council at the time the application is presented, which plans and specifications shall show in detail
the proposed operation under the permit, showing all route, structures, utilities and use of City property planned under the permit. The plans and
specifications shall bind the applicant, and the permit holder shall be confined to the plans and specifications filed with the original application. In the
event that the applicant desires to modify or extend the plans and specifications submitted under the original application, it shall be necessary to submit
his application for proposed modification and allied documents as herein provided for the extended or enlarged service and operation. (Ord. 654, 2-28-
66)
4-3-5: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
The City Clerk shall, upon proper authorization of the Mayor and Council, issue a permit to the applicant. The applicant's application shall be
incorporated in the permit by reference, and all the provisions of the application shall bind the permit holder. The permit shall provide that a fee charge
of three percent (3%) of the gross receipts per annum shall be paid by the permit holder to the City on January 1 of each year throughout the term of the
permit. The permit shall further provide that in the event that the permit holder has not commenced work within a required number of days inserted on
the permit, as of the date of issuance of the permit, that the permit shall be void. (Ord. 965, 8-24-81)
4-3-6: TERM OF PERMIT:
The permit shall be issued for a term which, in the opinion of the Council, will be of a sufficient length of time to amortize the original capital investment
of the permit holder in the CATV system. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-7: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
The permit holder shall, five (5) days prior to commencing work or business within the City, deliver to the Clerk's office satisfactory evidence of a paid-up
policy of liability insurance, with the coverage limit in the amount of three hundred fifty thousand dollars ($350,00.00), acceptable to the Mayor and
Council insuring the City against any loss suffered from any cause to any person from the operation conducted under the permit. At the termination of
said policy, the permit holder shall present proof of paid-up insurance in the amount herein set forth. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66, amd. Ord. 655, 3-14-66)
4-3-8: SAVE HARMLESS CLAUSE:
The Clerk shall endorse upon the permit the provision that the applicant or permit holder shall covenant and agree to hold the City harmless from any
liability whatsoever resulting from the operation under the permit. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-9: SURETY PERFORMANCE BOND:
The permit holder shall deliver to the office of the City Clerk within thirty (30) days after the issuance of the FCC permit for microwave stations to serve
the CATV in the City, a surety bond in the amount of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), for faithful compliance with the terms of the application,
permit and performance under this Chapter. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66, amd. Ord. 655, 3-14-66)
4-3-10: PUBLIC SERVICE:
The permit is issued for the use and benefit of the citizens of the City, and such permit shall be subject to revocation, modification and the orders of the
Council relative to the performance of such service as provided in the application, ordinance, permit and future legislative or administrative acts or
regulations by the Federal or State agencies. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-11: BUSINESS OPERATION:
The holders of permits issued under this Chapter shall, upon thirty (30) days' notice, produce their books and accounts for examination by audit agents
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 31/258
authorized and designated by the Mayor and Council to determine the gross receipts. The permit holder shall be required to reimburse the City for
reasonable charges connected with such audit or examination. In the event that the permit holder requests a rate increase above the maximum amount
set forth in the original application for permit, the permit holder shall deposit with the Clerk a sum deemed sufficient by the Mayor and Council to pay the
costs of the City's audit of the permit holder's books, accounts and records by such person designated by the Mayor and Council to give the City advice
as to the merits of the proposed rate increase. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-12: RATES:
The maximum subscription service charge made to the various classes of subscribers within the City shall be set out in the written application for
permit. The permit holder shall be required to maintain the subscription service rate on the basis of the original application filed with the Council unless
by application to the Council, an increase of such service rate shall be granted. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-13: MONTHLY REPORTS:
The permit holder shall cause a duplicate invoice for subscribers subscribing to said permit holder's service and shall monthly file a consolidated report
with the Clerk listing all subscription sales and cancellations. Such report shall be accompanied by the individual invoices. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-14: TRANSFER OF PERMIT:
The Clerk, upon receiving authority from the Mayor and Council to issue a permit, shall endorse upon the permit the terms and conditions prescribed by
this Chapter and a clause providing that such permit shall not be transferred without the consent of the Council. Such permit shall be signed by the
person or officer of the corporation or company to whom it is issued certifying that he agrees that there will be compliance with all the terms hereof.
(Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-15: PERMIT COVENANTS:
The permit issued by the Clerk shall contain a covenant signed by the parties to whom the permit is issued certifying that the holder of the permit shall
comply with all the terms and conditions of this Chapter and the orders provided under Section 4-3-10 hereof. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-16: REGULATION; INSTALLATION:
No installation shall be placed within the City, without first complying with City, County and State, and FCC regulations applicable to such installation
and shall comply fully with the requirements of the National Electrical Board or such standard setting organization as may hereafter prepare standards
for electrical installation. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-17: CITY EMPLOYEES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for City officials and employees to have an interest in any business organization holding or owning an interest in a permit issued
under this Chapter by the City. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66; 1990 Code)
4-3-18: LOCAL STATIONS:
The holder of the permit shall carry the broadcasts of all local television stations. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-19: INTERFERENCE:
The holder of the permit shall not permit any form of interference with the wireless broadcasts of local television stations. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-20: FEDERAL COMMUNICATION COMMISSION RULING:
The permit holder shall comply with all Federal Communication rulings and regulations relating to programming and transmission of cable television
signals. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-21: EDUCATIONAL CHANNEL:
The permit holder shall make available one educational channel to all subscribers. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-22: SERVICES TO BE FURNISHED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 32/258
The permit holder shall carry on cable all local stations, present and future without degradation of signal, and without duplicating regularly scheduled
local broadcast programs; providing that:
A. The permit holder is notified by the local television station of the programming scheduled to be carried.
B. The permit holder shall carry one weather and news channel; one F.M. connection; substantial network coverage of the National Broadcasting
Company, American Broadcasting Company and Columbia Broadcasting System available. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-23: RESTRICTED ACTIVITIES:
The permit holder shall not engage in any television sales, service or repair within the City. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-24: HEIGHTS OF CABLES:
The permit holder shall install all cables, wires and other impediments so that its lowest elevation is a minimum of eighteen feet (18') clearance from the
road and alley surface. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66; 1990 Code)
4-3-25: BROADCASTS ORIGINATING WITH THE PERMIT HOLDER:
The permit holder shall not permit any form of broadcast or signal interruption with broadcasts being conveyed on the CATV system and shall not
duplicate any program being carried on the local stations; provided, however, that the permit holder may originate or delete programs so long as they
are in full compliance with all Federal Communication Commission rules and regulations and Federal laws concerning television and radio broadcasting
and programming. The permit holder shall not produce any biased news reporting and present any programs offensive to good taste and shall not
interrupt regular broadcasts. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-26: CHANNEL DESIGNATION:
The permit holder shall carry local television stations on assigned CATV channels, and the channels designated to carry regular television broadcasts
shall not be changed without prior consent of the Council. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-27: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
In the event the permit holder discontinues business for any cause, the permit holder or the bonding company shall be required to remove all cables,
lines and installations within the City limits within sixty (60) days at their costs. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-28: COMPLIANCE:
The permit holder shall and must comply with all applicable City ordinances and the violation of any applicable City ordinance and this Chapter shall be
unlawful and punishable under the general penalty sections of the City Code, and shall subject the permit holder to revocation and cancellation of a
permit granted hereunder. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-29: NOTICE OF REMOVAL:
The permit holder shall, upon notice from the Council to its office personnel in the City, remove all poles, towers, wires, cables and other impediments
which interrupt or interfere with necessary City improvements, including, but not limited to, construction of streets, alleys, storm service sewers,
sidewalks and other City improvements which are, in the opinion of the Council, necessary within the City. Such removal shall be at the permit holder's
expense. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-30: EMERGENCY OCCURRENCES:
In the event of flood disaster, national emergency or other conditions beyond the control of the City it becomes necessary for the public safety and
welfare to remove or sever any part or parts of the cable television system, such damage will be repaired by the permit holder without expense to the
City. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-31: FUTURE LEGISLATIVE ACTS:
In the event that the Legislature of the State of Idaho, or the Congress of the United States or any Federal or State regulatory agency, shall take
jurisdiction of the CATV business, the permit shall be totally subject to such enactment, and in the event a permit has been issued hereunder, the United
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 33/258
States Congress, State Legislature or any other Federal or State regulatory agency makes compliance herewith impracticable, then in that event the
permit holder may make application to the Council for relief under this Chapter; provided, however, that the performance bond shall remain in effect for
the purpose of requiring the removal of all poles, towers, wires, cable and other such impediments on the streets and alleys within the City. (Ord. 654, 2-
28-66)
4-3-32: USE OF STREETS AND ALLEYS:
The permit holder shall not cut the oiled surface of the streets or alleys and shall in those subdivisions in which all utilities are buried under the surface
of the ground, carry their cable underground. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66)
4-3-33: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by an order of the Council, granting, denying, renewing, or revoking a license under this Chapter, may file a written request for a
hearing before the Council within ten (10) days after issuance of such order. Said hearing is to be conducted in accordance with Section 1-10-1 of this
City Code. At the general meeting of the Council next following the expiration of said ten (10) days, the Council shall then determine whether the
granting, denying, renewal or revocation of the license was in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and its findings shall be filed with the
Clerk. (Ord. 654, 2-28-66; 1990 Code)
Chapter 4
SALE OF CERTAIN MERCHANDISE IN RAILROAD PARK
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
CITY: The city of Mountain Home, Elmore County, Idaho.
RAILROAD PARK: The area maintained by the city west of Main Street, south of 5th North Street, east of the railroad tracks and north of Jackson
Street. (Ord. 1023, 3-12-1984)
4-4-2: SALE OF CERTAIN MERCHANDISE PROHIBITED IN RAILROAD PARK:
No person, corporation, organization or association shall sell or offer for sale in Railroad Park any goods, wares, merchandise, except the following:
A. Property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an individual or members of his or her residence, and acquired in the normal course of living in
and/or maintaining a residence not including merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment;
B. Handmade craft items or works of art when sold by the maker thereof or artist who created the work of art;
C. Homegrown produce when sold by the person who raised the produce;
D. Food items may be sold by charitable or nonprofit groups by obtaining a special permit therefor from the Central district health department and the
city council.
Items shall only be sold in those areas of Railroad Park so designated by the city. (Ord. 1081, 5-11-1987)
4-4-3: PENALTY:
Any violation shall subject the offender to penalties in accordance with section 1-4-1 of this code. (1990 Code)
Chapter 5
ADULT BUSINESSES1
(Rep. by Ord. 1584, 7-9-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 34/258
Chapter 6
DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CANVASSER: Any person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or appointment
from the resident, for the primary purpose of: a) attempting to enlist support for or against a particular religion, philosophy, ideology, political party, issue,
candidate, or a person under subsection 4-6-2E of this chapter, even if incidental to such purpose the canvasser accepts the donation of money for or
against such cause or person, or b) distributing a handbill or flier advertising a noncommercial event or service.
CHARITABLE: Means and includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, health, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, cultural or fraternal,
either actual or purported.
CHIEF: The chief of police of the city of Mountain Home.
CONTRIBUTIONS: Means and includes the words alms, money, subscription, property or any donations under the guise of a loan of money or property.
DEPARTMENT: The city of Mountain Home police department.
PEDDLER: Any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the city, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, carrying or
transporting goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature and offering the same for sale. This definition also includes any person who
solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of the scheme to evade the provisions of this chapter. Peddler does
not include a person who distributes handbills or fliers for a commercial purpose, advertising an event, activity, good or service that is offered to a
resident for purchase at a location away from his/her residence or at a time different from the time of visit.
PEDDLING: Includes all activities ordinarily performed by a peddler as indicated under the definition of "peddler" in this section.
PERSON: A natural person or any firm, corporation, association, club, society or other organization.
SOLICITATION: Includes all activities ordinarily performed by a solicitor as indicated under the definition of "solicitor" in this section.
SOLICITOR: Any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the city, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, for the
purpose of taking or attempting to take orders for the sale and future delivery of goods, merchandise, wares, or other personal property of any nature, or
for services to be performed in the future. This definition also includes any person who, without invitation, goes upon private property, primarily to
request contribution of funds or anything of value, or sell goods or services for political, charitable, religious, or other noncommercial purposes. (Ord.
1591, 12-27-2012)
4-6-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS AND EXEMPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling or solicitation activities within the city of Mountain Home without first obtaining a license issued
by the city clerk; provided, however, that the following are exempted from the provisions of this section:
A. A "canvasser" as defined in section 4-6-1 of this chapter.
B. Any solicitation made upon premises owned or occupied by an organization upon whose behalf the solicitation is made;
C. Any communication by an organization soliciting contributions solely from persons who are members of the organization at the time of such
solicitation;
D. Any solicitation in the form of a collection at a regular meeting, assembly or service of a charitable person;
E. Any person under eighteen (18) years of age who is engaged in solicitation for a nonprofit charitable organization or school; or
F. Any person who is a full time high school student who is engaged in solicitation for such school or a nonprofit or charitable school activity. (Ord. 1591,
12-27-2012)
4-6-3: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Every person subject to the provisions of this chapter shall file with the city clerk an application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city, which
shall provide the following information:
A. Date of birth, address and identification of the applicant, to be provided through the applicant's driver's license, articles of incorporation (for
sponsors), or other legally recognized form of identification;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 35/258
B. A brief description of the business or activity to be conducted;
C. The hours and location for which the right to peddle or solicit is desired;
D. If employed, the name, address and telephone number of the employer; or if acting as an agent, the name, address and telephone number of the
principal who is being represented, with credentials in written form establishing the relationship and the authority of the employee or agent to act for
the employer or principal, as the case may be;
E. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation (other than traffic violations), the
nature of the offense or violation, the penalty or punishment imposed, the date when and place where such offense occurred, and other pertinent
details thereof;
F. Proof of possession of any license or permit which, under federal, state or local laws or regulations, the applicant is required to have in order to
conduct the proposed business, or which, under any such law or regulation, would exempt the applicant from the licensing requirements of this
chapter; and
G. Two (2) photographs of the applicant which shall have been taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application. The
photographs shall measure two inches by two inches (2" x 2") and show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing
manner.
H. To determine the suitability of prospective applicants for a peddler's or solicitor's license, the chief of police shall require an applicant to provide
information and fingerprints necessary to obtain criminal history information from the Idaho state police and the federal bureau of investigation.
Pursuant to section 67-3008, Idaho Code, and congressional enactment of public law 92-544, the chief of police shall submit a set of fingerprints
obtained from the applicant and the required fees to the Idaho state police, bureau of criminal identification, for a criminal records check of state and
national databases. The submission of fingerprints and information required by this subsection shall be on forms prescribed by the Idaho state
police. The chief of police is authorized to receive criminal history information from the Idaho state police and from the federal bureau of investigation
for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of applicants for peddler's or solicitor's licenses. As required by state and federal law, further dissemination
or other use of the criminal history information is prohibited. (Ord. 1591, 12-27-2012)
4-6-4: FEES:
At the time the application is filed with the city clerk, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable fee to cover the cost to the city of processing the
application and investigating the facts stated therein. The license fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each solicitor or peddler, fifty five dollars
($55.00) of which shall cover the cost of the license and forty five dollars ($45.00) of which shall cover the cost of the fingerprinting and investigation.
There shall be a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) paid to the city for the issuance of a duplicate identification card if the licensee has lost his or her license or
identification card. (Ord. 1591, 12-27-2012)
4-6-5: APPLICATION REVIEW AND LICENSE ISSUANCE:
A. Upon receipt of an application, the city clerk, or authorized representative, shall forward a copy of the application to the chief of police for review to
ensure the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare, which review may take four (4) to six (6) weeks because of the fingerprinting
and criminal records check.
B. Subject to section 4-6-6 of this chapter and the meeting of all of the requirements by the applicant, the chief of police shall endorse his approval on
the application and forward his approval to the city clerk, who shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, deliver the required license or identification
card to the applicant.
C. The license or identification card shall show the name, business and photograph of the licensee, the kind of goods or services to be sold or
delivered, the date of issuance, and the length of time that the license shall be in effect.
D. A record of all licenses issued shall be maintained by the city clerk for a period of two (2) years. (Ord. 1591, 12-27-2012)
4-6-6: DENIAL OF LICENSE:
A. Upon the chief of police's and city clerk's review of the application, the city clerk may refuse to issue a license to the applicant under this chapter for
any of the following reasons:
1. The location and time of solicitation or peddling would endanger the safety and welfare of the solicitors, peddlers or their customers;
2. An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application;
3. The applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation involving trafficking in controlled substances, or any violent acts
against persons or property, such conviction being entered within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application;
4. The applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation involving a sex offense at any time prior to the application for
the license;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 36/258
5. The applicant is a person against whom a judgment based upon, or conviction for, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation has been entered within the
five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application;
6. There is no proof as to the authority of the applicant to serve as an agent of the principal;
7. The applicant has been denied a license under this chapter within the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the
satisfaction of the city clerk that the reasons for such earlier denial no longer exist; or
8. The applicant fails to submit the necessary information as requested under section 4-6-3 of this chapter and/or the application is incomplete.
B. The city clerk's disapproval and the reasons for disapproval shall be noted on the application, and the applicant shall be notified by the city clerk that
his application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application
form, or at the applicant's last known address. (Ord. 1591, 12-27-2012)
4-6-7: LICENSE EXPIRATION:
All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance, unless an earlier expiration date is noted on the
license. (Ord. 1591, 12-27-2012)
4-6-8: IDENTIFICATION CARDS:
A. At the same time the license is approved, the city clerk shall issue to each licensee a city identification card, which shall be worn by the licensee in
such a way as to be conspicuous at all times while the licensee is soliciting or peddling in the city. (Ord. 1591, 12-27-2012)
4-6-9: IDENTIFICATION CARD EXHIBITION:
Every person required to obtain a license under the provisions of this chapter shall exhibit the city identification card when requested to do so by any
prospective customer or city employee. (Ord. 1591, 12-27-2012)
4-6-10: TRANSFER PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the licensee to use or wear any license or city identification card issued under the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 1591, 12-27-2012)
4-6-11: ENTRY UPON PREMISES UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or unlicensed, while conducting the business of a canvasser, peddler, or solicitor, to enter upon any
residential premises in the city where the owner, occupant or person legally in charge of the premises has posted, at the entry to the premises, or at the
entry to the principal building on the premises, a sign bearing the words "No Peddlers", "No Solicitors", or words of similar import. (Ord. 1591, 12-27-
2012)
4-6-12: HOURS OF SOLICITATION:
No person, while conducting the activities of canvasser or a peddler or solicitor, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall enter upon any private property,
knock on doors or otherwise disturb persons in their residences between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. (Ord. 1591,
12-27-2012)
4-6-13: LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the city clerk for any of the following reasons:
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a license;
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the licensee in the course of conducting solicitation or peddling activities;
C. Conducting peddling or solicitation activities contrary to the provisions contained in the license;
D. Conviction for any crime involving moral turpitude; or
E. Conducting peddling or solicitation activities in such a manner as to create a public nuisance, constitute a breach of the peace or endanger the
health, safety or general welfare of the public. (Ord. 1591, 12-27-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 37/258
4-6-14: NOTICE AND INFORMAL HEARING:
Notice of the revocation or suspension of the license by the city clerk shall be in writing and shall set forth specifically the grounds for the revocation or
suspension of the license. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the address shown on the license application or at the last
known address of the licensee or delivered to the licensee personally. The licensee whose license is being revoked or suspended shall have the right to
an informal hearing before the city clerk. The notice of the revocation or suspension delivered or sent to the licensee shall notify the licensee of his, her
or its right to an informal hearing before the city clerk and the reason or reasons for the denial, revocation or suspension. The request for an informal
hearing before the city clerk must be in writing and delivered to the city clerk within ten (10) days of the mailing or delivery of the notice of denial,
revocation or suspension to the licensee. If an informal hearing is requested and held, the city clerk shall render a written decision within five (5) days of
the informal hearing, which written decision shall be delivered to the licensee in the same manner as the original notice. (Ord. 1591, 12-27-2012)
4-6-15: APPEALS:
A. Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the city clerk to deny, suspend or revoke a license applied for or issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall have the right to appeal such action or decision to the city council within fifteen (15) days after the notice of the action or decision has
been mailed to the person's address as shown on the license application form, to his last known address, or delivered to him personally.
B. An appeal shall be taken by filing with the city clerk a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal.
C. The city clerk shall transmit the written statement to the city council within ten (10) days of its receipt and the city council shall set a time and place
for a hearing on the appeal.
D. A hearing shall be set not later than thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the appellant's written statement.
E. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided for in the mailing or personal service of
notice of action or decision.
F. The decision of the city council on the appeal shall be final and binding on all parties concerned. (Ord. 1591, 12-27-2012)
4-6-16: CLAIMS OF EXEMPTION:
Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the regulations set forth in this chapter, or from the payment of a license fee, shall cite to the city clerk
the statute or other legal authority under which exemption is claimed and shall present to the city clerk proof of qualification for such exemption. (Ord.
1591, 12-27-2012)
4-6-17: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY:
A. Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punishable as set forth in title 1, chapter 4 of
this code and by state law.
B. In addition to any criminal enforcement, the city or any individual may pursue any available civil remedies deemed appropriate and necessary. (Ord.
1591, 12-27-2012)
4-6-18: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall for any reason be held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses,
and phrases of this chapter, but they shall remain in effect; it being the legislative intent that this chapter shall remain in effect notwithstanding the
invalidity of any part. (Ord. 1591, 12-27-2012)
Chapter 7
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
(Rep. by Ord. 1597, 4-8-2013)
Chapter 8
TAXICABS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 38/258
4-8-1: APPLICATION:
Before engaging in the business of operating or using any motor or power driven vehicle commonly known as a taxicab, in the transportation of persons
within the city limits, said person shall file with the clerk an application for a license to do so and shall secure such license for each for hire motor vehicle
to be operated in such business. The application for license shall contain the following information:
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. Make, year, model, vehicle identification number and license number of the motor vehicle for which application is made. (Ord. 1409, 3-28-2005)
4-8-2: LICENSE:
After the application has been approved by the council, the clerk shall issue a license to the applicant, subject to the restrictions and upon the conditions
in this chapter specified. Such license shall be carried at all times in each vehicle licensed in a conspicuous place. The license shall give the name of
licensee, describe the motor vehicle for which it is issued and give the expiration date of such license. (Ord. 335, 11-6-1945)
4-8-3: FEE:
A license fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per vehicle per annum shall be paid to the clerk in advance at the time of the filing of said application or any
renewal thereof. Any person desiring to carry on or engage in said business may procure a monthly license by paying in advance the sum of five dollars
($5.00) per month for each vehicle used or operated in said business. All annual licenses issued hereunder shall expire on December 31 of the year in
which issued. (Ord. 1409, 3-28-2005)
4-8-4: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
A. Maximum Coverage: All taxicab companies or individuals operating taxicabs within the city of Mountain Home by license or franchise shall be
required to carry public liability and property damage insurance on each vehicle used for the transportation of persons within the city limits in the
amount of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each person to the maximum capacity of the vehicle for personal injury and fifteen thousand
dollars ($15,000.00) for property damage. (Ord. 1096, 4-25-1988)
B. Accredited Insurance Carrier: Such personal injury and property damage insurance policy shall be with the insurance company duly licensed by the
department of insurance of the state of Idaho.
C. Condition Precedent To License: Such paid up insurance policy will be filed with the city clerk prior to the issuance of any license or franchise to any
individual, company or partnership, to convey by taxicabs within the city limits.
D. Violations And Revocation: Failure of the licensee to comply with any of the terms hereof shall constitute a violation hereof and shall subject the
licensee to revocation of license or franchise. (Ord. 620, 3-4-1963; amd. 1990 Code)
4-8-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Every licensee shall observe the following regulations:
A. The driver of every licensed vehicle shall be at least twenty one (21) years of age, shall be duly licensed as a chauffeur under the laws of the state,
shall operate the licensed vehicle in a careful and prudent manner and in accordance with the traffic laws and regulations of the city and shall not
operate said vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs of any kind.
B. No driver shall be employed who is unskilled or reckless in the operation of a vehicle, who is addicted to the use of intoxicating liquor, opiates or habit
forming drugs or is an immoral or disorderly person.
C. No taxi stand shall be established on any street, alley or public place without the prior consent of the council. (Ord. 1470, 2-26-2007)
4-8-6: REVOCATION1:
The right shall be and at all times remain vested in the council to revoke or cancel the license of any person licensed hereunder for any violation of this
chapter or any other laws of the city or of the state of Idaho or of the United States of America, pertaining to the operation or use of motor vehicles.
Before revoking a license, the council shall conduct a hearing, after notice to the licensee, and if at said hearing it appears to the council that cause
exists for the cancellation or revocation of such license, the same may thereupon be immediately canceled or revoked without obligation on the part of
the city to refund any portion of the license fee. (Ord. 335, 11-6-1945)
4-8-7: VIOLATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 39/258
Each day a person operates a taxicab in the city of Mountain Home without a license issued by the city of Mountain Home shall be a violation of this
chapter. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be an infraction and shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1409,
3-28-2005)
Chapter 9
ANTIQUE AND SECONDHAND STORES
(Rep. by Ord. 1622, 11-10-2014)
Chapter 10
PAWNBROKERS
4-10-1: PAWNBROKER DEFINED:
Any person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or who deals in the purchase of personal property on condition of selling the
same back at a stipulated price. (1990 Code)
4-10-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
The city council may, from time to time, grant licenses to such persons as shall produce to it satisfactory evidence of their good character to exercise or
carry on the business of pawnbroker within the city. No person shall exercise or carry on the business of pawnbroker within the city without being duly
licensed therefor. (1990 Code)
4-10-3: FEE; TRANSFERABILITY:
Every applicant for a license to act as a pawnbroker within the city shall pay to the city clerk an annual fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) at the time
the application for license is filed. Such license will not be transferable to any person or persons, except upon written consent of the city council. If the
application for the license is rejected by the council, the license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. (Ord. 424, 6-15-1953; amd. 1990 Code)
4-10-4: BOND:
(Rep. by Ord. 1169, 12-14-1992)
4-10-5: RECORDS REQUIRED:
Every pawnbroker licensed under this chapter shall keep a record book in which shall be legibly written, at the time of each pledge or purchase of
personal property, the following:
A. The name and address of the pledger or seller;
B. The pledger's or seller's driver's license number or military identification number, if available;
C. A general description of the pledger or seller;
D. An identification and complete description of the pledged or purchased property, including serial numbers if available;
E. The amount of money loaned on the pledged goods, or the purchase price of purchased goods;
F. The rate of interest to be paid on each loan; and
G. The date and time of each pledge or purchase of personal property.
Each pawnbroker licensed under this chapter shall preserve the records required by this section for one year from the date of the pledge or
purchase or until the item is sold or redeemed, whichever occurs later. (1990 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 40/258
4-10-6: INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
The record book provided for in the preceding section, as well as every article or thing of value pawned or pledged, shall at all reasonable times be
open to the inspection of the mayor or any member of the police department. (1990 Code)
4-10-7: MEMORANDUM TO PLEDGER:
Every pawnbroker shall at the time of each loan deliver to the person pawning or pledging any goods, articles or thing, a memorandum or note signed
by him, containing the substance of the entry to be made in his book, which is provided for in section 4-10-5 of this chapter, and no charge shall be
made or received by any pawnbroker for any such entry, memorandum or note. (1990 Code)
4-10-8: REPORT TO POLICE:
It shall be the duty of every person licensed hereunder to make out and deliver to the chief of police a legible and correct copy of the record book
required in section 4-10-5 of this chapter, as and when requested by the chief of police. (1990 Code)
4-10-9: REDEMPTION OR REMOVAL OF PLEDGED PROPERTY:
No personal property received on deposit or pledged by any such licensed person shall be sold or permitted to be redeemed from the place of business
of such licensed person for the space of twenty four (24) hours after the copy and statement required to be delivered to the police department shall
have been delivered as required by the preceding section. (1990 Code)
4-10-10: HOURS OF BUSINESS:
No person licensed under this chapter shall receive on deposit or pledge any personal property or other valuable thing before the hour of six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. nor after the hour of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. (1990 Code)
4-10-11: PLEDGES FROM MINORS PROHIBITED:
No person licensed under this chapter shall take or receive any property, bonds, notes, securities, articles or other valuable things as a pawn or pledge,
for money loaned, which may be in the possession or control of any minor person, regardless of any claim by such minor with respect to ownership.
(1990 Code)
4-10-12: MINIMUM AGE OF EMPLOYEES:
No person licensed under this chapter shall employ any person under eighteen (18) years of age to take or receive pledges or pawns. (1990 Code)
4-10-13: PROHIBITED PLEDGES:
No person licensed hereunder shall take any article or pawn from any person appearing to be intoxicated, nor from any person known to be a notorious
thief or to have been convicted of larceny or burglary. (1990 Code)
4-10-14: DISPLAY OF CERTAIN WEAPONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1609, 10-15-2013)
4-10-15: POLICE REPORT; REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of all members of the police department to report to the mayor any failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter, and the city
council may revoke the license of the person offending against any of these provisions upon notice and hearing procedures set out in section 1-10-1 of
this code. (1990 Code)
4-10-16: PENALTY:
Every pawnbroker who shall violate or neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, where no other penalty is imposed, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, and in addition to such penalty, the license of any person
convicted as aforesaid shall be revoked. (1990 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 41/258
Title 5
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODE
5-1-1: ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODES:
A. Adoption: The city hereby adopts the following documents and codes published by the International Code Council, effective January 1, 2014, and as
the international building codes and supporting documents are revised and republished from time to time, the current editions thereof shall become
the building codes for the city, effective January 1 immediately following said publications, regulating the erection, construction, enlargement,
alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of all buildings or structures
in the city, to be known as the building codes of the city and to be administered and enforced by the building official of the city. In addition, the city
shall administer and enforce any and all codes and regulations as may be adopted by the state under the Idaho building code advisory act of 1975
and that compliance with said act shall be continuous from year to year. In the event that this section shall be repealed, the director of labor and
industrial services shall be notified in writing that compliance with the building code advisory act shall terminate on June 30 following such written
notice. The codes that are adopted by the city are as follows:
1. The 2012 edition of the international building code prepared by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted by the state of Idaho or the Idaho
building code board, together with any amendments or revisions to the international building code made by the Idaho building code board through
the negotiated rulemaking process:
a. Excluding the incorporated electrical codes, mechanical code, fuel gas code, plumbing codes, fire codes or property maintenance codes other
than specifically referenced subjects or sections of the international fire code;
b. Including the incorporated international residential code, parts I, II, III, IV and IX; international energy conservation code; and rules promulgated
by the board to provide equivalency with the provisions of the Americans with disabilities act accessibility guidelines and the fair housing act
accessibility guidelines which shall be included.
c. With the following amendments:
IBC building code amendment, table 2902.1 footnote f
f. Drinking fountains are not required for an occupant load of thirty (30) or fewer.
IBC building code amendment, table 2902.1 footnote g
g. For business occupancies, excluding restaurants, and mercantile occupancies with an occupant load of thirty (30) or fewer, service sinks
shall not be required.
2. The 2009 edition of the international residential code prepared by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted by the state of Idaho or the
Idaho building code board, together with any amendments or revisions to the international building code made by the Idaho building code board
through the negotiated rulemaking process, except for parts V, VI, VII and VIII as they pertain to mechanical, fuel gas, plumbing and electrical
requirements with the following amendments:
IRC building code amendment, section R315.2, Carbon Monoxide Alarms Where Required In Existing Dwellings.
R315.2 Where Required In Existing Dwellings.
Where work requiring a permit occurs in existing dwellings that have attached garages or in existing dwellings within which fuel-fired
appliances exist, carbon monoxide alarms shall be provided in accordance with section R315.1.
Exceptions:
1. Work involving the exterior surfaces of dwellings, such as, but not limited to, replacement of roofing or siding, or the addition or
replacement of windows or doors, or the addition of a porch or deck, or electrical permits, are exempt from the requirements of this section.
2. Installation, alteration or repairs of noncombustion plumbing or mechanical systems are exempt from the requirements of this section.
IRC building code amendment, section N1102.4.3, Fireplaces.
N1102.4.3 Fireplaces. New wood-burning fireplaces shall have tight-fitting flue dampers and outdoor combustion air.
3. The 2009 edition of the international energy conservation code prepared by the International Code Council, Inc., together with any amendments
or revisions to the international building code made by the Idaho building code board through the negotiated rulemaking process with the following
amendment:
IECC energy code amendment, section 402.4.3, Fireplaces.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 42/258
402.4.3 Fireplaces. New wood-burning fireplaces shall have tight-fitting flue dampers and outdoor combustion.
4. The 2012 international property maintenance code.
5. The 2012 international existing building code.
6. The 1997 uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings.
7. The 2012 international fire code.
8. The 2012 mechanical code.
9. The 2012 fuel gas code.
B. Exemptions: Agricultural buildings are exempt from the building codes adopted herein, but shall remain subject to placement requirements
established by zoning regulations.
C. Copies On File: Not less than one copy of the current building codes and the rules and regulations of the department of labor and industrial services
shall be on file at all times in the office of the building official for examination by the public.
D. Penalty For Failure To Obtain Building Permit: It shall be unlawful for anyone to start work on any project needing a building permit before obtaining
one. Anyone starting a project who has not obtained the proper building permit as required by this chapter shall be in violation of this title and shall
be subject to punishment as an infraction as provided for in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1613, 12-23-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
5-1-2: DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL:
It shall be the duty of the building official to enforce the provisions of this chapter. This person shall be certified by the International Code Council and
shall have and maintain a current commercial and residential certification. It shall be unlawful for anyone to obstruct the building official or his designee
in the performance of his or her duty. (Ord. 1528, 6-22-2009)
5-1-3: ARCHITECTS' PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
Plans and specifications prepared by a licensed architect shall be submitted to the building official before any construction may begin on any building or
structure which is more than two (2) stories in height or any building or structure that is intended for commercial, industrial, public or semipublic use or
for any building or structure for private use if built primarily of concrete, masonry, metal or of heavy wood beam design. This requirement will not apply
to one- or two-family dwellings of conventional wood frame construction which are two (2) stories or less in height. (Ord. 1422, 9-12-2005)
5-1-4: BUILDING PERMIT FEES:
Except as hereinafter provided, building permit fees and plan review fees for multiple dwellings (more than 4), limited office, public/quasi-public,
commercial and industrial structures shall be as provided in the building permit fee table that is attached as exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein
and by this reference made a part hereof.
A. City Of Mountain Home Fee Table: The city hereby adopts the city of Mountain Home building code fee table that is attached as exhibit A to the
ordinance codified herein and by this reference made a part hereof and it shall be in effect for all building permit and inspection fee costs.
B. Value Of Construction: Except as hereinafter provided, the value of construction for the purpose of computing the building permit fees shall be as
provided in the "building valuation data table" listed in the current edition of the International Conference Of Building Officials' "Building Standards"
publication, or the estimated cost of construction, furnished by the applicant, whichever is greater.
1. Building permit fees for accessory buildings, roof construction and covering, siding, swimming pools, uncovered decks, alterations or repair of
existing buildings, or buildings or structures not listed in the data table or herein, shall be based on actual value as determined by the building
official, or actual cost as submitted by the applicant, or by the contractor's bid price.
2. The "actual construction value" shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting,
roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing systems and other permanent equipment.
C. Fixed Fees: The following fees are hereby imposed and have been established to reflect, as close as possible, the actual hourly costs to the city:
1. Certificate of compliance $10.00
2. Certificate of occupancy/existing building 40.00
3. Energy standard form fee 25.00
4. Fence permit 20.00
5. Floodplain building application 35.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 43/258
6. Miscellaneous and special inspections $47.00 per hour (1/2 hour minimum)
7. Mobile home tie down permit $50.00
8. Sidewalk/curb/gutter permit 20.00
9. Spas, hot tubs, solar collectors/
antennas (more than 18 inch diameter) and similar construction
20.00
10. Tank removal and placement permit $47.00 per hour (1/2 hour minimum)
11. Wood stove inspection $ 20.00
12. Commercial hood inspection 100.00
13. Commercial plan review 40 percent of building permit fee
14. Residential plan review $100.00 refundable deposit if building permit is purchased
15. For the use of outside consultants Actual cost
(Ord. 1528, 6-22-2009)
5-1-5: BUILDING PERMITS FOR CITY PROJECTS OR PUBLIC ENTITIES:
A building permit will be issued free of charge to any person, firm, or contractor who is awarded the bid by the city for the construction of a public facility.
However, this fact must be specifically stated in the bid specifications prepared on behalf of the city and approved by the building official or his designee
for each project.
A public entity may, upon making application and upon approval of the city council, be exempted from the fees provided for in this chapter. However, the
applicant shall be responsible for any additional costs incurred by the city with regard to its particular project. (Ord. 1528, 6-22-2009)
5-1-6: FROST DEPTH:
The frost depth level for the city is hereby declared to be two feet (2') below the natural surface of the ground. All foundation footings shall be at least
two feet (2') below finish grade or the natural ground surface. (Ord. 786, 1975)
5-1-7: ROOF LOAD DESIGN CRITERIA:
All roofs constructed in the city will be designed for a minimum live load of thirty (30) pounds per square foot. (Ord. 815, 4-12-1976)
5-1-8: MOBILE HOME INSTALLATIONS:
No mobile home shall be installed or located upon any property within the city limits of the city without obtaining a permit from the city building official,
except those mobile homes temporarily located or installed for the purpose of display for sale only. (Ord. 1528, 6-22-2009)
5-1-9: BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain anywhere in the city a fence equipped with or having an electric charge sufficient to cause shock. It shall be
unlawful to erect or to maintain anywhere in the city, except in those areas zoned commercial or industrial, a fence equipped with or having barbed wire,
spikes or any other similar device. (Ord. 1067, 7-14-1986)
5-1-10: KEEPING OF JUNK RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or keep any old articles or materials which may be classified as junk, adjacent to or in close proximity to any
schoolhouse, church, public park, public grounds, business buildings or residences without first having provided proper and tight buildings for the
storage of same. (Ord. 719, 2-22-1971)
5-1-11: CONTRACTOR'S REGISTRATION NUMBER:
A. Building Permit Issued: No building permit shall be issued without the contractor's registration number being presented by the contractor, except
when the permit applicant provides evidence to the satisfaction of the city's building official that the applicant is exempt from the registration
requirements pursuant to title 54, chapter 52 of the Idaho Code.
B. Violation And Penalty: It shall be unlawful for any contractor, as that term is defined by Idaho Code section 54-5203, unless exempt as provided in
Idaho Code section 54-5205, to act as a contractor within the city limits of the city of Mountain Home or to conduct business as a contractor without
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 44/258
first obtaining and maintaining a current contractor registration number. Violation of this section shall constitute an infraction and shall be punishable
by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), excluding court costs and fees. An infraction is a civil public offense, not constituting a crime, which is
punishable only by a penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and for which no period of incarceration may be imposed. There is no
right to a trial by jury of a citation or complaint for an infraction and such trials shall be held before the court without a jury. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. A second and any subsequent conviction of any violation of
any of the provisions of this section within five (5) years shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord.
1438, 3-13-2006)
5-1-12: STORAGE OF CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS:
All construction sites within the city of Mountain Home shall have a trash container on site of sufficient size to accommodate the debris for that project.
All lightweight construction debris, including cardboard boxes, product wrapping, waste material, and similar material, including trash, shall be placed in
this container. No lightweight debris shall be placed on the ground outside of this container at any time. The city's building official and/or his designee
will issue a stop work order for violations of this section. Any stop work order issued for this construction site will remain in effect until the owner calls for
an inspection and an inspection has been completed to ensure that all trash and debris have been properly disposed of. (Ord. 1508, 5-12-2008)
Chapter 2
PLUMBING CODE
5-2-1: ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE:
The current edition of the uniform plumbing code, relating to and establishing rules and regulations for the installation of plumbing, be and the same is
hereby adopted and enacted as the plumbing code for the city. The current edition of said code, and any amendments and additions thereto, are hereby
adopted by reference. Not less than one copy of said code shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the building official for use and examination by
the public. (Ord. 1528, 6-22-2009)
5-2-2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The plumbing code of the city shall be administered and enforced by the state, pursuant to the provisions of chapter 26, title 54 of the Idaho Code. (Ord.
951, 2-9-1981; amd. 1990 Code)
5-2-3: PRESSURE REDUCING VALVE:
All new residential houses built within the city of Mountain Home shall have a pressure reducing valve installed in a readily accessible area located on
the wall by the water heater. (Ord. 1500, 2-25-2008)
Chapter 3
ELECTRICAL CODE
5-3-1: ADOPTION OF NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE:
The current edition of the national electrical code, relating to and establishing rules and regulations for electrical installation, be and the same is hereby
adopted and enacted as the electrical code for the city. The current edition of said code, and any amendments and additions thereto, are hereby
adopted by reference. Not less than one copy of said code shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the building official for use and examination by
the public. (Ord. 1528, 6-22-2009)
5-3-2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The electrical code of the city shall be administered and enforced by the state pursuant to the provisions of chapter 10, title 54 of the Idaho Code. (Ord.
952, 2-9-1981)
Chapter 4
SIGN CODE
5-4-1: SIGN CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of regulating and controlling sign construction and providing minimum standards for the city, the uniform sign
code, current edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials.
The code described above is adopted by reference as if fully set forth in this section. Pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-901, the building official is
directed to certify one copy of said code or standard as having been adopted pursuant to this section and maintain one copy of said code on file in the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 45/258
office of the building official. (Ord. 1528, 6-22-2009)
Chapter 5
FLOOD HAZARD PROTECTION
5-5-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, AND OBJECTIVES:
A. Statutory Authority: The legislature of the state of Idaho, pursuant to Idaho Code sections 46-1020 through 46-1024, authorizes local governments to
adopt floodplain management ordinances that identify floodplains and minimum floodplain development standards to minimize flood hazards and
protect human life, health, and property. Therefore, the city council of the city of Mountain Home, Idaho, does hereby ordain as follows.
B. Findings Of Fact:
1. The flood hazard areas of Mountain Home, Idaho, are subject to periodic inundation that results in:
a. Loss of life and property;
b. Health and safety hazards;
c. Disruption of commerce and governmental services;
d. Extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection; and
e. Impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
2. These flood losses are caused by structures in flood hazard areas, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from
flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
3. Local government units have the primary responsibility for planning, adopting, and enforcing land use regulations to accomplish proper floodplain
management.
C. Statement Of Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to promote public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses
due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
1. Protect human life, health, and property;
2. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric, telephone
and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in floodplains;
3. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas;
4. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
5. Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated with flooding, generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
6. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
7. Ensure potential buyers are notified the property is in an area of special flood hazard; and
8. Ensure those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.
D. Objectives And Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses: In order to accomplish its purpose, this chapter includes methods and provisions to:
1. Require that development which is vulnerable to floods, including structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety, and welfare of
citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
2. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights,
velocities, or erosion;
3. Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion;
4. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert floodwaters or that may increase flood hazards to other lands;
5. Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which carry and store floodwaters. (Ord. 1654, 11-28-
2016)
5-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined herein, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted according to the meaning they have in common usage and
to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE): A structure on the same lot or parcel as a principal structure, the use of which is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 46/258
incidental and subordinate to the principal structure.
ADDITION (To An Existing Building): An extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or structure.
APPEAL: A request for review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of provisions of this chapter or request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, or AR/AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent
(1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: See definition of Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): A determination by the federal insurance administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the
flood level that has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. When the BFE has not been provided in a special flood
hazard area, it may be obtained from engineering studies available from a federal, state, or other source using FEMA approved engineering
methodologies. This elevation, when combined with the freeboard, establishes the flood protection elevation.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING: See definition of Structure.
COMMUNITY: The city of Mountain Home, Idaho.
CRITICAL FACILITIES: Facilities that are vital to flood response activities or critical to the health and safety of the public before, during, and after a
flood, such as a hospital, emergency operations center, electric substation, police station, fire station, nursing home, school, vehicle and equipment
storage facility, or shelter; and facilities that, if flooded, would make the flood problem and its impacts much worse, such as a hazardous materials
facility, power generation facility, water utility, or wastewater treatment plant.
DATUM: The vertical datum is a base measurement point (or set of points) from which all elevations are determined. Historically, that common set of
points was the national geodetic vertical datum of 1929 (NGVD29). The vertical datum currently adopted by the federal government as a basis for
measuring heights is the North American vertical datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
Per Idaho Code section 46-1021: "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited
to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures, or the construction of additions or substantial improvements to buildings,
structures or accessory structures; the placement of mobile homes; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and
the deposition or extraction of materials; specifically including the construction of dikes, berms and levees. The term "development" does not
include the operation, cleaning, maintenance or repair of any ditch, canal, lateral, drain, diversion structure or other irrigation or drainage works
that is performed or authorized by the owner thereof pursuant to lawful rights and obligations.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Any activity defined as "development" which will necessitate a floodplain development permit; such as: the construction of
buildings, structures, or accessory structures; additions or substantial improvements to existing structures; bulkheads, retaining walls, piers, and pools;
the placement of mobile homes; or the deposition or extraction of materials; the construction or elevation of dikes, berms and levees.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM): The digital official map of a community, issued by the federal emergency management agency, on
which both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated.
ELEVATED BUILDING: For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation
walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE: An important administrative tool of the NFIP. It is used to determine the proper flood insurance premium rate; it is used to
document elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with community floodplain management regulations; and it may be used to support a
request for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) or letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F).
ENCLOSURE: An area enclosed by solid walls below the BFE/FPE or an area formed when any space below the BFE/FPE is enclosed on all sides by
walls or partitions. Insect screening or open wood lattice used to surround space below the BFE/FPE is not considered an enclosure.
ENCROACHMENT: The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, structures, or development into a floodplain, which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective
date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision where the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the original floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community, which was March 15, 1994.
EXISTING STRUCTURES: See definition of Existing Construction.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 47/258
FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION: See definition of Base Flood Elevation (BFE).
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY: See definition of Flood Insurance Study (FIS).
FLOOD FRINGE: Per Idaho Code section 46-1021: "Flood fringe" is that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway covered by floodwaters during
the regulatory flood.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the federal insurance administrator, where the boundaries of
the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as zones A, M, and/or E.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the federal insurance administrator has delineated both the special
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a digital flood insurance
rate map (DFIRM).
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface
elevations; or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood related erosion hazards.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
3. Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in subsection A2 of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid
and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the
current.
B. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly
unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection A1 of this definition.
C. Per Idaho Code section 46-1021: "Flood" means a general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
caused by the overflow or rise of rivers, streams or lakes, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The base flood elevation plus the freeboard.
A. In "special flood hazard areas" where base flood elevations (BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus one foot (1') of
freeboard;
B. In "special flood hazard areas" where no BFE has been established, this elevation shall be at least two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade;
and
C. Any building built before November 28, 2016, that is at BFE or above is exempt from the one foot (1') freeboard for the substantial improvement.
Per Idaho Code section 46-1021: "Flood protection elevation" means an elevation that shall correspond to the elevation of the one percent (1%)
chance flood (one hundred (100) year flood) plus any increased flood elevation due to floodway encroachment, plus any required freeboard.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have
been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the
extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes dams, reservoirs, levees, or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOOD ZONE: A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or flood insurance rate map (FIRM) that reflects the severity or
type of flooding in the area.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: The individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: Any type of permit that is required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the
commencement of any development activity.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but
not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations.
Per Idaho Code section 46-1021: "Floodplain management" is the analysis and integration of the entire range of measures that can be used to
prevent, reduce, or mitigate flood damage in a given location, and that can protect and preserve the natural, environmental, historical, and cultural
values of the floodplain.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 48/258
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance), and other applications of police power. The term
describes such State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flood or flooding).
Per Idaho Code section 46-1021: "Floodplain" is the land that has been or may be covered by floodwaters, or is surrounded by floodwater and
inaccessible, during the occurrence of the regulatory flood. The riverine floodplain includes the floodway and the flood fringe.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
Per Idaho Code section 46-1021: "Floodproofing" means the modifications of structures, their sites, building contents, and water and sanitary
facilities, to keep water out or reduce the effects of water entry.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation.
Per Idaho Code section 46-1021: "Floodway" is the channel of the river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel
required to discharge and store the floodwater or flood flows associated with the regulatory flood.
FREEBOARD: A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the hydrologic effects of urbanization in a watershed.
The base flood elevation (BFE) plus the freeboard establishes the flood protection elevation (FPE). Freeboard shall be one foot (1').
Per Idaho Code section 46-1021: "Freeboard" represents a factor of safety usually expressed in terms of a certain amount of feet above a
calculated flood level. Freeboard shall compensate for the many unknown factors that contribute to flood heights greater than the height
calculated. These unknown factors include, but are not limited to, ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of bridge openings and
floodways, the effects of urbanization on the hydrology of the watershed, loss of flood storage areas due to development, and the sedimentation of
a river or stream bed.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A facility that cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water,
such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair facilities. The term does
not include long term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG): The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a
structure. Refer to the FEMA elevation certificate for HAG related to building elevation information.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: A structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a listing maintained by the U.S. department of interior) or preliminarily determined by
the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or to
a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been
approved by the secretary of the interior; or
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have
been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior, or
2. Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs.
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC): A general term used to refer to the several types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be
accomplished by letter. They include letter of map amendment (LOMA), letter of map revision (LOMR), and letter of map revision based on fill (LOMRF):
Conditional Letter Of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project
complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not
revise the effective flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or flood insurance study (FIS). Upon submission and approval of certified as built
documentation, a letter of map revision (LOMR) may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. Building permits and/or flood development
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 49/258
permits cannot be issued based on a CLOMR, because a CLOMR does not change the NFIP map.
Letter Of Map Amendment (LOMA): An official amendment, by letter, to an effective national flood insurance program (NFIP) map. A LOMA
establishes a property's location in relation to the special flood hazard area (SFHA). LOMAs are usually issued because a property has been
inadvertently mapped as being in the floodplain but is actually on natural high ground above the base flood elevation.
Letter Of Map Revision (LOMR): FEMA's modification to an effective flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or a flood boundary and floodway map
(FBFM) or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of
a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevations (BFEs), or the special
flood hazard area (SFHA). The LOMR officially revises the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) or flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM), and
sometimes the flood insurance study (FIS) report, and when appropriate, includes a description of the modifications. The LOMR is generally
accompanied by an annotated copy of the affected portions of the FIRM, FBFM, or FIS report.
Letter Of Map Revision Based On Fill (LOMR-F): FEMA's modification of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the flood insurance rate
map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. The LOMR-F does not change the FIRM, FBFM, or FIS report.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed according to sound engineering practices, to contain,
control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Per Idaho Code section 46-1021: "Local government", in the context of this chapter, means any county or city having planning
and zoning authority to regulate land use within its jurisdiction.
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG): The lowest point of the ground level next to the structure. Refer to the FEMA elevation certificate for LAG related
to building elevation information.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR section 60.3 and this
chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for
rent or sale.
MARKET VALUE: The building value, not including the land value and that of any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value
may be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value);
or adjusted tax assessed values.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program (NFIP), the national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum
(such as North American vertical datum of 1988 - NAVD88) to which base flood elevations (BFEs) shown on a community's FIRM are referenced.
MITIGATION: Per Idaho Code section 46-1021: "Mitigation" means any action taken which will reduce the impact, damage, or cost of the next flood that
occurs.
MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW): Describes a condition where there is a river, flow, or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside usually as a result of a dual
condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A
mudslide (i.e., mudflow) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a landslide is in progress, and will be recognized as such by the administrator only if
the mudflow, and not the landslide, is the proximate cause of damage that occurs.
MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) AREA MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing mudslide
(i.e., mudflow) damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, mudslide control works, and floodplain management regulations.
MUDSLIDE (i.e., MUDFLOW) PRONE AREA: An area with land surfaces and slopes of unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate
indicate a potential for mudflow.
NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP): The NFIP is a federal program created by congress to mitigate future flood losses nationwide
through sound, community enforced building and zoning ordinances and to provide access to affordable, federally backed flood insurance protection for
property owners.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For floodplain management purposes, a structure for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date
of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
Any construction started after March 15, 1994, and before the effective start date hereof is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit
was issued, provided the start of construction was within one hundred eighty (180) days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A place where the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community, which is March 15, 1994.
PERSON: Per Idaho Code section 46-1021: "Person" means any individual, group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, political
subdivision, public or private agency, or entity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 50/258
POST-FIRM: Construction or other development for which the "start of construction" occurred on or after the effective date of the initial flood insurance
rate map (FIRM).
PRE-FIRM: Construction or other development for which the "start of construction" occurred before March 15, 1994, the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map (FIRM).
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is:
A. Built on a single chassis, and
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, and
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty truck, and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD: Per Idaho Code section 46-1021: "Regulatory flood" is a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have
occurred in Idaho and which may be expected to occur on a particular stream because of like physical characteristics. The regulatory flood is based
upon a statistical analysis of stream flow records available for the watershed or an analysis of rainfall and runoff characteristics in the watershed. In
inland areas, the flood frequency of the regulatory flood is once in every one hundred (100) years. This means that in any given year there is a one
percent (1%) chance that a regulatory flood may occur or be exceeded.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: See definition of Floodway.
REMEDY A VIOLATION: To bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is
not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing
federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
REPETITIVE LOSS STRUCTURE: An NFIP insured structure that has had at least two (2) paid flood losses of more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) each in any ten (10) year period since 1978.
RIVERINE: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in
any given year. For purposes of these regulations, the term "special flood hazard area" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood
hazard".
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of its market value before the damage occurred. See definition of Substantial Improvement. Substantial
damage also means flood related damage sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds
fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
A. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
B. Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure"
and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant to this chapter.
TECHNICAL BULLETINS AND TECHNICAL FACT SHEETS: FEMA publications that provide guidance concerning the building performance standards
of the NFIP, which are contained in title 44 of the U.S. code of federal regulations section 60.3. The bulletins and fact sheets are intended for use
primarily by state and local officials responsible for interpreting and enforcing NFIP regulations and by members of the development community, such as
design professionals and builders. New bulletins, as well as updates of existing bulletins, are issued periodically as needed. The bulletins do not create
regulations. Rather they provide specific guidance for complying with the minimum requirements of existing NFIP regulations.
It should be noted that technical bulletins and technical fact sheets provide guidance on the minimum requirements of the NFIP regulations. State or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 51/258
community requirements that exceed those of the NFIP take precedence. Design professionals should contact the community officials to determine
whether more restrictive state or local regulations apply to the building or site in question. All applicable standards of the state or local building code
must also be met for any building in a flood hazard area.
TEMPERATURE CONTROLLED: Having the temperature regulated by a heating and/or cooling system, built in or appliance.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by the governing body from a requirement of this chapter.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the finished construction elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American vertical datum
(NAVD) of 1988 (or other specified datum), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
WATERCOURSE: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 1654, 11-28-2016; amd. Ord. 1660, 5-22-2017)
5-5-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Mountain Home,
Idaho. Nothing in this chapter is intended to allow uses or structures that are otherwise prohibited by the zoning ordinance.
B. Basis For Special Flood Hazard Areas: The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood
insurance study (FIS) for Mountain Home, Elmore County, Idaho, dated March 15, 1994, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) or
digital flood insurance rate maps (DFIRM), and other supporting data, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. The FIS and the
FIRM are on file at the Office of the Building Official of the City of Mountain Home, Idaho, located at 160 South 3rd East, Mountain Home, ID 83647.
C. Establishment Of Floodplain Development Permit: A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the provisions of
subsection 5-5-4B of this chapter.
D. Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the
terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
E. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter shall not in any way repeal, abrogate, impair, or remove the necessity of compliance with any
other laws, ordinances, regulations, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions, et cetera. However, where this chapter and another conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes more stringent or greater restrictions shall control.
F. Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
G. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Mountain Home, Idaho, or by any officer or employee thereof for flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or an administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
H. Penalties For Violation: No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or altered unless in full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not
more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or both. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the city of Mountain Home, Idaho, from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 1654, 11-28-2016)
5-5-4: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Designation Of Floodplain Administrator: The building official, hereinafter referred to as the "floodplain administrator", is hereby appointed to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter.
B. Duties And Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Administrator: The floodplain administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the following duties:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 52/258
1. Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that
the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
2. Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that all necessary local, state, and federal permits have been
received, including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.
3. Notify adjacent communities and the Idaho department of water resources state coordinator for the national flood insurance program (NFIP) prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the federal emergency management agency (FEMA).
4. Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is maintained.
5. Prevent encroachments into floodways and flood fringe areas unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of subsection 5-5-5E
of this chapter are met.
6. Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and
substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of subsection C3 of this section.
7. Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed,
in accordance with the provisions of subsection C3 of this section.
8. Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public utilities in accordance with the provisions of subsection C3 of this section.
9. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with
the provisions of subsection C3 of this section and subsection 5-5-5B2 of this chapter.
10. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, floodways, or flood fringe areas (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The
person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article.
11. When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in accordance with the provisions of subsection 5-5-3B of this chapter, obtain,
review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with floodway data or flood fringe area data available from a federal, state, or other source,
including data developed pursuant to subsection 5-5-5C2b of this chapter, in order to administer the provisions of this chapter.
12. When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway or flood fringe area data has been provided in accordance with the provisions
of subsection 5-5-3B of this chapter, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or flood fringe area data available from a federal,
state, or other source in order to administer the provisions of this chapter.
13. When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure or the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood hazard area
(SFHA) is above the base flood elevation (BFE), advise the property owner of the option to apply for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) from
FEMA. Maintain a copy of the LOMA issued by FEMA in the floodplain development permit file.
14. Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of this chapter and make these records available for public inspection,
recognizing that such information may be subject to the privacy act of 1974, as amended.
15. Make on site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the floodplain administrator
shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the local
ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the floodplain administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to
enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
16. Issue stop work orders as required. Whenever a building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of
this chapter, the floodplain administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing and directed to the
person doing or in charge of the work. The stop work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and
the condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop work order constitutes a misdemeanor.
17. Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The floodplain administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain
development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial
departure from the approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or
for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an
applicable state or local law may also be revoked.
18. Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the community. The floodplain administrator and
each member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
19. Follow through with corrective procedures of subsection D of this section.
20. Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests.
21. Maintain a current map repository to include, but not be limited to, the FIS report, FIRM and other official flood maps, and studies adopted in
accordance with the provisions of subsection 5-5-3B of this chapter, including any revisions thereto including letters of map change, issued by
FEMA. Notify the NFIP state coordinator and FEMA of the community's mapping needs.
22. Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including letters of map revision based on fill (LOMR-Fs) and letters of map revision (LOMRs).
C. Floodplain Development Application, Permit, And Certification Requirements:
1. Application Requirements: Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the floodplain administrator prior to any development
activities located within special flood hazard areas. The following items shall be presented to the floodplain administrator to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
a. A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain development:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 53/258
(1) The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and other development;
(2) The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in subsection 5-5-3B of this
chapter, or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard area;
(3) The flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in
subsection 5-5-3B of this chapter;
(4) The boundary of the floodway(s) or flood fringe area(s) as determined in subsection 5-5-3B of this chapter;
(5) The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in subsection 5-5-3B or C or 5-5-5C of this chapter;
(6) The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
b. Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a special flood hazard area including, but not limited to:
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed reference level (including basement) of all structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure in zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30 will be floodproofed; and
(3) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
c. If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA form 086-0-33) with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance
plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise, and maintenance of floodproofing measures.
d. A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this chapter are met.
These details include, but are not limited to:
(1) The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation, or on
columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
(2) Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on walls in accordance with subsections 5-5-5A8b(1) through A8b(6)
of this chapter when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-30.
e. Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
f. Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
g. Certification that all other local, state, and federal permits required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
h. Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of
subsections 5-5-5B5 and B6 of this chapter are met.
i. A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation, when applicable, including:
(1) An engineering report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties
located both upstream and downstream; and
(2) A map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation.
2. Permit Requirements: The floodplain development permit shall include, but not be limited to:
a. A complete description of all the development to be permitted under the floodplain development permit (i.e., house, garage, pool, septic,
bulkhead, cabana, pole barn, chicken coop, pier, bridge, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials, et cetera).
b. The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed development in accordance with available data specified in subsection 5-5-3B of
this chapter.
c. The flood protection elevation required for the reference level and all attendant utilities.
d. The flood protection elevation required for the protection of all public utilities.
e. All certification submittal requirements with time lines.
f. A statement that no fill material or other development shall encroach into the floodway or flood fringe area of any watercourse, as applicable.
g. The flood openings requirements, if in zones A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30.
h. A statement of the limitations of below BFE enclosure uses, if applicable (i.e., parking, building access and limited storage only).
i. A statement that all materials below BFE/FPE must be flood resistant materials.
3. Certification Requirements:
a. Elevation Certificates:
(1) An elevation certificate (FEMA form 86-0-33) is required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit
holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. The
floodplain administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 54/258
holder prior to the beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a
floodplain development permit.
(2) An elevation certificate (FEMA form 86-0-33) is required after the reference level is established. Within seven (7) calendar days of
establishment of the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of
the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. Any work done within the seven (7) day calendar period and prior to
submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The floodplain administrator shall review the certificate data submitted.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being permitted to proceed.
Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project.
(3) A final as built finished construction elevation certificate (FEMA form 86-0-33) is required after construction is completed and prior to
certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of
final as built construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities. The floodplain administrator shall review the
certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of
compliance/occupancy issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify corrected as built construction. Failure to
submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of
compliance/occupancy.
The finished construction elevation certificate certifier shall provide at least two (2) photographs showing the front and rear of the building
taken within ninety (90) days from the date of certification. The photographs must be taken with views confirming the building description and
diagram number. To the extent possible, these photographs should show the entire building including foundation. If the building has split level
or multilevel areas, provide at least two (2) additional photographs showing side views of the building. In addition, when applicable, provide a
photograph of the foundation showing a representative example of the flood openings or vents. All photographs must be in color and measure
at least three inches by three inches (3" x 3"). Digital photographs are acceptable.
b. Floodproofing Certificate: If nonresidential floodproofing is used to meet the flood protection elevation requirements, a floodproofing certificate
(FEMA form 086-0-34), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start
of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of the floodproofed
design elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level. Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The floodplain administrator shall review the
certificate data, the operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain
development permit. Failure to construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of
compliance/occupancy.
c. Engineered Foundation Certificate: If a manufactured home is placed within zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is
more than thirty six inches (36") in height above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance with the provisions of
subsection 5-5-5B3b of this chapter.
d. Idaho Stream Channel Alteration Permit: If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, the following shall all be submitted by the permit
applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit:
(1) A description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; and
(2) A professional engineer's certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse and the
effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and
(3) A map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation; and
(4) An Idaho stream channel alteration permit approval shall be provided by the applicant to the floodplain administrator.
e. Certification Exemptions: The following structures, if located within zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing
certification requirements specified in subsections C3a and C3b of this section:
(1) Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of subsection 5-5-5B5a of this chapter;
(2) Temporary structures meeting requirements of subsection 5-5-5B6 of this chapter; and
(3) Accessory structures less than two hundred (200) square feet meeting requirements of subsection 5-5-5B7 of this chapter.
4. Determinations For Existing Buildings And Structures: For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including
alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements,
repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the floodplain administrator shall:
a. Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work. In the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure
shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made;
b. Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its predamaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure;
c. Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
d. Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance
with the flood resistant construction requirements of the adopted Idaho building code and this chapter is required.
D. Corrective Procedures:
1. Violations To Be Corrected: When the floodplain administrator finds violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to notify
the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 55/258
2. Actions In Event Of Failure To Take Corrective Action: If the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
floodplain administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or registered mail to the owner's last known address or by personal service,
stating:
a. That the building or property is in violation of the floodplain management regulations;
b. That a hearing will be held before the floodplain administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten (10) days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the
matter; and
c. That following the hearing, the floodplain administrator may issue an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
applicable.
3. Order To Take Corrective Action: If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the floodplain administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of this chapter, he or she shall issue an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the
violation within a specified time period, not less than sixty (60) calendar days nor more than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days. Where the
floodplain administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he or she may order that corrective action be taken in such
lesser period as may be feasible.
4. Appeal: Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice
of appeal in writing to the floodplain administrator and the clerk within ten (10) days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an
appeal, the order of the floodplain administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may
affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order.
5. Failure To Comply With Order: If the owner of a building or property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished at the discretion of the court.
E. Variance Procedures:
1. The city council of the city of Mountain Home, Idaho, hereinafter referred to as the "appeal board", shall hear and decide requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
2. Variances may be issued for:
a. The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of
the structure;
b. Functionally dependent facilities, if determined to meet the definition as stated in section 5-5-2 of this chapter, provided provisions of
subsections E8b, E8c, and E8e of this section, have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety; or
c. Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements of this section.
3. In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections
of this chapter, and:
a. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
b. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
c. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
d. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
e. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined under section 5-5-2 of this chapter as a functionally dependent facility, where
applicable;
f. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
g. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
h. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
i. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
j. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and
k. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
4. The applicant shall include a written report addressing each of the factors in subsections E3a through E3k of this section with their application for
a variance.
5. Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this chapter.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and
the elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction below the BFE increases risks to life and property, and that the
issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty five dollars
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 56/258
($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance.
7. The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the federal emergency management
agency and the state of Idaho upon request.
8. Conditions for variances:
a. Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
b. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or flood fringe area if the variance would result in any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge.
c. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
d. Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit approval.
e. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
9. A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage
facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas provided that all of the following conditions are met:
a. The use serves a critical need in the community.
b. No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood hazard area.
c. The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to at least the flood protection elevation.
d. The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and local laws.
10. The city of Mountain Home, Idaho, will notify the state NFIP coordinator of the Idaho department of water resources of its intention to grant a
variance at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to granting the variance.
11. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision to the court, as provided in Idaho Code section 67-6535.
(Ord. 1654, 11-28-2016)
5-5-5: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
A. General Standards: In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required:
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement of the structure.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in
accordance with the technical bulletin 2, flood damage resistant materials requirements, and available from the federal emergency management
agency.
3. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
4. All new and replacement electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding to the flood protection elevation.
These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes,
utility/cable boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.
5. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
6. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
7. On site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
8. A fully enclosed area, of new construction and substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor shall:
a. Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least to the flood protection elevation; and
b. Include, in zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-30, flood openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or
exceed the following minimum design criteria:
(1) A minimum of two (2) flood openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding;
(2) The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 57/258
(3) If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and
exit;
(4) The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above the interior or exterior adjacent grade;
(5) Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of
floodwaters in both directions; and
(6) Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood openings.
Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
9. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall meet the
requirements of "new construction" as contained in this chapter.
10. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date hereof and
located totally or partially within the floodway, flood fringe area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the flood
protection elevation in the floodway, flood fringe area, or stream setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all
of the other requirements of this chapter.
11. New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not be
permitted, except by variance as specified in subsection 5-5-4E9 of this chapter. A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of
subsection 5-5-4C3 of this chapter.
12. All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and determined to be
reasonably safe from flooding.
13. All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
14. All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
15. All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for
which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act amendments of 1972, 33 USC
1334.
16. When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
17. When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood elevation (BFE) shall apply.
B. Specific Standards: In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in subsection 5-5-3B of
this chapter or subsection D of this section, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of subsection A of this section, are required:
1. Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have
the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the flood protection elevation, as defined in section 5-5-2 of this chapter.
2. Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall
have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the flood protection elevation, as defined in section 5-5-2 of this chapter.
Structures located in zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 may be floodproofed to the flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation provided that all
areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the flood protection elevation are watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AH and AO zones, the floodproofing elevation shall be in accordance with subsection F2 of this section. A
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the floodproofing standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall
be provided to the floodplain administrator as set forth in subsection 5-5-4C3 of this chapter, along with the operational plan and the inspection
and maintenance plan.
3. Manufactured Homes:
a. New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the flood
protection elevation, as defined in section 5-5-2 of this chapter of this chapter.
b. Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement,
either by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most current edition of the Idaho division of building safety's "Idaho
Manufactured Home Installation Standard" in accordance with Idaho Code section 44-2201(2). Additionally, when the elevation would be met by
an elevation of the chassis thirty six inches (36") or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or
engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above thirty six inches (36") in height, an engineering certification is required.
c. All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the requirements of subsection B4 of this section.
d. An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents of all new, substantially improved, or substantially damaged manufactured
home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the floodplain administrator and the
local emergency management coordinator.
4. Additions/Improvements:
a. Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 58/258
(1) Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more
nonconforming than the existing structure; or
(2) A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
b. Additions to post-FIRM structures that are a substantial improvement with no modifications to the existing structure other than a standard door
in the common wall shall require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.
c. Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
(1) Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction; or
(2) A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
d. Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a five (5) year
period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair
is started, must comply with the standards for new construction. For each building or structure, the five (5) year period begins on the date of the
first improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to the effective date hereof. If the structure has sustained substantial
damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The requirement does not,
however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building
official and that are the minimum necessary to assume safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
5. Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles shall be either:
a. Temporary Placement:
(1) Be on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no
permanently attached additions); or
b. Permanent Placement:
(1) Recreational vehicles that do not meet the limitations of temporary placement shall meet all the requirements for new construction, as set
forth in subsection A of this section.
6. Temporary Nonresidential Structures: Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the floodplain administrator a plan for the removal of such structure(s) in the event of a flash flood or other type of flood warning
notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the floodplain administrator for review and written approval:
a. A specified time period for which the temporary use will be permitted. Time specified may not exceed six (6) months, renewable up to one year;
b. The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;
c. The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be removed (i.e., immediately upon flood warning notification);
d. A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
e. Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be
moved.
7. Accessory Structures: When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, etc.) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, elevation
or floodproofing certifications are required for all accessory structures in accordance with subsection 5-5-4C3 of this chapter, and the following
criteria shall be met:
a. Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation (including working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas);
b. Accessory structures shall not be temperature controlled;
c. Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential;
d. Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
e. Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with the provisions of subsection A1 of this section;
f. All service facilities, such as electrical, shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of subsection A4 of this section; and
g. Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below flood protection elevation in conformance
with the provisions of subsection A8b of this section.
An accessory structure with a footprint less than two hundred (200) square feet and is a minimal investment of two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00) or less and satisfies the criteria outlined in subsections B7a through B7g of this section is not required to meet the elevation
or floodproofing standards of subsection B2 of this section.
8. Tanks: When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 59/258
a. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads during conditions of the base flood, including the effects of buoyancy (assuming the tank is empty);
b. Elevated aboveground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting
structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement during conditions of the base flood. Tank supporting structures shall
meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area;
c. Not elevated aboveground tanks, that do not meet the elevation requirements of subsection B2 of this section shall be permitted in flood hazard
areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the
effects of floodborne debris.
d. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be:
(1) At or above the flood protection elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the
tanks during conditions of the base flood; and
(2) Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during
conditions of the base flood.
9. Construction Of Below Grade Crawl Space:
a. The interior grade of a crawl space must not be below the BFE and must not be more than two feet (2') below the exterior lowest adjacent grade
(LAG).
b. The height of the below grade crawl space, measured from the interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the crawl space foundation wall,
must not exceed four feet (4') at any point.
c. There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space. The enclosed area should be
drained within a reasonable time after a flood event.
d. The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five feet (5') per second for any crawl space.
10. Other Development In Regulated Floodways And Flood Fringe:
a. Fences that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, in regulated floodways and
flood fringe shall meet the limitations of subsection E of this section.
b. Retaining walls, bulkheads, sidewalks, and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways and flood fringe shall meet the
limitations of subsection E of this section.
c. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low water crossings, and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to
travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, which encroach into regulated floodways and flood fringe, shall meet the limitations of
subsection E of this section.
d. Drilling water, oil, and/or gas wells including fuel storage tanks, apparatus, and any equipment at the site that encroach into regulated floodways
and flood fringe shall meet the limitations of subsection E of this section.
e. Docks, piers, boat ramps, marinas, moorings, decks, docking facilities, port facilities, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities that encroach into
regulated floodways and flood fringe shall meet the limitations of subsection E of this section.
C. Standards For Floodplains Without Established Base Flood Elevations: Within the special flood hazard areas designated as zone A (also known as
unnumbered A zones) and established in subsection 5-5-3B of this chapter, where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA,
the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of subsection A of this section, shall apply:
1. No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or new development shall be permitted, unless a determination of
the base flood elevation (BFE) is provided.
2. The BFE used in determining the flood protection elevation (FPE) shall be determined based on the following criteria:
a. When base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas
shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in subsections
A and B of this section.
b. When floodway or flood fringe data is available from a federal, state, or other source, all new construction and substantial improvements within
floodway and flood fringe areas shall also comply with the requirements of subsections B and E of this section.
c. All subdivision, manufactured home park, and other development proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE) data if development is
greater than five (5) acres or has more than fifty (50) lots/manufactured home sites. Such base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by
reference in accordance with subsection 5-5-3B of this chapter and utilized in implementing this chapter.
d. When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a federal, state, or other source as outlined above, the reference level shall be
elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential) to or above the flood protection elevation, as defined in section 5-5-2 of this chapter. All other
applicable provisions of subsection B of this section shall also apply.
D. Standards For Riverine Floodplains With Base Flood Elevations But Without Established Floodways Or Flood Fringe Areas: Along rivers and
streams where base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided by FEMA or is available from another source but neither floodway nor flood fringe areas
are identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS report, the following requirements shall apply to all development within such
areas:
1. Standards of subsections A and B of this section; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 60/258
2. Until a regulatory floodway or flood fringe area is designated, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development shall be permitted unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will
not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood at any point within the community.
E. Standards For Floodways And Flood Fringe Areas: Areas designated as floodways or flood fringe areas are located within the special flood hazard
areas established in subsection 5-5-3B of this chapter. The floodways and flood fringe areas are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of
floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and potential projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in
subsections A and B of this section, shall apply to all development within such areas:
1. No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other developments shall be permitted unless:
a. It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood,
based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain
Administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or
b. A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has been approved by FEMA. A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be obtained within six
(6) months of completion of the proposed encroachment.
2. If subsection E1 of this section is satisfied, all development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.
3. Manufactured homes may be permitted provided the following provisions are met:
a. The anchoring and the elevation standards of subsection B3 of this section; and
b. The encroachment standards of subsection E1 of this section. (Ord. 1654, 11-28-2016)
F. Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (Zone AO, AH, AR/AO, Or AR/AH): Located within the special flood hazard areas established in subsection
5-5-3B of this chapter, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of
one (1) to three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. In
addition to subsections A and B of this section, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the following requirements:
1. The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), in feet, plus a
freeboard of one foot (1'), above the highest adjacent grade; or at least two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is
specified.
2. Nonresidential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be floodproofed to the same level as required in subsection F1 of this section so that the
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below that level shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
Certification is required in accordance with subsection 5-5-4C3 of this chapter, and subsection B2 of this section.
3. Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
4. Any legally built building that is at BFE or above before November 28, 2016, is exempt from the one foot (1') freeboard. (Ord. 1660, 5-22-2017)
5-5-6: LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS:
A. Effect On Rights And Liabilities Under The Existing Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance: This chapter, in part, comes forward by reenactment of
some of the provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted March 15, 1994, as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but
rather to reenact and continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder
are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this chapter shall not affect any action, suit, or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions
of the flood damage prevention ordinance of the City of Mountain Home, Idaho, enacted on March 15, 1994, as amended, which are not reenacted
herein are repealed.
B. Effect Upon Outstanding Floodplain Development Permits: Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size, or
designated use of any development or any part thereof for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain Administrator
or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage hereof. Provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding
permit within a period of one hundred eighty (180) days subsequent to the date of issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1654, 11-28-2016)
Chapter 6
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
5-6-1: ENFORCEMENT:
The building and zoning official shall have the authority to investigate complaints for violations of this title, conduct inspections, issue written warnings
and issue citations on an Idaho uniform citation form pursuant to the Idaho misdemeanor rules and Idaho infraction rules, in addition to any other
authority authorized in this title or in a code adopted by this title. (Ord. 1462, 1-8-2007)
5-6-2: PENALTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 61/258
Unless specified otherwise in this title, it shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any provision of any of
the building codes adopted by the city of Mountain Home. (Ord. 1527, 6-22-2009)
Chapter 7
FALSE ALARMS
5-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
ALARM ADMINISTRATOR: Any employee designated by the chief of police or the fire chief to administer, control and review alarm activations received
by the police or fire department.
ALARM BUSINESS: Any business which installs, alters, leases, maintains, monitors, repairs, replaces, sells at retail, services or responds to an alarm
system.
ALARM SIGNAL: The activation of an alarm system.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any mechanical or electrical equipment arranged to signal a fire, an unauthorized entry, or other illegal activity. Alarm system
includes devices activated automatically, such as burglar alarms or fire alarms and devices activated manually, such as holdup alarms or fire alarms.
Alarm system does not include alarm systems installed in motor vehicles, boats, or aircraft.
ALARM USER: The owner, lessor or lessee of any alarm system; the occupant of any dwelling unit with an alarm system; and each tenant that uses an
alarm system in a multi-tenant building.
FALSE ALARM: Any alarm signal that elicits a response by police or fire personnel; and for which there is no evidence of criminal activity or a fire
emergency to justify a police or a fire response. (Ord. 1610, 11-12-2013)
5-7-2: FALSE ALARMS; FEES; APPEAL:
A. Duties Of The Alarm User: An alarm user shall maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms,
which shall include periodic maintenance and cleaning of the alarm system. The alarm user shall also make every reasonable effort to respond or
cause a representative to respond to the alarm system location within fifteen (15) minutes when notified by the police department, fire department or
alarm company to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system. The representative shall provide access to the premises or provide alternative security
for the premises.
The alarm user may advise the police department or fire department that no representative will be responding to the alarm site. However, failure of
an alarm user or representative thereof to respond to an alarm site may result in no further police department or fire department intervention at said
site and for said occurrence due to the failure of a representative to respond.
The alarm user shall not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than the occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to
report.
B. Number Allowed Before Fees Assessed: An alarm user shall be allowed two (2) false alarms within a one year period of time, commencing with the
first false alarm, before a fee is assessed. This one year period of time may continue over two (2) different calendar years.
C. Fees: An alarm user shall be subject to a false alarm response fee for the third false alarm and for each additional false alarm occurring within the
one year period as described above. A fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be assessed if the false alarm results in the fire department
responding and a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed if the false alarm results in the police department responding. In the event
of a false alarm, the department which is effected by the false alarm shall prepare and send a billing statement to the alarm user. The alarm user
shall pay the bill for the alarm fee to the city in full within thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing or other notification of the fee assessed.
D. Waiver Of Fees: A false alarm response fee may be waived upon the discretion of the police chief or fire chief if the alarm system was activated by
extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to the control of the alarm business or alarm user, including violent natural conditions or
occurrences, or the installation of a new system where false alarms might be anticipated until the system is adjusted properly.
If it is determined by the police chief or fire chief that a false alarm signal from an alarm user was due to an event beyond the reasonable control of
the alarm user, that event may not be considered a false alarm for the purpose of this chapter.
If alarm signals were caused by a malfunctioning alarm system, which caused two (2) or more false alarms in a six (6) hour period, and the alarm
user exercised their best efforts to limit alarm signals caused by the malfunction, those false alarms shall be counted as one false alarm.
An alarm signal that a person intentionally activated in response to an actual or threatened criminal activity or fire emergency shall not be considered
a false alarm.
E. False Alarm Fee Appeal Process: An alarm user may appeal the police department's or fire department's assessment of a fee to the respective alarm
administrator. The alarm user shall file a written appeal to the alarm administrator stating the reasons for the appeal within ten (10) business days
after receipt of notice of the fee. Upon verbal contact with the alarm user, the alarm administrator may waive the written appeal and conduct the
matter informally.
If the alarm administrator denies the appeal of the fee, the alarm administrator shall send written notice of the action and statement of the right to an
appeal to the chief of police or fire chief. The notice shall include the appropriate time frames and procedures to file an appeal of the alarm
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 62/258
administrator's decision.
An aggrieved alarm user can appeal the decision of the alarm administrator. Upon receipt of the alarm administrator's denial, the alarm user may
appeal the decision by filing a written request for a review, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within ten (10) business days of the date of the
notice from the alarm administrator. Such written request shall be filed with the chief of police or the fire chief.
The chief of the city department assessing the fee, i.e., the police chief or the fire chief, shall conduct a formal hearing and consider the evidence by
any interested person(s). The chief of police or fire chief shall make a decision on the basis of the preponderance of evidence presented at the
hearing. The chief of police or the fire chief must render a written decision within thirty (30) days after the appeal hearing is held.
An aggrieved alarm user can appeal the chief of police's or fire chief's decision to the city council after the formal hearing conducted by the chief of
police or the fire chief. After the chief of police or fire chief has issued a decision following the formal hearing, the alarm user shall have ten (10)
business days to request, in writing, an appeal to the city council. Such written request for an appeal shall be filed with the office of the city clerk. If
further appeal is taken, it shall be pursuant to the administrative procedures act of the Idaho Code.
The alarm administrator shall then prepare the necessary paperwork to place the matter on the city council agenda. The alarm administrator shall
notify the alarm user in writing of the time and date of the appeal which will be at a regularly scheduled city council meeting. (Ord. 1610, 11-12-2013)
Title 6
LAW ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 1
CRIMINAL CODE
6-1-1: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted that certain code identified as the criminal code, more particularly title 18, Idaho Code, and as the same may hereafter be
revised by the state legislature, or amended by the governing body, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the city as
fully as though set forth at length herein.
Three (3) copies of the said state law, together with any revisions or amendments, duly certified by the city clerk, shall be kept on file in his office for use
and examination of and by the public. (1990 Code)
6-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE; DUTIES:
The chief of police shall be the chief of the acting police and all assistant police officers shall be in subordination to him and subject to his orders, except
in cases otherwise provided by ordinance. It shall be his duty to cause the public peace to be preserved and see that all laws and ordinances are
enforced within the city limits, and when any violation thereof shall come to his knowledge or be reported to him, he shall cause the requisite complaint
to be made and see that all possible evidence is procured for the successful prosecution of offenders. (1990 Code)
6-1-3: ASSISTANT POLICE OFFICERS; DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the assistant police officers to aid and assist the chief in the execution of his duties herein enjoined, and they and the chief or
either of them shall have power and authority in the city to execute warrants and other process for the apprehension or commitment of persons charged
with or held for examination or trial, or taken in execution for the commission of any crime or misdemeanor or violation of any law or ordinance of the
city, and while executing or serving or assisting in the execution or service of any such warrant or process, shall be vested with and have all powers and
authority conferred at common law and by the laws of the state. (1990 Code)
6-1-4: POLICE TRAINING AID:
The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid for police training from the Idaho police officers' standards and training council pursuant to Idaho
Code 19-5101 et seq., and while receiving such aid will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by that council. (1990 Code)
6-1-5: ENFORCEMENT OF ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES:
The building and zoning official and code enforcement officer as designated in section 7-8-12 of this code shall have the authority to enforce the
provisions of title 49, chapter 18 of the Idaho state code, abandoned motor vehicles. (Ord. 1462, 1-8-2007)
Chapter 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
6-2-1: GENERAL OFFENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 63/258
A. Compliance With The Law: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or fail to perform any requirement which is prohibited or required by
State law, insofar as such laws are applicable to Municipal government.
B. Violations: Violations of this chapter shall be an infraction, however, third and subsequent violations shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1675, 12-27-
2018)
6-2-2: AID TO AN OFFENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person in any way or manner to aid, abet, counsel, advise, or encourage any other person in the commission of any unlawful
acts in violation of this Code or in any manner to encourage the commission of any offensive acts in the City as defined by law. (Ord. 617, 9-17-1962)
6-2-3: LOUDSPEAKERS OR SOUND TRUCKS:
It shall be unlawful to play, operate or use any device known as a sound truck, loudspeaker or sound amplifier, radio or phonograph, with loudspeaker or
sound amplifier or any instrument of any kind or character which emits loud and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle unless the
person in charge of the vehicle shall have first applied to and received permission from the Chief of Police to operate any such vehicle so equipped.
(Ord. 617, 9-17-1962)
6-2-4: PLAYING BALL ON STREETS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball or throw any ball or any other object to and fro upon or across any public thoroughfare in the City. (Ord.
617, 9-17-1962; amd. 1990 Code)
6-2-5: WATER FLOWING UPON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any water to flow into or upon any public thoroughfare. (Ord. 617, 9-17-1962)
6-2-6: WINDOWSILLS TO BE KEPT CLEAR:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep on any windowsill, porch or other projection above the first story of any building abutting on any
sidewalk any article which might do injury by falling upon any person on the sidewalk in front of such building, unless the article be securely fastened or
protected by screens. (Ord. 617, 9-17-1962)
6-2-7: INTOXICATING BEVERAGES; CONSUMPTION; POSSESSION OF ON PUBLIC PROPERTY, IN PARKS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any intoxicating beverage, or to have in his or her possession any unsealed container containing any
intoxicating beverage on a public street, sidewalk or alley in the City.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or possess any alcoholic beverage in any City park in the City without a park reservation and prior
approval of the City Parks and Recreation Department. (Ord. 1232, 1-22-1996)
6-2-8: AIR GUNS, FIREARMS:
A. Definitions: Wherever the term "firearms" is used in this section, the term shall mean any instrument used in the propulsion of shot, shell or bullets or
other harmful objects by the action of gunpowder exploded within it, or by the action of compressed air within it, or by the power of springs and
including what are commonly known as air rifles and BB guns.
B. Discharge Of Firearms Prohibited: Except as otherwise provided by State law, it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge firearms of any kind or
description within the limits of the Municipality; provided, however, that this shall not apply to police officers in the discharge of their duties.
C. Exceptions; Permits: The Governing Body may at any time, upon receipt of proper application, grant permits to shooting galleries, gun clubs and
others for shooting in fixed localities and under specified rules. Such permits shall be in writing attested by the Clerk conforming to such
requirements as the Governing Body shall demand, and the permit thus issued shall be subject to revocation at any time by action of the Governing
Body. (Ord. 1620, 9-8-2014)
6-2-9: LOITERING:
A. Unlawful Acts:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter about the private property of another without the owner's consent.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 64/258
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter about public property adjacent to public school property from the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to
four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on days when school is in session.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally deface, injure, paint, vandalize or otherwise alter property of another without the owner's
consent.
B. Definitions:
ADJACENT: Property immediately bordering on, next to, or separated only by a public roadway.
LOITER: To prowl, wander, or remain idle without apparent business essentially in one location.
C. Penalty: A violation of this section shall subject the offender to penalties in accordance with section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1022, 3-12-1984; amd.
1990 Code)
6-2-10: ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS, FREEZERS AND CONTAINERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or
abandoned building, structure or dwelling under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded refrigerator,
freezer or other container which has a door or lid, snaplock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing
said door or lid, snaplock or other locking device. (Revised Code 1958; amd. 1990 Code)
6-2-11: FIGHTING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fight another person, except in boxing exhibitions duly licensed or authorized under law, or wrestling matches that
are a part of an official school program. (Ord. 1142, 12-20-1990)
6-2-12: URINATING IN PUBLIC PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate on any public street, public sidewalk, the floor of any public building or in any other place open
to or used by the public, except designated restrooms. (Ord. 1142, 12-20-1990)
6-2-13: CITY PARK HOURS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in any City park between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., except
for recognized group activities with prior approval of the City Parks and Recreation Department, or individuals using the City swimming pool, or the
lighted horseshoe pits or tennis courts in Richard Aguirre Park. (Ord. 1232, 1-22-1996)
6-2-14: BURIALS OTHER THAN IN CITY CEMETERY PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, association or corporation, to bury, inter, or cause to be interred or buried, the dead body or human remains of any
person anyplace within the City limits of the City of Mountain Home, Idaho, except in the cemetery owned and operated by the City of Mountain Home,
Idaho. This shall not prohibit the burial of cremated human remains. (Ord. 1510, 6-23-2008)
6-2-15: GLASS CONTAINERS PROHIBITED IN CITY PARKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, carry or have in his or her possession any glass beverage container in any City park. (Ord. 1589, 11-13-
2012)
Chapter 3
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
6-3-1: HORSEBACK RIDING:
The riding or leading of horses within the city limits shall be confined to roadways, and horses shall not be ridden or led on sidewalks, on grass strips
between sidewalks and roadways, or in any city park, cemetery, golf course or any other property without the consent of the owner. When riding or
leading horses on roadways, horses shall always proceed on the extreme right hand portion of the roadway and shall proceed in single file. Horses shall
not be ridden or led on roadways during hours of darkness. (Ord. 1076, 4-13-1987)
6-3-2: SPEED LIMIT:
The maximum speed limit for the city shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour unless otherwise posted. The maximum speed for the city alleys shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 65/258
ten (10) miles per hour. Violations of this section shall be dealt with as provided for in the Idaho state motor vehicle laws. (Ord. 1062, 11-13-1985)
6-3-3: BICYCLES:
A. Bicycle Parking: It shall be unlawful for any person to park a bicycle in such manner as to interfere or obstruct with vehicular traffic on a roadway or
pedestrian traffic on a sidewalk.
B. Riding On Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district in the city of Mountain Home.
(Ord. 1043, 4-8-1985; amd. 1990 Code)
6-3-4: OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN PROHIBITED AREAS:
A. It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle on any city property, street, pathway or any other public place that has been posted by the city of
Mountain Home with a sign stating that such operation is prohibited. Violation of this provision shall be an infraction except as specified below.
B. If violation of this section results in damages in the posted area, said violation shall be a misdemeanor.
C. This section shall not apply to motor vehicles operated by the city of Mountain Home, vehicles authorized by the city engaged in maintenance or
construction activities or authorized emergency vehicles as defined in Idaho Code 49-123(2)(b) when those vehicles are used in an authorized
capacity.
D. Motor vehicle shall be defined as in Idaho Code 49-123(2)(g). (Ord. 1474, 5-29-2007)
6-3-5: BYPASSING INTERSECTIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to drive upon or use any private driveway, private property, or parking lot as a throughway to
bypass an intersection controlled by a stop sign or traffic control signal.
B. It shall be considered adequate evidence of bypassing an intersection in violation of this section for an operator of a motor vehicle to enter property
from a street, road or highway and then exit said property without stopping, other than to reenter a street, road or highway.
C. Any violation of this section shall be an infraction and shall be punishable by a penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus court
costs. (Ord. 1534, 10-13-2009)
6-3-6: DESIGNATED TRUCK ROUTE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle of a gross weight in excess of twenty six
thousand (26,000) pounds' gross weight capacity, upon the following streets and highways located within the city of Mountain Home:
1. That portion of North 3rd West from West 2nd North to North 2nd West.
B. No vehicle in excess of twenty six thousand (26,000) pounds' gross weight capacity or licensed capacity shall be allowed to drive or operate on the
street or streets described above other than for the purpose of loading or unloading cargo and no such vehicle shall be allowed to park on any street
or streets described above other than while actively loading or unloading cargo.
C. Commercial and wholesale delivery vehicles shall be permitted to make home or retail delivery or pick up to places at any location within the city.
D. Emergency vehicles, street maintenance equipment operated by a public entity and garbage trucks collecting garbage from adjacent properties shall
be allowed on any street or streets described above. (Ord. 1656, 1-23-2017)
Chapter 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms shall be defined as follows:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any vehicle observed by an authorized officer or reported by a member of the public to have been left within the limits of any
highway or upon the property of another without the consent of the property owner for a period of twenty four (24) hours or longer, except that a vehicle
shall not be considered abandoned if its owner-operator is unable to remove it from the place where it is located and has notified a law enforcement
agency and requested assistance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 66/258
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Vehicles operated by any fire department or law enforcement agency of the state of Idaho or any political
subdivision of the state, ambulances, vehicles belonging to personnel of voluntary fire departments while in performance of official duties only, vehicles
belonging to, or operated by EMS personnel certified or otherwise recognized by the EMS bureau of the Idaho department of health and welfare while in
the performance of emergency medical services, sheriff's search and rescue vehicles which are under the immediate supervision of the county sheriff,
wreckers which are engaged in motor vehicle recovery operations and are blocking part or all of one or more lanes of traffic, other emergency vehicles
designated by the director of the Idaho state police or vehicles authorized by the Idaho transportation board and used in the enforcement of laws
specified in section 40-510, Idaho Code, pertaining to vehicles of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or greater.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A commercial vehicle or commercial motor vehicle:
A. Is any vehicle either motorized or nonmotorized, having a GVWR greater than twelve thousand (12,000) pounds and which any dimension is
greater than: width of eight feet (8'), height of ten feet six inches (10'6"), length of twenty one feet six inches (21'6"), or
B. Is any designed to transport sixteen (16) or more people, including the driver; or
C. Is of any size and is used in the transportation of materials found to be hazardous for the purposes of the hazardous material transportation act
and which require the motor vehicle to be placarded under the hazardous materials regulations (49 CFR part 172, subpart F).
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING (GVWR): The value specified by the manufacturer as the maximum loaded weight of a single vehicle or registered
weight rating, whichever is greater.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE: Any vehicle that is capable of transporting one or more persons, and which moves by using a self-contained power source, or
any part of such a vehicle, and which is not in a condition allowing the vehicle's operation on the public streets.
MOTOR HOME: A vehicular unit designed to provide temporary living quarters, built into an integral part or permanently attached to a self-propelled
motor vehicle chassis. The vehicle must contain permanently installed independent life support systems which meet the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) 1192 standard on recreational vehicles, and provide at least four (4) of the following facilities: cooking, refrigeration or icebox, selfcontained
toilet, heating and/or air conditioning, a potable water supply system, including a faucet and sink, separate 110-125 volt electrical power
supply and/or LP gas supply.
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading property or passengers.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A motor home, travel trailer, truck camper or camping trailer, with or without motive power, designed for human habitation
for recreational or emergency occupancy. It does not include pickup hoods, shells, or canopies designed, created or modified for occupational usage.
School buses or van type vehicles which are converted to recreational use are defined as recreational vehicles.
STOP/STANDING/STOPPING: The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in receiving or discharging passengers.
A. "Stop" means the act of or complete cessation from movement.
B. "Stopping" means the act of any halting even momentarily of a vehicle.
TRAILER AND ALL TYPES THEREOF:
Fifth Wheel Trailer: A vehicular unit equipped in the same manner as a travel trailer but constructed with a raised forward section that allows a bilevel
floor plan. This style is designed to be towed by a vehicle equipped with a device known as a fifth wheel hitch, which is typically installed in the bed of a
pickup truck.
Fold Down Camping Trailer: A vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible partial side walls, which fold for towing by
another vehicle and unfold at the campsite to provide temporary living quarters, for recreational, camping or travel use.
Park Trailer: A trailer designed to be towed by a motorized vehicle, and of such size and weight as not to require a special highway movement permit.
It is designed for seasonal or temporary living quarters and may be connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. It
is built on a single permanent chassis and constructed to permit set up by persons without special skills.
Pole Trailer: Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or
pole or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles,
pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
Semitrailer: Every vehicle without motive power, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed
that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by the towing vehicle.
Travel Trailer: A vehicular unit, mounted on wheels designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or emergency use
and of such size or weight as not to require special highway movement permits when towed by a motorized vehicle.
Utility Trailer: A trailer or semitrailer designed primarily to be drawn behind a passenger car or pickup truck for domestic and utility purposes. Utility or
domestic use shall include a farm trailer while being used to haul agricultural products or livestock from farm to storage, market or processing plant, or
returning therefrom.
VEHICLE (GENERAL): Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 1553, 9-27-2010)
6-4-2: STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING:
A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or at the direction of a police officer or traffic
control device, in any of the following places:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 67/258
1. On the traffic side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street or highway;
2. On a sidewalk;
3. Within an intersection;
4. On a crosswalk;
5. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of the safety zone,
unless the traffic authority indicates a different length by signs or markings;
6. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
7. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel;
8. In front of a public or private driveway;
9. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
10. Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection or any other designated crosswalk;
11. In an alley so as to hinder or block traffic;
12. In front of a mailbox in a manner that would prevent the distribution of mail by the United States postal service. Postal carriers must be able to
drive into and out of the delivery area without backing up;
13. In a parking space designated for handicapped parking except for a vehicle that is momentarily in the space for the purpose of allowing a
handicapped person to enter or leave the vehicle, unless the vehicle is displaying a special license of the handicapped, or official handicapped
card issued by the state, or an official temporary handicapped card issued by another state;
14. Upon any officially marked bicycle lane, bicycle path, footpath or other separate right of way specifically set aside for use by pedestrians or
nonmotorized vehicles except at an intersection or when entering or leaving a roadway at a driveway, private road or alley.
15. No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway or public right of way for the principal purpose of:
a. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
b. Repairing such vehicle except when repairs are necessitated by emergency.
16. No person shall park upon any roadway or public right of way:
a. Any vehicle which is inoperable or abandoned;
b. That does not display a current registration.
17. At any place where traffic control devices prohibiting stopping, standing, or parking are placed at the direction of the city council by duly passed
resolution, to regulate the flow of traffic or to ensure the safety of motorists or pedestrians.
18. This section shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles, or authorized maintenance and construction vehicles while actually engaged in
work upon a roadway or nonmotorized right of way. (Ord. 1553, 9-27-2010)
6-4-3: PARKING ON PUBLIC STREETS:
A. Parking On Public Streets: No person shall park or place, or cause to be parked or placed, upon any public street, regardless of whether attended or
unattended:
1. For longer than seventy two (72) hours:
a. Any Motor Home Or Recreational Vehicle: Neither this nor any provision of this chapter shall be construed to authorize any person to sleep in or
allow another to sleep in any motor home or recreational vehicle.
b. Any Utility Or Boat Trailer: Any utility or boat trailer that is attached or unattached to a vehicle.
2. For any length of time, except as otherwise allowed in this section:
a. Any commercial vehicle either motorized or nonmotorized, unless such vehicle is a motor home or recreational vehicle, in which case the
provisions of subsection A1a of this section shall apply.
b. Any pole trailer or semitrailer.
c. Any vehicle designed or used primarily as farm or construction equipment.
B. Time Limit: At the expiration of the applicable time limit set forth in this section, a new time limit may begin only upon removal of the motor home,
recreational vehicle, trailer, or vehicle from the block, or five hundred feet (500') from the location in which it was previously parked, whichever is
farther, for a minimum of forty eight (48) hours.
C. Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply when a vehicle or trailer is parked:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 68/258
1. For the purpose of loading or unloading materials or merchandise, when such materials or merchandise are actually being loaded or unloaded,
and where such vehicle or trailer is parked within one hundred feet (100') of the loading or unloading point.
2. For a purpose incident to any ongoing, lawful construction project, where such construction project is conducted under a valid city of Mountain
Home building permit and such trailer or vehicle is parked within one hundred feet (100') of such construction project.
3. For the purpose of maintenance or response to emergency by a public utility, public entity, public agency, or the duly authorized agent thereof,
where such vehicle is visibly marked and identified as such, or
4. As specifically allowed by the mayor or chief of police of the city of Mountain Home who may grant a temporary waiver. (Ord. 1553, 9-27-2010)
6-4-4: STOPPING AND PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
The city of Mountain Home is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no stopping or parking upon that side of any street adjacent to school property
when such stopping or parking would, in its opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. When official signs are erected indicating no
stopping or parking upon that side of the street adjacent to any school property, no person shall stop or park a vehicle in any such designated place.
(Ord. 1553, 9-27-2010)
6-4-4-1: LOADING AND UNLOADING STUDENTS IN SCHOOL ZONES:
The city of Mountain Home is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating that no student(s) shall be loaded into or unloaded from vehicles on streets
adjacent to school property when such activity would, in its opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. When official signs are erected
indicating no loading or unloading of students upon that side of the street adjacent to any school property, no person shall do so in any such designated
place. (Ord. 1553, 9-27-2010)
6-4-5: MANNER OF PARKING:
A. Motor vehicles shall be parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway on all streets, in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with the right
hand wheels within eighteen inches (18") of the curb or edge of the roadway.
B. At locations where there is adequate right of way available, as determined by the city engineer, and where properly striped, motor vehicles shall be
parked diagonally or perpendicularly, as indicated by the striping to the curb or edge of the roadway in such a manner that the wheel of the vehicle
closest to the curb is not more than eight inches (8") from the curb or edge of the roadway and the other wheel is not more than eight inches (8")
from the street edge of the curb.
C. A motor vehicle shall not be parked on the street so that any portion of it crosses any line or marking of a parking space or be parked in such position
that the vehicle shall not be entirely within the area designated by the lines or markings. (Ord. 1553, 9-27-2010)
6-4-6: PARKING REGULATIONS, SIGNS AND CURB MARKINGS:
A. The city is authorized to erect signs regulating parking and establishing areas for no parking at any time, loading zones, limited time parking, and
handicapped parking.
B. The city may use curb markings or colors as substituting or supplemental to standard signs. The colors shall be as follows:
1. No parking any time: Red curbing.
2. Loading zone: Yellow curbing.
3. Limited time parking: Green curbing.
4. Handicapped parking: Blue curbing.
C. When official signs or curb markings regulating parking are used as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon a street in
violation of such sign or marking. If any vehicle is found stopped, standing or parked in violation of this section and the identity of the operator cannot
be determined, the owner, person, corporation or named lessee in whose name said vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for
said violation. (Ord. 1553, 9-27-2010)
6-4-7: PARKING/RUNNING OF REFRIGERATED UNITS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
A. Parking Of Commercial Vehicle(s) In Residential Areas Prohibited: No person shall park any commercial vehicle, whether attended or unattended,
upon the streets in any residential district within the city except:
1. For the purpose of loading and unloading passengers, materials or merchandise in the most expeditious manner.
2. For any purpose incident to a lawful commercial operation located in any residential district within the immediate vicinity of such parked vehicle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 69/258
B. Running Of Refrigerated Units Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any motorized refrigeration unit used in connection
with a truck or trailer to be run in any residential district of the city except for temporarily unloading or loading purposes, between the hours of nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. (Ord. 1553, 9-27-2010)
6-4-8: PARKING IN CITY PARKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any city park between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., except
where prior written permission has been granted therefor by the mayor, city council or the chief of police for special events held at any park. (Ord. 1553,
9-27-2010)
6-4-9: TEMPORARY "NO PARKING" ZONES; BARRICADES AND SIGNS; AUTHORITY; TOWING:
The police department is authorized to indicate temporary zones where vehicles shall not be parked when, in the opinion of the police officer, it is
necessary to prevent temporarily the parking of vehicles on any street or portion of such street. The chief of police may do so either by placing
appropriate signs (orange "Police Temporary No Parking") or by placing barricades or officers at such places. It is unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle at such time and at such designated places. The police department is authorized to remove such illegally parked vehicles and the owner thereof
shall pay the cost of such removal. It is also deemed illegal to remove or tamper with such signs. (Ord. 1553, 9-27-2010)
6-4-10: PLACING NO PARKING SIGNS PROHIBITED:
No person shall without the written permission of the mayor or chief of police place or cause to be placed on any street or sidewalk or on any building
any sign preventing or forbidding the parking of vehicles in the street in front of any building or place of business. It is also deemed illegal to remove or
tamper with any such signs. (Ord. 1553, 9-27-2010)
6-4-11: AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE LIMITED TIME SPACES AND ZONES:
The city council may establish parking spaces which limit the amount of time a motor vehicle may park in that space. The city street department is
directed and authorized to mark off individual parking spaces and/or zones and/or place signs indicating a time restriction in the limited time parking
spaces or zones. (Ord. 1553, 9-27-2010)
6-4-12: STANDING, PLACING, PARKING OF INANIMATE OBJECTS:
It shall be unlawful to stand, stop, place, or park any inanimate object, packing container(s), and/or crates of any shape and size on a public roadway.
(Ord. 1553, 9-27-2010)
6-4-13: ENFORCEMENT:
Violations of this chapter may be enforced by officers of the Mountain Home police department or some other employee of the city of Mountain Home by
issuing parking citations on a form authorized by the chief of police and city council. Said parking citation shall be left on the vehicle or personally
served upon the owner or operator of the vehicle and shall include the date and hour of the violation, the location of the violation, the ordinance section
violated, and the license number and make of the vehicle. The citation shall also include the amount of the fine and instructions to the owner or operator
to pay the fine at city hall within seventy two (72) hours. One copy of the citation shall be forwarded to city hall. (Ord. 1553, 9-27-2010)
6-4-14: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, or who shall counsel, aid or abet any violation or failure to
comply, shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to the fines set forth in the schedule below. In order to eliminate burdening courts
with violations of ordinances and to eliminate possible public inconvenience, each person receiving a parking ticket under this chapter, whether left upon
his or her vehicle or served personally, shall pay the administrative fine indicated in the fine schedule to city hall within seventy two (72) hours of the
issuance of the ticket. In the event of nonpayment of said administrative fine within seventy two (72) hours, an infraction citation or complaint for parking
violation may be filed in the magistrate division of the district court. In such an event, administrative fees and/or court costs may be assessed in addition
to the fines set forth below. (Ord. 1553, 9-27-2010)
6-4-15: REMOVAL AND TOWING:
The Mountain Home police department is hereby authorized and/or directed to remove all vehicle(s) and trailer(s) defined under title 49 chapter 1 of the
Idaho Code, where such vehicles and trailers appear to have been abandoned or where such vehicles and trailers shall be unlawfully parked according
to above ordinances. The registered owner of the vehicle shall be liable for the cost of removal, towing and storage of the vehicle pursuant to the
procedures contained in title 49, chapter 18 of the Idaho Code regardless of whether the removal is because of a parking offense or abandonment.
Removal shall be a cumulative remedy and shall not preclude issuance or filing of any other citation or complaint. (Ord. 1553, 9-27-2010)
6-4-16: FINE SCHEDULE:
The following fine schedule for violations of the provisions of this chapter is hereby adopted as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 70/258
FINE SCHEDULE
City Code Violation Description Fine Amount
6-4-2A1 or A2 Stopping, standing, parking on sidewalk/parkway $ 40.00
6-4-2A4 Parked on a crosswalk 50.00
6-4-2A5 Parked within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of the safety zone 40.00
6-4-2A7 Obstructing traffic - bridge, structure, tunnel 40.00
6-4-2A8 Blocking driveway 40.00
6-4-2A9 Parked within 15 feet of a fire hydrant 40.00
6-4-2A10 Parked within 20 feet of crosswalk 40.00
6-4-2A11 Parking in alley as to hinder or block traffic 18.00
6-4-2A12 Parking in front of mailbox 25.00
6-4-2A13 Disabled parking 100.00
6-4-2A14 Parking on bicycle/foot path 40.00
6-4-2A15a Displaying vehicle for sale 15.00
6-4-2A15b Repairing/greasing/abandoned vehicle 15.00
6-4-2A16a and A16b
Any vehicle that is inoperable, abandoned, not currently registered 40.00
6-4-3 Extended parking - 72 hours 40.00
6-4-4 Official signs prohibit parking adjacent to schools 40.00
6-4-5A Standing/parking too far from curb 40.00
6-4-5A Motor vehicles parked parallel to the curb or edge of roadway in the direction of authorized traffic
movement
40.00
6-4-6 Red curb
Yellow and green curb
Blue curb
40.00
25.00
100.00
6-4-7 Commercial vehicle-residential area 50.00
6-4-8 Parking in city parks 20.00
Other Any section not specifically addressed 20.00
(Ord. 1553, 9-27-2010)
Chapter 5
MINORS
6-5-1: CURFEW:
A. It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to go or to remain upon any pedestrian or vehicular thoroughfare, public place or
other premises open to the public, or to operate or to ride in a vehicle at any such location, between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and
five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
B. This prohibition shall not apply to the following:
1. A minor accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having care and custody of said minor;
2. A minor upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed or authorized by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care and custody of said minor;
3. A minor participating in a lawful youth group activity, school or church function or on his or her way home by a direct route after participating in
such activity or function.
4. A minor who is lawfully married or who is a member of the armed forces of the United States on active duty or on authorized leave from active
duty.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 71/258
5. A minor when exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly. Such minor shall evidence the good faith of such exercise of his or her first amendment rights by first delivering
to the Mountain Home police department at 2775 East 8th North, Mountain Home, Idaho, directed to the chief of police of the city of Mountain
Home, a written communication, signed by such minor and countersigned if practicable by a parent of such minor with their home address and
telephone number, specifying when, where and in what manner said minor will be on the streets at night (during hours when this section is
otherwise applicable to said minor) in the exercise of a first amendment right specified in such communication.
C. Any law enforcement officer finding a minor in apparent violation of this curfew restriction shall take said minor to the office of the city police
department, and the parent, guardian or other adult person having care and custody of the minor shall be requested to come and take charge of the
minor. A petition may be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction under the youth rehabilitation act or the child protective act of the state of Idaho, as
appropriate to the circumstances.
D. It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a juvenile knowingly to permit or by inefficient control to allow the juvenile to remain in any
pedestrian or vehicular thoroughfare, public place or other premises open to the public, or to operate or to ride in a vehicle at any such location
under circumstances not constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, this section. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge that
a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in that parent's legal custody. This requirement is
intended to hold a neglectful or careless parent up to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall,
therefore, be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such juvenile. (Ord. 1530, 7-27-2009)
6-5-2: RUNAWAYS:
A. Purpose: For the purpose of preventing persons in the city under the age of eighteen (18) years from running away or attempting to run away from
home, and in order to promote the safety and welfare of the residents of the city, this section is hereby enacted.
B. Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, living or found in the city to attempt to run away or to run
away from his or her parents, guardian or other legal custodian, or to be or remain a person who has run away from his or her parents, guardian or
other legal custodian.
C. Encouraging Or Aiding A Runaway: It shall be unlawful for any person by any act or neglect to encourage, aid or cause any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years to come within the purview of subsection B of this section.
D. Penalties: A violation of this section shall subject the offender to penalties in accordance with section 1-4-1 of this code. (1990 Code)
Chapter 6
ANIMAL CONTROL
6-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply to this chapter:
ABANDON: To completely forsake and desert an animal previously under the custody or possession of a person without making reasonable
arrangements for its proper care, sustenance, and shelter.
ANIMAL: A live mammal, bird, reptile, fish or amphibian.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER (ACO): Any person(s) employed by the City to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter or any State laws or
regulations relating to animal control.
ANIMAL CONTROL SUPERINTENDENT: The lead animal control officer tasked with management of animal shelter operations and personnel.
ANIMAL NUISANCE: Any nuisance arising out of the keeping, maintaining or owning of, or failure to exercise sufficient control of an animal.
ANIMAL SHELTER: Any premises designated by the City for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter.
AT LARGE: Any animal that is off the premises of the owner and not secured by leash or in a motor vehicle.
BITE: Any contact by an animal's teeth that breaks the skin of a person or another animal.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL: Any premises where three (3) or more dogs or three (3) or more cats or any combination thereof over the age of six (6)
months are kept, for boarding, breeding, training or selling, etc.
CRUELTY: The malicious, intentional and needless infliction of pain, physical suffering, injury or death to an animal; to maliciously kill, maim, wound,
torment or mutilate an animal; the failure to provide necessary sustenance, water or shelter for an animal; the failure to provide a sanitary and adequate
living environment for an animal; or to abandon an animal.
DESTROY: To humanely euthanize an animal in keeping with State standards.
IMPOUND: The taking into custody of an animal by any police officer, animal control officer, or any authorized representative thereof, and confined in a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 72/258
humane manner.
LIVESTOCK: To include, but not be limited to, cattle, sheep, horses, goats, pigs, llamas, donkeys, burros or mules, or any other similar animals,
excluding mini-pigs.
OWNER/RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any person or persons keeping, harboring, possessing, caring for, or having any custodial duties over any animal.
POLICE OFFICER: An officer, certified by Idaho Police Officer Standards and Training Council, to enforce the laws of the State of Idaho and ordinances
of the City of Mountain Home.
POULTRY: Any domesticated birds which serve as a source of food, either meat or eggs, including, but not limited to, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys,
guinea fowl and pheasants.
QUARANTINE: To isolate a dog or cat in a controlled environment away from contact with animals or humans in an effort to assess the behavior and
overall health of the animal. Normally is utilized for rabies observation and/or control.
SECURE ENCLOSURE: An enclosure from which an animal cannot escape and for which exit and entry is controlled by the owner of the premises or
owner of the animal.
SERVICE ANIMAL: Any guide dog, signal dog, police/drug or bite dog or other animal that is individually trained and certified to do work or perform
tasks for the benefit of a law enforcement agency or individual with a disability, including, but not limited to, guiding people with impaired vision, alerting
people with impaired hearing to intruders or sounds.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal which, when not physically provoked, physically attacks, wounds, bites or otherwise injures any person or other
domestic animal upon a street, sidewalk, any public grounds or places, or private property not owned or possessed by the owner of the animal. No
animal may be declared vicious if any injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time of such injury or damage was sustained, was
committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal or attempting to commit a crime. No animal may be
declared vicious if the injury or damage was sustained as a result of teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal. No animal may be declared
vicious if the animal was protecting or defending a human being or other domestic animal within the immediate vicinity of the animal from an unjustified
attack or assault.
WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMAL: Any non-domesticated animal or any animal that is not indigenous to Idaho, which is not otherwise authorized by this
chapter. (Ord. 1665, 9-25-2017)
6-6-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to serve City residents in a timely, professional, and competent manner while enforcing animal control ordinances and
State laws. It is also the mission of the animal shelter to build healthy relationships between people and animals by advocating for the humane
treatment of animals; delineating animal owner's responsibility for the acts and behavior of their animal at all times; enforcing animal related laws and
safeguarding residents from animal annoyance, intimidation, injury and health hazards; and encouraging and promoting responsible pet ownership.
(Ord. 1535, 10-26-2009)
6-6-3: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER AND DUTIES:
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the police officers and ACOs of the City specifically designated by the Chief of Police. These
enforcement officials shall have the authority to act on behalf of the City, including, but not limited to, the authority to investigate complaints, impound
and destroy animals, and to take any other lawful action required to enforce the provisions of this chapter or any State laws or regulations relating to
animal control. A police officer or an ACO so designated by the Chief of Police shall have the authority to issue citations on an Idaho uniform citation
form pursuant to the Idaho Misdemeanor Criminal Rules and the Idaho Infraction Rules for the violation(s) of animal control laws, and rules and
regulations within the City. It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with, or give any false or misleading information to, any police officer or ACO
in the performance of his or her duties. (Ord. 1535, 10-26-2009)
6-6-4: LICENSES, NUMBER OF ANIMALS, VACCINATIONS, FEES AND PENALTIES:
A. Animal Licenses: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any unlicensed dog or cat over six (6) months of age within the City limits.
1. The owner or responsible party shall apply for a license at City Hall and provide the owner's name and address, the name, breed, color, age, sex
of the dog or cat, and proof of whether or not the dog or cat has been neutered or spayed.
2. A veterinarian's certificate documenting the current rabies immunization of said dog or cat is required to be presented at the time of application,
along with the required licensing fee.
3. A numbered receipt and numbered metallic tag shall be issued to the owner as proof of licensing. The license tag shall be securely fastened to
the dog's or cat's collar or harness and worn by the dog or cat at all times.
4. All licenses are nontransferable from animal to animal and it shall be unlawful for any person to use any dog or cat license issued for another dog
or cat.
5. All license fees are nonrefundable.
B. Number Of Dogs And/Or Cats Allowed:
1. It shall be unlawful to keep more than three (3) dogs, or more than three (3) cats or a combination thereof, six (6) months of age or older (example
2 dogs and 1 cat or 1 dog and 2 cats) and more than one litter at any one time, litters not to exceed the age of three (3) months. (Excluding multi6/
5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 73/258
family dwellings which are regulated in a separate section of this chapter.)
a. Anyone having more than three (3) adult dogs or three (3) adult cats or a combination thereof on or before December 31, 2017, may keep the
same dogs and cats they have until the dogs and cats they own or possess at that time have died or are otherwise no longer in their
possession. Any such person may not obtain additional dogs or cats until their total number of dogs or cats owned or possessed by that person
does not exceed three (3) dogs or three (3) cats or a combination thereof. Owners of these dogs or cats are required to license them
individually.
C. Commercial Kennel Licenses:
1. Commercial Kennel Licenses: It shall be unlawful to keep three (3) or more dogs, six (6) months or older, three (3) or more cats, six (6) months or
older, or any combination thereof, per household for boarding, breeding, training or selling, etc., without a commercial kennel license. No
commercial kennel license shall be permitted or granted for a multiple-family dwelling unit.
2. Conditional Use Permit Procedures: Individuals wishing to obtain a commercial kennel license must follow the conditional use permit procedures
contained in title 9 of this Code.
3. Additional Requirements: In addition to the procedures contained in title 9 of this Code, the following is also required:
a. Complete the application for a kennel license on the current City of Mountain Home application for City license form.
b. A current veterinarian certificate documenting rabies immunization of said dogs and/or cats over six (6) months of age is required to be
presented at the time of application, along with the required licensing fees.
c. A numbered receipt and numbered metallic tag shall be issued to the owner for each animal over six (6) months of age as proof of licensing.
The license tag shall be securely fastened to the dog's or cat's collar or harness and worn by the dog or cat at all times.
4. Non-Transferable: All kennel licenses and license fees are non-transferable from animal to animal and owner to owner.
5. Non-Refundable: All kennel license fees are non-refundable.
D. Fees And Penalties:
1. The annual license fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for each neutered or spayed dog over six (6) months of age and twenty dollars ($20.00) for
each unneutered or unspayed dog over six (6) months of age.
2. The annual license fee shall be five dollars ($5.00) for each neutered or spayed cat over six (6) months of age and ten dollars ($10.00) for each
unneutered or unspayed cat over six (6) months of age.
3. In the event that a duplicate license tag is needed or required, a replacement fee of five dollars ($5.00) per tag shall be assessed.
4. If there is a change of ownership of a dog or cat during the license year, a transfer fee of five dollars ($5.00) per dog or cat shall be assessed.
This provision also applies to lifetime licenses.
5. The commercial kennel license fee shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
6. Individual lifetime licenses are available for one hundred dollars ($100.00) per neutered and spayed dog or cat and shall never expire so long as
the owner provides proof of current rabies vaccinations as required in this chapter and contact information annually. Dogs or cats not neutered or
spayed are not eligible to receive a lifetime license. Failure to comply with the requirements will result in the revocation of the license. This license
is transferable with the transfer or change of ownership of the dog or cat, but non-transferable from one dog to another dog or from one cat to
another cat.
E. Licensing Period: All licenses shall be issued for one year commencing January 1 and expiring December 31. Applications for licenses may be made
not more than thirty (30) days prior to the start of the licensing year.
F. Exceptions:
1. The licensing and vaccination requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any dog or cat belonging to a nonresident of the City or kept within
City limits for less than ninety (90) days. All nonresident dogs and cats must be kept on a leash, or confined within a building, vehicle, fenced yard
or secure enclosure during the duration of the stay in the City.
2. The licensing and vaccination requirement of this chapter shall apply to any service animal that has been properly trained and is acting in that
capacity, however, all such animals shall be licensed without a fee upon a proper showing that such animal is a service animal.
G. Violations: Violations of this section shall be an infraction, however, individuals charged with a third and/or subsequent violation(s) shall be charged
with a misdemeanor. Violation of subsection 6-6-4B of this section shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1665, 9-25-2017)
6-6-5: IMPOUNDMENT, REDEMPTION, ADOPTION AND FEES:
A. Impoundment: Any animal may be impounded at any time if found in violation of any of the following:
1. Running at large.
2. In violation of a quarantine order.
3. Suspected of being abused, neglected or abandoned.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 74/258
4. Suspected of having or been exposed to rabies.
5. If a vicious animal kept in violation of section 6-6-8 of this chapter.
B. Redemption:
1. The owner or responsible party shall be entitled to regain possession of the animal(s) upon payment of the appropriate impoundment fee,
provided however, that the owner of any dog or cat must first comply with the license requirements of this chapter before the animal will be
released if said animal is unlicensed. ACOs reserve the right to ask for satisfactory proof of ownership before releasing the animal.
2. Regardless of whether the animal is returned to its owner or impounded, ACOs may issue a citation to the owner for any violation(s).
3. Any animal not claimed by its owner within five (5) business days will become the property of the City. Where ownership can be determined, in
lieu of impoundment, ACOs may return the animal to the owner.
C. Adoption: Any animal not claimed after five (5) business days may be placed up for adoption or humanely euthanized at the discretion of the ACO.
Any animal placed for adoption, but which is not adopted within a reasonable time may be humanely euthanized at the discretion of the ACO. Any
animal adopted from the animal shelter must be spayed or neutered at the owner or responsible party's expense within sixty (60) days unless
extended or waived by ACOs based upon veterinarian availability and/or age of the animal.
D. Owner Turn Ins: Only upon special hardship circumstances and at the discretion of the Chief of Police after conferring with the animal control
superintendent, or his or her designee that there is room available at the shelter, will an owner be allowed to surrender their animal(s) to the custody
of the animal shelter for possible adoption. All owners shall complete an information sheet and sign the form stating that they are relinquishing all
legal rights of the animal(s) to the City animal shelter. These animals are subject to the same guidelines as impounded animals. The City is not
required to accept these animals.
E. Fees:
1. An impounded animal may be adopted for thirty dollars ($30.00) or two (2) animals for fifty dollars ($50.00). Senior citizens (55 and over) may
adopt animals at half the regular adoption rate.
2. Impounded animals may be reclaimed upon payment of corresponding impound fees:
a. First violation within a twelve (12) month period: Twenty five dollars ($25.00).
b. Second violation within a twelve (12) month period: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
c. Third violation within a twelve (12) month period: Seventy five dollars ($75.00).
d. Fourth and/or subsequent violation(s) within a twelve (12) month period: One hundred dollars ($100.00).
3. In addition to such fees, a ten dollar ($10.00) daily fee shall be assessed beginning the second day of impoundment.
4. Isolation or quarantine care of any animal is twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day.
5. To facilitate adoption, in lieu of euthanasia, the animal control superintendent may reduce or waive the adoption fee. (Ord. 1665, 9-25-2017)
6-6-6: FREEING IMPOUNDED ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to release or attempt to release any animal from animal shelter custody without proper authorization. Violations of this
section shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1535, 10-26-2009)
6-6-7: ANIMAL BITES AND RABIES CONTROL:
A. It shall be the duty of every physician, or other medical practitioner, to report to the ACOs or police the name and address of person(s) treated for
bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control.
B. When an animal bite by an animal at large without the owner present is reported to animal control or the police, the animal shall be securely
quarantined at the City's animal shelter at the direction of the ACO or police for a period of ten (10) days, and shall not be released from such
quarantine except by permission of the ACOs or the police. Said quarantine shall be at the owner's expense and in the amount set forth in section 6-
6-5 of this chapter. If an animal at large bites an individual and the owner of the animal is not able to provide documentation of current vaccinations,
the animal will be required to be quarantined at the City's animal shelter at the owner's expense. If the owner is able to provide documentation that
the animal's vaccinations are current, the animal can complete the remaining time required for the quarantine period at the owner's residence at the
discretion of the ACO. The animal will not be released to the owner until the daily fee(s) that have been accumulated have been paid in full or
payment arrangements agreeable with the City have been made. At the discretion of the ACO or police, such quarantine may be on the premises of
the owner, at the City animal shelter, or at the owner's option and expense, in a veterinary hospital of their choice. ACOs or the police officer shall be
responsible for completing the animal bite investigation form and for making sure that the animal is quarantined. The owner or responsible party
shall be required to sign the form acknowledging receipt of the quarantine notice. If the report is being made to the police, the animal bite
investigation form and all investigative information shall be forwarded to the ACO for required recordkeeping. A copy of the animal bite investigation
form shall then be forwarded to the Central District Health Department.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 75/258
C. The owner, upon demand made by ACOs or the police, shall forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten a human, or which is suspected as
having been exposed to rabies, for quarantine, supervised by a veterinarian, which expense shall be borne by the owner, and may be reclaimed by
the owner if adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of fees set forth in section 6-6-5 of this chapter and upon compliance of licensing provisions set
forth in section 6-6-4 of this chapter.
D. When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid or suspected by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid and dies while under
such observation, ACOs shall immediately send the head of such animal to the State Department of Health and Welfare for pathological
examination, and shall notify the Central District Health Office of reports of human contacts, and the diagnosis made of the suspected animal.
E. When one or both reports have given a positive diagnosis of rabies in an animal, ACOs or the police may recommend to the Chief of Police a
Citywide quarantine for a period of thirty (30) days, and upon the invoking of such quarantine, no animal shall be taken into the streets, or permitted
to be in the streets, during such period of quarantine. During such period of quarantine, any animal found on the streets or roaming at large shall be
placed in the City animal shelter. If such animal is unlicensed or is of unknown ownership, it shall be held for a period of forty eight (48) hours, after
which it shall be destroyed.
F. During such period of rabies quarantine as herein mentioned, every animal bitten by an animal adjudged to be rabid shall be forthwith destroyed or, at
the owner's option and expense, shall be treated for rabies infection by a licensed veterinarian, or held under ten (10) days' quarantine by the owner
in the same manner as other animals are quarantined.
G. In the event there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the period of the quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended
indefinitely.
H. The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be surrendered to ACOs. ACOs shall direct the disposition of any animal
found to be infected with rabies.
I. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required herein when demand is made
thereof by ACOs or the police.
J. The first violation of this section shall be an infraction, however, individuals charged with a second and/or subsequent violation(s) shall be charged
with a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1665, 9-25-2017)
6-6-8: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
A. Responsibilities And Control Of Vicious Animals:
1. All vicious animals shall be confined in a secure enclosure on the owner's/responsible party's property and said property shall be posted, at the
owner's/responsible party's expense, with a visible sign at every entrance reading "Vicious Animal", "Beware of Animal", or words of like effect.
2. Any vicious animal removed from the secure enclosure, must be restrained by a chain sufficient to control the animal.
3. The owner or responsible party of any vicious animal shall procure liability insurance in the amount of no less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00), covering any damage or injury which may be caused by such vicious animal. The owner or responsible party shall provide proof
of liability insurance upon demand of any ACO or police officer.
4. The owner or responsible party shall immediately notify ACOs or the Police Department of any vicious animal that is at large, unconfined, or has
attacked a human being or another domestic animal.
B. Euthanasia: Any persons found harboring a vicious animal in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. For a second or subsequent
violation, the court may order the animal to be euthanized. (Ord. 1665, 9-25-2017)
6-6-9: COMMANDING AN ANIMAL TO ATTACK:
It shall be unlawful for any person, without justifiable cause, to command or encourage any animal to bite, chase or attack another person. Violations of
this section shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1535, 10-26-2009)
6-6-10: ANIMAL CRUELTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to treat an animal in a cruel or inhumane manner. It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and intentionally tease
or otherwise molest any animal; or for any parent or guardian of any child under fourteen (14) years of age to knowingly permit such child to tease or
molest any animal. Violations of this section shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1535, 10-26-2009)
6-6-11: ANIMAL FIGHTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to attend any game, exhibition, contest or fight in which fighting, killing, maiming or injuring of animals is a significant
feature. Violations of this section shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1535, 10-26-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 76/258
6-6-12: ANIMAL NUISANCES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner or responsible party of an animal to allow it to become a nuisance to others by any of the following:
1. Excessive, continuous or untimely barking or noise.
2. Charging at, aggressive behavior towards, biting, nipping or chasing vehicles or passersby.
3. Allowing the excessive accumulation of animal feces, which becomes offensive by sight or smell or creates an insect breeding or attraction site.
4. Impedes refuse collection by ripping any bag or tipping any container of such.
B. Violations of this section shall be an infraction, however, individuals charged with a second and/or subsequent violation(s) shall be charged with a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 1665, 9-25-2017)
6-6-13: ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE:
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or responsible party of any animal to allow it to run at large within the City.
1. It is the responsibility of the owner or responsible party to have control of the animal at all times when on a leash or not on a leash, or it must be
confined in a fenced yard.
2. If the animal is not on the owner's or responsible party's property it must be controlled by a leash or restricting device at all times. (Ord. 1665, 9-
25-2017)
6-6-14: ANIMALS NOT PERMITTED IN CITY PARKS OR ON CITY PROPERTY:
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or responsible party of any animal to allow it to remain in any City park or on any City property that has been posted
"No Animals Allowed". The Chief of Police and/or the Mayor may permanently designate such signage in City parks or on City property or such
designation may be done and posted on a temporary basis for special events held in City parks or on City property.
B. Violations of this section shall be an infraction, however, individuals charged with a second and/or subsequent violation(s) shall be charged with a
misdemeanor.
C. Exceptions: Any "service animal" as defined in section 6-6-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 1665, 9-25-2017)
6-6-15: ANIMAL FECES TO BE REMOVED BY OWNERS:
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or responsible party to allow their animal to defecate and to allow the feces to remain upon any public park,
sidewalk, roadway, or any other private or public property not owned or possessed by the owner or responsible party.
B. The owner or responsible party shall immediately and securely enclose all feces deposited by the animal in a bag, wrapper or other container and
dispose of it in a sanitary manner.
C. Violations of this section shall be an infraction, however, individuals charged with a second and/or subsequent violation(s) shall be charged with a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 1665, 9-25-2017)
6-6-16: INJURED AND DISEASED ANIMALS:
ACOs may turn over any stray or abandoned animal suffering in pain to a licensed veterinarian approved by the City where the cost or treatment shall
be borne by the owner or responsible party, if known, or by the City. If the animal appears to be diseased or severely disabled, or if treatment would be
prohibitively expensive, animal control may humanely euthanize the animal in accordance with State standards. (Ord. 1535, 10-26-2009)
6-6-17: PROHIBITED ANIMALS, LIVESTOCK, POULTRY, WILD AND EXOTIC ANIMALS:
A. Poultry And Livestock Prohibited; Exception: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any poultry, except no more than three (3) hens
on any one parcel of property which shall be allowed, or livestock within City limits unless said poultry or livestock was kept within the City prior to
November 4, 2009.
B. Wild Or Exotic Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any wild or exotic animal within City limits.
C. Multi-Family Dwellings: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain more than two (2) dogs or two (2) cats or a combination thereof in any
multi-family dwelling unit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 77/258
D. Animals Allowed: Animals allowed in the City limits are as follows:
1. Domesticated cats, in amounts listed in another section of this chapter.
2. Domesticated dogs, in amounts listed in another section of this chapter.
3. Small domestic animals including rats, mice, guinea pigs, hamsters, gerbils, ferrets, and hedgehogs.
4. Nonpoisonous reptiles, excluding crocodilians.
5. Nonpoisonous amphibians.
6. Indoor birds, such as parakeets, parrots, etc., and fish.
7. Hens, so long as no more than three (3) hens are kept on any one parcel of property.
8. Rabbits, so long as no more than two (2) rabbits are kept on any one parcel of property.
9. Mini-pigs, so long as it is an indoor pet and no more than one mini-pig is kept on any one parcel of property.
E. Exceptions: Livestock, poultry, wild or exotic animals are only allowed within the City under the following circumstances:
1. At any bona fide licensed veterinary hospital for treatment.
2. At any bona fide educational or medical institutions.
3. Temporarily in transit with the appropriate licensing.
4. By exhibitors who are properly licensed or permitted by the City, the Idaho Department of Agriculture, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, or U.S.
Department of Agriculture.
5. Goats shall be allowed within the City limits for the sole purpose of eating and removing vegetation that is growing on the property and only for a
period of no more than ten (10) days on any one parcel of property in any one hundred eighty (180) day time frame, with the following restrictions:
a. There shall be no more than one goat per every one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of property upon which the goat or goats are
located;
b. The goat or goats shall be properly fenced in without the aid of an electric fence;
c. The owner or owners of the goats shall be solely responsible for any damage done or caused by the goat or goats owned by them; and
d. All other local and State laws, ordinances, rules and regulations shall still apply.
F. Violations: Violations of this section shall be an infraction, however, third or subsequent violations are a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1676, 2-11-2019)
6-6-18: RECORDS REQUIRED:
A. It shall be the duty of the ACOs to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of:
1. The licensing, impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into custody.
2. All bite cases reported and of the investigation of same.
3. All monies received at the shelter belonging to the City.
B. Said records shall be open to inspection at reasonable times by such persons responsible for similar records of the City, and shall be audited by the
City in the same manner as other City records are audited. All records shall be managed, retained and disposed of in accordance with the City of
Mountain Home Records Retention Manual. (Ord. 1535, 10-26-2009)
6-6-19: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of this chapter and
the application of such provisions to other persons and circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 1535, 10-26-2009)
6-6-20: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this chapter shall be punished by the penalties as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this
Code.
When the offense is designated as an infraction by any section or provision of this chapter or by State law, it is punishable only by a penalty as set forth
in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1675, 12-27-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 78/258
6-6-21: STATE LAWS SUPERSEDE:
In the event any of the procedures outlined herein conflict with or are now, or may hereafter become, covered by State laws, then such procedures
under State laws shall supersede and supplant such procedures. (Ord. 1535, 10-26-2009)
Chapter 7
FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. FIRE PREVENTION CODE
6-7A-1: ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE:
The current edition of the international fire code, relating to and establishing rules and regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire, is hereby adopted and enacted as the fire code for the city. The current edition of said code, and any amendments and additions thereto, are
hereby adopted by reference. Not less than two (2) copies of said code shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the city building department for
use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1642, 2-8-2016)
6-7A-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The chief of the Mountain Home fire department, or such other person or persons as the council may appoint, shall be responsible for the administration
and enforcement of the international fire code and amendments. The chief may request the aid of the city police department to assist him in the
enforcement of this code and amendments when necessary. (Ord. 1642, 2-8-2016)
ARTICLE B. FIREWORKS
6-7B-1: FIREWORKS DEFINED:
A. Fireworks Defined: Fireworks are defined as any device that contains combustible or explosive material that creates an audible or visual effect by
combustion, deflagration, explosion or detonation for the purposes of entertainment or display.
B. Exceptions: The term "fireworks" shall not include any blank cartridge, automotive safety flare, toy or model hobby rockets, toy pistols, toy cannons,
toy canes and toy guns, caps, party poppers, pop-its, party favors or other devices in which paper caps containing not more than twenty-five
hundredths (.25) of a grain or less of explosive compound per cap is used for such caps, whether single, roll or tape type. (Ord. 1669, 5-14-2018)
6-7B-2: DANGEROUS FIREWORKS DEFINED:
"Dangerous fireworks" includes any of the following:
A. Fireworks containing explosive material that will burn or deflagrate when ignited. Examples include, but are not limited to, firecrackers, cherry bombs
and M-80s.
B. Fireworks that leave the ground on their own accord, or fly when tossed into the air. Examples include but are not limited to: sky lanterns, skyrockets,
bottle rockets, mortar shells or roman candles.
C. Fireworks designed for ground or near ground use that travel outside of a ten foot (10') diameter circle. Examples include, but are not limited to,
ground blooms and dancing Betties.
D. Fireworks designed for ground or near ground use that, as a means of propulsion, emit showers of sparks longer than twelve inches (12") in length.
E. Fireworks designed for use from the stationary position that emit sparks, showers, or flaming balls, vertically more than twenty feet (20') in height or
discharge material that falls beyond a twenty foot (20') diameter area. (Ord. 1669, 5-14-2018)
6-7B-3: NON-AERIAL COMMON SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS:
Fireworks not meeting the criteria of "dangerous fireworks" or not specifically banned by the reference are to be considered non-aerial common "safe
and sane" fireworks.
Non-aerial common "safe and sane" fireworks cannot explode, leave the ground or fly when tossed into the air, travel more than ten feet (10'), emit
showers of sparks more than twenty feet (20') in height, discharge material outside a twenty foot (20') diameter circle or emit sparks more than twelve
inches (12") when used for propulsion. (Ord. 1669, 5-14-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 79/258
6-7B-4: DANGEROUS FIREWORKS PERMITTED ONLY BY THE MOUNTAIN HOME FIRE DEPARTMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person in the City of Mountain Home to import, export, offer for sale, sell, possess, keep, or store or permit the keeping or
storing of any "dangerous fireworks" for any use or purpose, except in controlled circumstances in conjunction with the Mountain Home Fire Department
for a safely supervised and conducted public display of fireworks as listed in section 6-7B-14 of this article. Said fireworks may be stored for a period not
exceeding ten (10) days immediately preceding the date of said public display, provided the fireworks are to be used exclusively for public display. (Ord.
1669, 5-14-2018)
6-7B-5: NON-AERIAL COMMON SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS PERMIT:
No person, without having a valid non-aerial common "safe and sane fireworks" permit issued by the City pursuant to terms and conditions set forth in
this article shall import, export, possess for the purpose of sale, offer for sale, or sell non-aerial common "safe and sane fireworks" for any use or
purpose within the City limits. (Ord. 1669, 5-14-2018)
6-7B-6: APPLICATION FOR NON-AERIAL COMMON SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS PERMIT:
Any reputable person, in reasonable pursuit or furtherance of any legitimate personal, business or charitable purpose, desiring to engage in the sale of
non-aerial common "safe and sane fireworks" within the City shall first make written application to the Clerk for a non-aerial common "safe and sane
fireworks permit".
Each applicant shall pay to the City Clerk a permit fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) at the time he/she files his/her application. At the time and as a
condition of such filing and with each application, each applicant shall pay an additional fire inspection fee to defray costs of preliminary investigations
required hereunder which fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per site applied for, and shall not be refundable in any event. (Ord. 1669, 5-14-2018)
6-7B-7: FORM OF APPLICATION:
Each applicant for a non-aerial common "safe and sane fireworks permit" shall file his/her application with the Clerk. Each application shall show the
following:
A. Name, address, date of birth and driver's license number of applicant.
B. The purpose for which the applicant primarily exists and for which it was organized.
C. The names and addresses of the officers, trustees, and/or directors, if any, of the applicant.
D. The location where the applicant requests permission to sell non-aerial common "safe and sane fireworks".
E. When and where the applicant was organized and established, or, if a natural person, the applicant's age.
F. The location of the applicant's principal and permanent meeting place or places, or principal place or places of business.
G. The applicant's State Sales Tax permit number.
H. If the applicant is an entity other than a sole proprietorship, the name and general description of the business activities of each parent or subsidiary
company, business or entity, and a general description of the ownership organization of each parent or subsidiary, if any.
I. Such other information as the Clerk may require on a standard form submitted to all applicants and which is reasonably necessary to protect the
public health, safety and morals. (Ord. 1669, 5-14-2018)
6-7B-8: INVESTIGATION:
A. The Fire Chief and/or his/her designee shall be authorized to:
1. Inspect any and all operations within the City limits at which fireworks are sold, offered for sale, and/or stored to ensure compliance with this
chapter and any and all other applicable laws.
2. Inspect any and all temporary fireworks stands within the City limits from which fireworks are sold, offered for sale, and/or stored.
3. Inspect and/or require an operator to produce any records required by law.
4. Revoke a non-aerial common "safe and sane fireworks" permit pursuant to the procedures set forth in this article.
5. Conduct any other inspections or undertake any other acts authorized by this article and any and all other applicable laws. (Ord. 1669, 5-14-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 80/258
6-7B-9: CLERK TO ISSUE PERMIT:
The Clerk shall have the power in his/her discretion or upon the request of the Fire Chief or his/her designee to grant or deny any application, subject to
such reasonable conditions, if any, as he/she shall prescribe so long as the denial of the application or any conditions imposed on the granting of the
application are reasonably necessary for protection of the public health, safety and morals. (Ord. 1669, 5-14-2018)
6-7B-10: TERM OF PERMIT:
A non-aerial common "safe and sane fireworks permit" issued pursuant to this article shall be valid only within the calendar year in which issued. A
permit shall be valid only for the specific dates listed on the permit and only for the premises or location designated in the permit. However, subject to
reasonable conditions necessary for protection of the public health, safety and morals, an applicant may be granted permits for more than one premises
or location within the City. No permit shall be transferable or assignable. (Ord. 1669, 5-14-2018)
6-7B-11: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
A. The City Clerk, Fire Chief or their designees, may revoke a non-aerial common "safe and sane fireworks permit" issued pursuant to this article where
any of the following occur:
1. The applicant conducts or permits a use, condition and/or activity not allowed under the terms of the permit.
2. The applicant violates conditions and/or limitations set forth in the permit.
3. The application for the permit contains any false statements or misrepresentations.
4. The permit is used by a different applicant than to whom it was issued.
5. The permit was issued in error in violation of any ordinance or law.
6. The applicant fails to comply with any order or notice duly served in accordance with the provisions of this article or other applicable law.
7. The applicant fails to comply with any applicable State or local law. (Ord. 1669, 5-14-2018)
6-7B-12: TIME OF FILING APPLICATION:
The application for a non-aerial common "safe and sane fireworks permit" must be made to the City Clerk on or before June 5 of each year. (Ord. 1669,
5-14-2018)
6-7B-13: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Each applicant for a non-aerial common "safe and sane fireworks permit", shall have filed with the Clerk prior to the issuance and validity of any permit,
a policy, or certified true copy thereof, of public liability and products liability insurance, including both "accident" and "occurrence" coverage. The
insurance coverage limits for both public liability coverage and for products liability coverage shall be at least one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per occurrence aggregate bodily, and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence aggregate property damage, or
personal injury. Each policy of insurance shall be in form and substance acceptable to the City, and shall name as insured parties under the terms of the
policy the City, all officials, elected and appointed, of the City in performance of official functions regarding all operations under or pertaining to said
permit, any licensee or licensor of the applicant, and all vendors of fireworks covered by the permit to be issued to the applicant.
Said policy of insurance shall be so written that it cannot be canceled without at least ten (10) days' prior written notice to the City from the underwriting
insurance company. The policy of insurance shall be underwritten through or by a qualified and duly licensed insurance company or companies doing or
authorized to do insurance business in the State of Idaho, and a copy of said policy shall be filed with the Clerk prior to the issuance of the permit. (Ord.
1669, 5-14-2018)
6-7B-14: AUTHORIZED DATES AND PLACES FOR THE SALE AND USE OF FIREWORKS:
Non-aerial common "safe and sane fireworks" may be sold at retail after the purchase of a City permit beginning June 28 and ending at twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight July 4. Non-aerial common "safe and sane fireworks" may be used within the City limits by the general public without a permit
beginning June 28 and ending at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight July 8 and again on December 31 beginning at eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M. and
ending January 1 at twelve thirty o'clock (12:30) A.M.
The City will provide a designated location at Legacy Park for the general public to use, light off and enjoy non-aerial common "safe and sane fireworks"
from July 4 through July 8, if they do not have a location elsewhere that allows them to be used. Any person using this location will be required to stay in
the designated area, maintain fire safety and must clean up any debris left behind after they are done.
Aerial and/or "dangerous fireworks" may be used without a City permit only in controlled circumstances in conjunction with the Mountain Home Fire
Department or by a professional pyrotechnics company after conferring with the Mountain Home Fire Department, for the 4th of July Celebration, the
Annual Christmas Tree Lighting Festival in December or any other time during the year that may be designated by the Mayor. (Ord. 1669, 5-14-2018)
6-7B-15: TEMPORARY FIREWORKS STANDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 81/258
Temporary fireworks stands from which non-aerial common "safe and sane fireworks" are to be sold shall be subject to the following provisions:
A. All retail sales of non-aerial common "safe and sane fireworks" shall be permitted only from within a temporary fireworks stand, and the sale from any
other building or structure is hereby prohibited.
B. The stand in which the fireworks will be stored or sold shall not be located within twenty five feet (25') of any other building nor within one hundred
feet (100') of any gasoline station or flammable liquid dispensing device or installation.
C. All such stands shall meet the requirements of the Building Code of the City of Mountain Home. No heating device may be used in a temporary
fireworks stand at any time.
D. The stand shall have exit doors at least thirty inches (30") wide at both ends of the structure and one additional door for each twenty five feet (25') of
rear wall in excess of twenty five feet (25'). All doors shall open outward from the stand and all doorways shall be kept free and clear from all
supplies and materials at all times.
E. Each stand shall be required to have a minimum of one type 2A-10B, C rated fire extinguisher and one type 2A fire extinguisher, in good working
order and easily accessible for use in case of fire, which shall be kept in immediate proximity to the location where the fireworks are retailed.
F. There shall be at least one supervisor twenty one (21) years of age or older, on duty at all times. All fireworks shall be effectively kept away from any
kind of self-service by the public, and shall be placed in a location which is unavailable and inaccessible to members of the public in capacities other
than as legal customers. No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall work at or about or be permitted inside of any stand where "safe and
sane fireworks" are sold or offered for sale.
G. No person employed as a watchman shall be permitted to remain inside of any stand when it is not open for business.
H. "No Smoking" signs shall be prominently displayed both inside and outside the stand. No smoking shall be permitted within the stand or within twenty
five feet (25') of the stand.
I. During the first selling period, no temporary stand shall be erected before June 27 of any year. The premises on which the stand is erected shall be
cleared of all structures and debris not later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of July 6.
J. No fireworks shall be discharged in or within twenty five feet (25') of any fireworks stand.
K. No person shall allow any rubbish to accumulate in or around any fireworks stand or permit a fire nuisance to exist. One noncombustible waste
container shall be required on site to collect combustible materials for disposal.
L. No fireworks shall remain unattended at any time regardless of whether the fireworks stand is open for business or not. If any fireworks are stored,
they shall only be stored at such places as are approved for storage of fireworks by the Fire Chief or his representative.
M. No stand shall be erected at a location where retail sales are not allowed under the zoning ordinance of the City of Mountain Home.
N. No dry vegetation, Christmas trees, or any other combustible material may be stored, displayed, sold, or otherwise kept within twenty five feet (25') of
a fireworks stand.
O. 1. A short term storage facility may be used for the storage of non-aerial common fireworks for a period of sixty (60) days prior to, and fifteen (15)
days after, any authorized retail sales date. The Fire Department shall be notified of the address or location of all short term storage facilities when
fireworks will not be stored in a temporary fireworks stand. If the short term storage facility is not within the boundaries of the City of Mountain Home,
then the permittee shall notify the authority having jurisdiction where the storage is to take place.
2. Short term storage is allowed in any of the following, provided it is locked or otherwise secured: a temporary fireworks stand, truck trailer, or other
vehicle. A truck trailer or other vehicle used for short term storage must remain at least twenty five feet (25') from any other inhabited building.
Short term storage may occur in a locked or secured shed, garage, barn or other building or storage container which is detached from an
inhabited building and contains no open flames, including heating and lighting sources. (Ord. 1669, 5-14-2018)
6-7B-16: GENERAL PROHIBITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except in compliance with this article, to:
Alter any fireworks;
Throw any fireworks from, into or at a moving vehicle or at any person;
Sell or use any fireworks at any time not permitted under this article;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 82/258
Use fireworks in any area that constitutes a severe fire threat based on the vegetative conditions during the current fire season as determined by the
Fire Chief, provided that notice of such areas is given in advance. (Ord. 1669, 5-14-2018)
6-7B-17: LIABILITY OF PARENTS OR GUARDIANS:
The parents, guardians or other persons having custody or control of a minor shall be liable for damage caused by the use of fireworks by the minor.
(Ord. 1669, 5-14-2018)
6-7B-18: RECORDS TO BE KEPT:
Each permittee shall be required to retain at the licensed premises while said premises is open, and at his/her principal place of business for a year
thereafter, copies of all invoices, receipts and orders evidencing the source from which he/she acquired the fireworks which he/she handled. (Ord. 1669,
5-14-2018)
6-7B-19: COMPLY WITH IDAHO STATE FIREWORKS ACT:
It shall be the duty of every person issued a non-aerial common "safe and sane fireworks permit" to comply with all the provisions of the Idaho State
Fireworks Act and this article. The conviction or violation of the aforesaid Idaho State Fireworks Act or any of the provisions of this article by the
permittee, or by any of its agents, employees, or officers shall constitute a cause, in and of itself, to deny any subsequent application for a permit. (Ord.
1669, 5-14-2018)
6-7B-20: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any of the provisions of this article, and any violation thereof shall constitute an
infraction and shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) excluding court costs and fees. An infraction is a civil public offense, not
constituting a crime, which is punishable only by a penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and for which no period of incarceration
may be imposed. There is no right to a trial by jury of a citation or complaint for an infraction and such trials shall be held before the court without a
jury. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. A second and any subsequent conviction of any violation of any of the provisions of this article within five (5) years shall constitute a misdemeanor,
and shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
C. Fireworks being used in violation of this article will be confiscated by the Mountain Home Fire Department. (Ord. 1669, 5-14-2018)
Title 7
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
WATER REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. GENERAL REGULATIONS
7-1A-1: WATER SERVICE LINES, FIRE SERVICE LINES, METER INSTALLATION AND FEES:
A. Installation And Inspection: Water service and fire service lines from the city water mains to the premises served and meter boxes, lids and valves
shall be installed by the owner or builder of the premises. Water service and fire service lines, meter boxes, lids and valves shall conform to city
specifications and shall be inspected by the city water superintendent or his designee. No excavation for the installation of water service lines, fire
service lines, meter boxes, lids or valves shall be covered until inspected by the city water superintendent or his designee.
B. Inspection And Labor Installation Fee: When water service lines, fire services lines, meter boxes, lids and valves are installed by the owner or builder
of the premises, the owner or builder shall pay the sum of thirty dollars ($30.00) to the city for an inspection fee through building services as a part of
the building permit.
C. Line Size: All water service connections shall have at least a one inch (1") service line.
D. Water Availability Fees: No water service line shall be connected to city water mains and no water service lines, fire service lines, meter boxes, lids
or valves shall be installed until the water availability fees are paid to the city through building services as a part of the building permit.
E. Street Cut Permit Required: Where the installation of a water service line, fire service line, meter box, lid or valve require the cutting into a street or
alley, the owner or builder of the premises served shall apply for and obtain a street cut permit at the city building services department and pay the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 83/258
required fees and deposit according to the provisions of title 8, chapter 4 of this code.
F. Water Meter(s): All premises connected to the city water system, except for fire service lines, must be equipped with an adequate water meter
furnished and installed by the city, but paid for by the consumer. The charge for the water meter shall be the cost of the meter to the city, plus ten
percent (10%) and shall be paid to the city through building services as a part of the building permit, prior to the installation by the city of the water
meter. When a building permit is requested for water service on a lot or parcel of land on which two (2) or more separate buildings or dwelling units
are or will be constructed, a separate water meter shall be required to be installed for each separate building or dwelling unit connected or
connecting to the city water service. For the purpose of this section, a "building or dwelling unit" shall mean any structure housing a single business
or multiple businesses or a single residence or multiple residences which is self-contained with at least four (4) walls and plumbing. Water meter
covers or lids must be completely exposed and readily accessible to city employees. Water meter covers or lids shall not be covered with any foreign
objects, such as bushes, bark, gravel, yard ornaments and so forth. The water meter must have a minimum of three feet (3') of clearance area
around the meter and an eight foot (8') clearance over the meter cover or lid to be accessible. If a water meter is covered in violation of these
provisions the city will shut off and lock the water meter until the meter is readily accessible.
G. Maintenance, Repair And Replacement Of Water Service And Fire Service Lines By The Owner Of The Premises Served: Water service lines from
the city meter assembly to the premises served and fire service lines from the city water main to the premises served shall be owned, maintained,
repaired and replaced by the owner of the premises served. (Ord. 1595, 4-8-2013)
7-1A-2: WATER RATES:
A. General: The monthly toll charge of the waterworks department shall be as established by resolution of the city council.
B. Bulk Delivery: The charge for miscellaneous bulk delivery of water, to be hauled by the purchaser, shall be as established by resolution of the city
council.
C. New Construction: At the time of the issuance of a building permit for any new construction requiring city water, a utility billing account for the city
water service shall be established in the name of the contractor or his designee by the city's utility billing department and a minimum monthly water
charge shall be billed until such time that a meter is installed. The standard turn on/new account fee shall also be charged at the time that the
account is established and all charges shall be the responsibility of the contractor or account holder. Once a water meter is requested and installed,
in addition to the monthly minimum water charge, the account holder shall be responsible for any metered water usage over and above the minimum
monthly water charge. In addition, wastewater services with a minimum monthly wastewater charge shall be added to the account. All accounts shall
remain the responsibility of the account holder until such time that a request to terminate the account has been received by the utility billing
department. If a two-family or multiple-family dwelling is being constructed, a meter shall be required to be installed for each dwelling unit and a
utility account for each meter shall be established. With prior approval of the city public works director or the city water superintendent, city water
may be used without charge to assist in the proper compacting of water and wastewater lines in public streets, when done under the supervision of
the city water superintendent.
D. Water Leaks: Within a reasonable time after a leak in a water line beyond the water meter is suspected by the city, the city will notify the account
holder of the potential leak. After the account holder has been notified by the city of the potential water leak, the account holder shall be responsible
to have the leak fixed as soon as possible and to pay the fees for any water that registers through the meter from that point forward. For accounting
and auditing purposes all water that registers through the meter prior to notification by the city of the potential leak shall not be removed from the
account, but a billing adjustment will be made charging the account holder the minimum monthly rate per equivalent dwelling unit for that water as
established by resolution of the city council. After notification of the potential leak by the city to the account holder, the city shall hold the account
holder responsible for all of the water that registers through the meter at the rate per one thousand (1,000) gallons as established by resolution of
the city council. If the account holder does not fix the leak before the next monthly billing cycle, the account holder will be charged the minimum
monthly amount as established by resolution of the city council for the first five thousand (5,000) gallons per equivalent dwelling unit and the rate as
established by resolution of the city council per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water furnished over and above the amount of five thousand (5,000)
gallons per month.
E. Definition: As used in this section, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings hereinafter given:
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms designed primarily for the occupancy by one family for living and/or sleeping purposes. (Ord. 1621, 9-22-
2014, eff. 10-1-2014)
7-1A-3: POWER TO REGULATE WATER:
The mayor and council are hereby authorized and empowered to declare an emergency whenever the council deems an emergency exists when, by
reason of drought conditions or other factors, the city wells fail to produce sufficient water for all domestic needs, and upon the declaring of such
emergency the mayor and council are hereby authorized and empowered to promulgate rules and regulations which shall be uniform in their application
to all residents of the city and which shall be designated for the purpose of regulating and restricting the use of water to ensure a sufficient supply of
water for human consumption and household needs and for firefighting purposes, during which periods of emergency the mayor and council may
restrict or prohibit the use of city water for irrigation purposes or such other purposes as the mayor and council deem less essential and urgent, and that
immediately upon the issuance of such rules or regulations, a copy thereof shall be published in the official newspaper and such rules and regulations
shall become effective immediately upon such publication. Such rules and regulations shall continue in full force and effect from the time the same are
posted until the mayor and council find that the emergency no longer exists, at which time the same shall be countermanded by a resolution duly
adopted and approved by the Council. (Ord. 611, 3-5-1962; amd. 1990 Code)
7-1A-4: DELINQUENCY; PENALTIES; CHARGES AND DEPOSIT FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 84/258
In the event the owner, tenant or property management company shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay such charges, on or before the due date indicated
on the monthly statement, the same shall become delinquent and may be turned over to a collection agency for collection and an additional fee
imposed as allowed by Idaho Code section 67-2358.
A. Discontinue Water Service: The City may discontinue water service in the event the owner, tenant or property management company responsible for
the payment of any water charges shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay such charges on or before the due date indicated on the monthly statement.
B. Failure To Establish Account: The City may discontinue water service to any dwelling, office or business establishment where the owner, tenant or
property management company responsible for the payment of any water charges, deposit or water meter installation charges fails to establish an
account with the City for water services.
C. Account Responsibility: No water service shall be provided to any residence, business or other water user unless an account is established with the
City for said premises with the owner, tenant or property management company of the property. The City shall not be required to turn off or
disconnect the City's water service at the request of the owner of the property if the account is in the name of a person other than the owner. In
situations in which multiple residential units are on one meter, the account shall be placed in the name of the owner of the residence or property
management company. The owner of the residence or the property management company shall be responsible for the total monthly utility bill.
D. Landlord/Tenant Accounts: The owner of the property or the property management company managing the property for the owner has the option of
having the City create a landlord/tenant account in the name of the owner or property manager (landlord), which would allow service to a specified
property to be transferred from the name of the owner or property manager (the landlord) and into the name of the renter or tenant when a renter or
tenant moves in and then is automatically transferred back into the name of the owner or property manager (landlord) when a renter or tenant moves
out. Such an account shall be established upon the written request and agreement of the owner or property manager as the landlord on a form
provided by the City at a reduced connection fee of ten dollars ($10.00). This option shall not be available in the case of multiple residential units on
one meter.
E. Connection/New Account/Deposit Fees: There shall be a new account fee charged for all new accounts created and a connection fee following
service stoppage due to delinquency in payment or requested temporary stoppage in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) due at the time of the
creation or renewal of services, and in addition the owner, tenant or property manager of each dwelling or other unit connecting to the City water
system shall pay a tap deposit in the amount of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for each dwelling or other unit before it is connected to the City water
system, which amount shall be paid at City Hall at the time water service is requested and said amount shall be refunded to the depositor by the City
at the time water service is discontinued, less any amount owing to the City or, if the depositor makes proper and timely payments on his or her
account for a continuous period of five (5) years, the amount of the tap deposit shall be returned to the depositor unless the property has been
placed in a landlord/tenant account program then the tap deposit will remain with the City until the property is removed from the program. No fee
shall be charged for requested temporary stoppage due to leaks or line maintenance issues. There shall be a connection fee in the amount of twenty
dollars ($20.00) for temporary turn ons for inspection or cleaning purposes which shall be limited to seventy two (72) consecutive hours.
F. Connection Of Services After Hours: There shall be, in addition to any other costs for water service, a twenty five dollar ($25.00) charge for turn on of
water services after regular business hours on working days and weekends or holidays.
G. Late Charge: There shall be a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) assessed against all water service charges not paid on or before the twentieth day of
each month. (Ord. 1678, 3-11-2019)
7-1A-5: CERTIFICATION OF LIEN BY CLERK:
(Rep. by Ord. 1548, 6-28-2010)
7-1A-6: UNLAWFUL FOR UNAUTHORIZED TURN ON:
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the Mayor or the Superintendent of Public Works to turn on water service after water service has
been terminated by the City for failure to pay for the water service, or to turn on water service prior to opening a water account. (Ord. 1052, 5-13-1985)
7-1A-7: WATER SERVICE AVAILABILITY FEE:
The owner of any property connecting to the City's water system for the first time, or changing the use of the property which results in an increase in the
equivalent dwelling unit as provided in section 7-1D-1 of this chapter, or his or her agent, shall pay to the City prior to the issuance of a water service
connection permit a water service availability fee of two thousand four hundred fifty dollars ($2,450.00) per equivalent dwelling unit as that term is
defined in and as provided by section 7-1D-1 of this chapter. The water service availability fee shall be placed in a separate city fund and shall be used
for the upgrade, replacement and expansion of existing water facilities. This fee does not pay for the labor or parts required to install the service line or
water meter. (Ord. 1477, 6-11-2007)
7-1A-8: MEDIUM PRESSURE SERVICE AREA:
There is hereby established a medium pressure booster pump service area that is defined and described as follows:
The service area can be described as any property directly served by the proposed medium pressure service area and/or booster station. This includes
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 85/258
all new development served by the city's medium pressure service water system and located north of McMurtrey Road. It also includes all
developments served directly by the existing twelve inch (12") water line located along the south side of Interstate 84. Rocky Mountain Subdivision,
Stormy Mountain Subdivision, Faith Crossing Subdivision, Greystone Subdivision, Pippin Heights Subdivision, Bollinger Subdivision, Glen Roi
Subdivision, Bel Air No. 9 Subdivision and any other subdivisions developed in the medium pressure zone will all be included in the service area as
depicted in the map on file in the city.
The owner of any property in the medium pressure service area described above that connects to the city's water system for the first time shall pay to
the city prior to the issuance of a water service connection permit a medium pressure service area fee in the amount of four hundred dollars ($400.00).
(Ord. 1563, 4-11-2011)
7-1A-9: WATER RIGHTS FEE:
A. Intent: It is the purpose of these provisions to ensure that an adequate and safe supply of public water is available to serve the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of Mountain Home.
B. Applicability: A water rights fee is hereby established that shall apply to all new development within the city and to property newly annexed into the
city. New development shall include the construction of new residential, commercial and industrial structures, and subdivisions of land. This section
shall not apply to the remodel of structures and redevelopment of property where there is an existing city water service connection and the
anticipated development will not represent an increase in water usage or to parcels of land less than one acre in size.
C. Water Rights Fee Required:
1. A water rights fee in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per acre or proportion thereof shall be required for all new residential,
commercial and industrial developments.
2. The water rights fee shall be imposed upon and paid at the time of the annexation of property that was not previously a part of the city, at the time
of the approval of the final plat upon the subdivision of property that is already in the city, and at the time of the connection of the property to the
city's water system if the property is already a part of the city and is not being subdivided but is being developed. Upon approval of the city council,
the time at which the fees are paid may be extended but must be paid prior to the issuance of building permits.
3. The water rights fee shall be placed in a separate city fund and accumulated for the purchase of water rights for the city, to implement a
wastewater reuse program, develop groundwater wells or surface water resources for additional irrigation and domestic water supplies that would
reduce the demands on the city's water system and effectively extend the service population of the city's existing water rights.
D. Existing Water Rights:
1. As a condition of the connection of property to the city's water system the owner or developer of property that is being annexed to the city,
property that is already in the city and being subdivided, or property that is already a part of the city and is not being subdivided but is being
developed shall grant to the city a first right to purchase any water rights appurtenant to the land being annexed, subdivided or developed.
2. The city shall have the right to purchase any water rights appurtenant to the land being annexed, subdivided or developed at their fair market
value within five (5) years of the connection of the property to the city's water system.
3. The purchase of the water rights by the city shall be contingent on the Idaho department of water resources approving the transfer of the water
rights to the city. The city shall purchase only the water rights for which the transfer to the city has been approved by the Idaho department of
water resources.
4. Costs of the transfer shall be paid by the developer or landowner, unless otherwise agreed by the city. (Ord. 1457, 10-10-2006)
7-1A-10: HYDRANT METERS:
The city of Mountain Home shall provide water meters that can be attached to fire hydrants for the use of contractors and others in locations within the
city limits where there are currently no other available water hookups. No water meter shall be installed except those water meters provided by the city.
Before taking possession of the hydrant meter, the person taking possession of the meter shall pay to the city a deposit of eight hundred dollars
($800.00). Prior to connecting to the city's water system with the hydrant meter, the person or entity using the meter shall obtain from the city a permit
allowing the connection to the fire hydrant and specifying the location and any terms applicable to the connection permit. In addition to the deposit, the
person renting the hydrant meter from the city shall pay to the city a monthly rental and minimum water usage fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
month or portion thereof that the person uses or retains possession of the hydrant meter. In addition to the monthly rental and water usage fee, the
person using the hydrant meter shall pay for any water used over and above the minimum amount of ten thousand (10,000) gallons per month at the
current bulk rate as established by resolution of the city council for water used during the month. The person renting the hydrant meter shall return the
meter to the city public works department once each month so the city can determine from the meter the amount of water used during the preceding
month and the person using the meter shall pay to the city any amounts due. If the meter is not returned to the city public works department each
month, the city may go upon the premises where the meter is located and remove the hydrant meter and the water connection to the city's fire hydrant
and terminate the permit. If the city has to go to the premises to read or remove the hydrant meter, a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be imposed upon
the user and paid to the city by the user. The eight hundred dollar ($800.00) deposit shall be returned to the person renting the hydrant meter upon the
return to the city of the hydrant meter in an undamaged condition, less any money owing to the city. (Ord. 1565, 5-23-2011; amd. Ord. 1621, 9-22-2014,
eff. 10-1-2014)
ARTICLE B. WATER DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 1598, 4-8-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 86/258
ARTICLE C. CROSS CONNECTIONS
7-1C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health of water consumers of the city by the control of actual and potential cross connections with the
city water supply in compliance with the rules for public drinking water systems that requires purveyors to protect from potential contamination (IDAPA
58.01.08.552.06). (Ord. 1601, 4-8-2013)
7-1C-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following are established as definitions for the purposes of this article:
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply (your local water system)
from any source or sources other than the intended source. Back siphonage is the flowing back of used, contaminated, or polluted water from a
plumbing fixture, irrigation system or vessel into a potable water supply due to a negative pressure in the supply piping.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device to counteract back pressure or prevent back siphonage.
CITY: The city of Mountain Home, Idaho.
CONTAMINATION: The entry into or presence in a public water supply of any substance which may be deleterious to the health or quality of water.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any actual or potential arrangement whereby a public or a consumer's potable water system is connected to any other source
or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable water system used water, water from any source other than an approved
public water system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water,
sewage or other waste or liquids of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply as a result of
backflow.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: Any system or water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic uses, including source, treatment,
storage, transmission and distribution facilities, where water is furnished to any collection or number of individuals or is made available to the public for
human consumption or domestic use.
SUPERINTENDENT: The superintendent of the water department for the city of Mountain Home, Idaho. (Ord. 935, 7-28-1980; amd. Ord. 1570, 11-14-
2011)
7-1C-3: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL:
No city provided water service connected to any premises shall be installed or maintained where a cross connection is known to exist and has not been
expeditiously removed or the proper backflow prevention device installed. The installation or maintenance of a cross connection which will endanger the
water quality of the potable water supply of the city shall be unlawful and is hereby prohibited. Any such cross connection now existing or hereafter
installed is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the same shall be abated. The control or elimination of cross connections shall be in
accordance with this article and the rules and regulations of the Idaho department of health and welfare, particularly IDAPA 58.01.08.552.06, together
with the latest edition of appropriate manuals of standard practice pertaining to cross connection control, approved by the state of Idaho department of
environmental quality. The city may adopt rules and regulations as necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1601, 4-8-2013)
7-1C-4: USE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
A. Backflow prevention devices shall be installed at the service connection or within any premises where cross connections are known to occur where
toxic or hazardous materials are handled such that should backflow or back siphonage occur, a health hazard may result.
B. Those facilities requiring cross connection control include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Sewage treatment plant;
2. Chemical or other industrial plant;
3. Agricultural chemical storage, formulation and distribution facilities;
4. Petroleum storage facilities;
5. Mortuaries;
6. Hospitals;
7. Piers and docks;
8. Laboratories;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 87/258
9. Food processing plant;
10. Tank truck fill stations;
11. Car washes;
12. Fire sprinkler systems;
13. Other facilities specified by the director of the Idaho department of health and welfare, department of environmental quality or the city.
C. The superintendent or licensed backflow tester shall make annual inspections of the above facilities and other premises connected to the city water
system to locate any cross connections and shall require that they be eliminated. (Ord. 1601, 4-8-2013)
7-1C-5: TYPE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES REQUIRED:
When a backflow prevention device is required on a service line, the type of backflow prevention device shall be selected from the AWWA
"Recommended Practice For Backflow Prevention And Cross Connection Control (M14) Manual" and commensurate with the degree of hazard and the
availability of qualified maintenance services.
A. In cases where annual testing and repair of mechanical devices is not possible, an air gap separation shall be required.
B. An air gap separation or reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be required where the water system may be contaminated with
sewage or other hazardous or toxic substances which may have an effect on the health of the consumer.
C. A double check valve assembly, an air gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the water
system may be contaminated with a substance which may be aesthetically objectionable, but not hazardous to the health of the consumer. Approved
double check valves or reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall successfully pass performance tests of the University Of
Southern California Foundation For Cross-Connection Control And Hydraulic Research and meet AWWA standard (C510 or C511). (Ord. 1601, 4-8-
2013)
7-1C-6: INSTALLATION OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
Backflow prevention devices required by this article shall be installed at the service connection meter or within any premises where cross connections
are known to occur. The device shall be located so as to be readily accessible for maintenance and testing. No part of the device shall be submerged.
All such devices shall be installed under the supervision of the superintendent and with his approval. (Ord. 1601, 4-8-2013)
7-1C-7: INSPECTION OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
A. Backflow prevention devices installed pursuant to this article shall be inspected and tested annually or more often if deemed necessary by the
superintendent. All such tests shall be performed by a backflow assembly tester licensed by the Idaho bureau of occupational licenses in
accordance with the University Of Southern California Foundation "Manual Of Cross-Connection Control" who shall forward a copy of the test report
to the city of Mountain Home public works department within ten (10) calendar days of completing the testing, all at the consumer's expense, and in
any of the following cases:
1. The plumbing in the facility is so complex or variable that it is not possible to assure through periodic inspections that cross connections do not
exist.
2. Entrance to the facility to inspect for cross connections is denied.
3. Cross connections are known to exist in a facility and have not been eliminated.
Additional action by the superintendent including terminating water services will be taken in order to protect the water system from contamination.
B. When any device is found to be defective, the device shall be repaired or replaced and tested by a backflow assembly tester licensed by the Idaho
bureau of occupational licenses within ten (10) calendar days of the date the device is found to be defective, at the consumer's expense.
C. The failure of any consumer to cooperate in the inspection, installation, maintenance and testing of cross connection and backflow prevention
devices as required by this article and state rules and regulations shall be grounds for the termination of water service to the premises or, in the
alternative, the installation of an air gap separation at the consumer's expense. (Ord. 1601, 4-8-2013)
7-1C-8: LAWN SPRINKLERS OR IRRIGATION SYSTEMS:
A. Potable water supplies to systems having no pumps or connections for pumping equipment, and no chemical injection or provisions for chemical
injection, shall be protected from backflow by one of the following devices:
1. Atmospheric vacuum breaker.
2. Pressure vacuum breaker.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 88/258
3. Reduced pressure backflow preventer.
B. Where sprinkler and irrigation systems have pumps, connections for pumping equipment, or auxiliary air tanks or are otherwise capable of creating
back pressure, the potable water supply shall be protected by the following type of device if the backflow device is located upstream from the source
of back pressure:
1. Reduced pressure backflow preventer.
C. Where systems have a backflow device installed downstream from a potable water supply pump or a potable water supply pump connection, the
device shall be one of the following:
1. Atmospheric vacuum breaker.
2. Pressure vacuum breaker.
3. Reduced pressure backflow preventer.
D. Where systems include a chemical injector or any provisions for chemical injection, the potable water supply shall be protected by the following:
1. Reduced pressure backflow preventer.
2. Air gap. (Ord. 1601, 4-8-2013)
7-1C-9: NEW CONSTRUCTION:
City water service shall not be connected or provided to any newly constructed premises until the same has been inspected by the state plumbing
inspector and the city water superintendent for possible cross connections and been approved as being free from the same, or, if the installation of a
backflow prevention device is determined to be necessary, until the same has been properly selected, installed and tested, in accordance with AWWA
"Recommended Practice For Backflow Prevention And Cross Connection Control (M14) Manual" and University Of Southern California Foundation
"Manual Of Cross-Connection Control" and has been approved by the state plumbing inspector and the city water superintendent. (Ord. 1601, 4-8-
2013)
7-1C-10: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
In the event an improper cross connection is not corrected or in the event the city is refused access to any property for the purpose of determining
whether or not cross connections exist, delivery of water to the property shall cease until the deficiency is corrected to the city's satisfaction. In addition,
the city may effect the necessary repairs or modifications at the expense of the property owner and refuse delivery of water to the property until the cost
thereof shall have been paid. (Ord. 1570, 11-14-2011)
7-1C-11: PERMITS REQUIRED:
A permit shall be obtained from both the state division of building safety plumbing bureau and the city of Mountain Home for the installation of all
backflow prevention devices installed pursuant to this article. In addition to the usual permit, all backflow prevention devices shall be inspected and
approved by the state plumbing inspector and the city of Mountain Home. (Ord. 1570, 11-14-2011)
7-1C-12: CROSS CONNECTION FEE:
A charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) is hereby assessed and imposed for each lawn sprinkler or lawn irrigation system installed or connected to the city's
water system after the effective date hereof. Such fee shall be paid to the city of Mountain Home at the time the application for the permit for the
backflow prevention device is submitted to the city. (Ord. 1570, 11-14-2011)
7-1C-13: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any provision of this article or any rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article by the city shall be subject to the
penalties as provided for in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1570, 11-14-2011)
7-1C-14: SEVERABILITY:
If any one or more sections, subsections or sentences of this article are for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article and the same shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1570, 11-14-2011)
ARTICLE D. EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT TABLE
7-1D-1: EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT TABLE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 89/258
The following equivalent dwelling unit table is hereby adopted by the City of Mountain Home to be used in the initial calculation to determine the number
of equivalent dwelling units per type of use. It is also used for the purpose of calculating and determining water and wastewater availability fees and
wherever applicable to the calculation of monthly user fees. If a use is not specifically listed, City staff will work to determine the appropriate EDU
calculation.
The City of Mountain Home will audit the accounts of all commercial users after the first year of operation, and approximately every three (3) years after
that. The average monthly consumption will be calculated to ensure that the consumption of water and the set EDU rate used for the monthly user fee is
consistent. Upon this review the City of Mountain Home will adjust the billing account EDUs accordingly, either up or down.
At any time, but no sooner than twelve (12) months after opening an account, the user may request a review of the actual water usage in comparison to
the set EDU rate as it applies to the monthly user fees.
Any alteration to a business premises for which a building permit is required, expansion of the property, or expansion/alteration of the business's
operations shall trigger an automatic review of the account and recalculation of the number of EDUs to be used in calculation of the monthly user fees.
For the purpose of this section a fixture is any feature that has a water connection. It is also encouraged that landscaping is to have a separate water
meter.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT TABLE
Classification
Equivalent
Dwelling Units
Agricultural:
General Staff calculated
Commercial:
Bank or savings and loan: 1.0
Per each fixture over 10 fixtures 0.1
Bar: 2.0
Per each seat over 20 0.05
Barbershop, beauty salon: 1.0
Per each fixture over 10 fixtures 0.1
Bowling alley: 1.0
Additional per lane over 3 0.2
Car dealer: 1.0
Per each fixture over 10 fixtures 0.1
Car lot - no repair or wash facility 1.0
Car wash:
Per bay 2.0
Convenience store: 1.0
Per each fixture over 10 fixtures 0.1
Doctor, dentist, medical professional: 1.0
Per each fixture over 10 fixtures 0.1
Drugstore: 1.0
Per each fixture over 10 fixtures 0.1
Fitness studio/gym: 1.0
Per each fixture over 10 fixtures 0.1
Florist: 1.0
Per each fixture over 10 fixtures 0.1
Garage:
Automotive repair 1.0
Additional per stall over 2 0.5
Grocery store: 1.0
Additional with bakery 3.0
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 90/258
Additional with butcher 2.0
Additional with deli 2.0
Additional with floral 1.0
Additional with pharmacy 1.0
Hardware store: 1.0
Per each fixture over 10 fixtures 0.1
Hospital: 5.0
Additional per bed 0.3
Hotel/motel:
First unit 1.0
Additional per unit 0.25
Kitchenette unit (with sink and cooktop) 0.5
Breakfast area 0.5
Conference facility 1.0
Fixtures related to conference facility per each fixture over 10 fixtures 0.1
Laundry room 2.0
Pools up to 500 square feet 1.0
Pools over 500 square feet 2.0
Laundry:
Self-service up to 10 machines 4.0
Additional machines over 10 0.25
Commercial cleaning company Staff calculated
Office building: 1.0
Per each fixture over 10 fixtures 0.1
Restaurant/cafe - sit down: 2.0
Per each seat over 20 seats 0.05
Additional for drive-up window 1.0
Restaurant - drive-in (no seating): 2.0
Per each parking space over 5 spaces 0.2
Additional for drive-up window 1.0
Restaurant - fast food: 2.0
Per each seat over 20 seats 0.05
Additional for drive-up window 1.0
Retail store: 1.0
Per each fixture over 10 fixtures 0.1
School/daycare:
Up to 25 students 1.0
Per student over 25 based on maximum occupancy 0.04
Service station - gas and restroom only 1.0
Spa/health center/salon: 1.0
Per each fixture over 10 fixtures 0.1
Tire store: 1.0
Per each fixture over 10 fixtures 0.1
Industrial:
Airport terminal Staff calculated
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 91/258
General use Staff calculated
Warehouse/storage unit: 1.0
Per each fixture over 10 fixtures 0.1
Public/semipublic/assembly/religious:
Assembly hall or auditorium:
Up to 50 seats 1.0
Per each seat over 50 based on maximum occupancy of largest room 0.02
Kitchen 1.0
Fixtures related to kitchen per each fixture over 10 fixtures 0.1
Church See assembly hall
Club or lodge See assembly hall
Jail: 5.0
Additional per bed 0.5
Post Office: 1.0
Per each fixture over 10 fixtures 0.1
Theater/performing arts center See assembly hall
Residential:
Campsite (RV parks):
Any site occupied by the same RV for 6 months or longer 1.0
First campsite 1.0
For each additional campsite 0.25
Additional for shower/laundry rooms 2.0
Additional for RV dump 4.0
Pools up to 500 square feet 1.0
Pools over 500 square feet 2.0
Group care facility/congregate living facility: 1.0
Additional per bed 0.3
Kitchen 1.0
Laundry 1.0
Mobile home and trailer park:
Per each unit 1.0
Residential per each dwelling unit 1.0
Other:
General:
For each 5,000 gallons of wintertime monthly consumption 1.0
Multiple entities in 1 business establishment Staff calculated
In the event a system user shall consider themselves aggrieved by the determination of the Public Works Department/building official relative to the
equivalent dwelling unit calculation on their property, or to their business, they shall within ten (10) days serve written notice to the City Clerk that they
appeal the findings of the Public Works Department/building official to the City Council. The City Council shall within ten (10) days appoint a time and
place for hearing the appeal, said hearing to be conducted in accordance with section 1-10-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1671, 6-25-2018)
Chapter 2
SEWER REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. SEWER DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 92/258
(Rep. by Ord. 1599, 4-8-2013)
ARTICLE B. WASTEWATER DISPOSAL
7-2B-1: PURPOSE:
For the purpose of providing a more equitable distribution of the costs and expenses of maintenance, operation, upkeep and repair of the wastewater
system and wastewater disposal facilities of the city and for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants, it is hereby determined
that a wastewater service charge should be assessed and collected against all property, the owners thereof and the inhabitants of the city, who are
served or benefited by the wastewater system and wastewater disposal plant. (Ord. 1569, 10-11-2011, eff. 3-1-2012)
7-2B-2: WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES:
The cost of collecting and treating city wastewater is based on the volume and strength of wastewater discharged into Mountain Home's system.
Therefore, user rates are based on the user's estimated wastewater volume and strength. Volume is projected by using the customer's average monthly
water meter readings obtained during the preceding winter months. For purposes of this section, "winter" shall be defined as the months of November
through February, inclusive. If this water use does not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons per month, the customer is charged the monthly minimum
rate. If it does exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons per month, the strength of discharge is estimated by placing the customer in a user group which
contributes approximately the same strength of wastewater, then assessing an additional fee per one thousand (1,000) gallons. A full description of
wastewater rate calculation is shown below:
A. Residential: The monthly toll charge of the wastewater department shall be as established by resolution of the city council. The wastewater amount
shall be calculated to obtain an average as stated above.
B. Nonresidential: For all nonresidential users, the monthly toll charge of the wastewater department shall be as established by resolution of the city
council. The wastewater amount shall be calculated to obtain an average as stated above.
WASTEWATER RATES
Type
Residential Strength
Equivalency Multiplier
Auto repair/garage 1.0
Barbershop/beauty salon 1.0
Bowling 1.0
Car wash 0.95
Church 1.0
City/county buildings 1.0
Commercial laundry 1.07
Drive-in restaurant 1.13
Homes 1.0
Hotel/motel 1.0
Laundry 0.95
Medical (hospital, doctor clinic) 1.0
Mobile home (metered) 1.0
Multi-dwelling units 1.0
Office 1.0
Rest home/per bed 1.0
Retail and grocery store 1.0
School 1.0
Service station 1.0
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 93/258
Sit down restaurant 1.13
Tavern 1.13
Unmetered connections 1.0
Warehouse 1.0
C. Industrial Users: Industrial users will be billed according to the formulas and rates as established by resolution of the city council.
D. Definition: As used in this section, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings hereinafter given:
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms designed primarily for the occupancy by one family for living and/or sleeping purposes.
E. Annual Review: The wastewater use charges established under the provisions of this section shall be reviewed annually and revised periodically for
the purpose of reflecting actual costs in the wastewater use charges, of operation, maintenance, replacement and financing, as well as to maintain
the equitability of the user charges with respect to the distribution of the costs of operation to each user in proportion to his contribution to the total
wastewater load. (Ord. 1621, 9-22-2014, eff. 10-1-2014)
7-2B-3: DISPOSITION OF CHARGES:
All wastewater service charges collected under authority of this article shall be deposited and credited to the wastewater fund. The city treasurer shall
keep a separate account for said fund, which account shall show all receipts and expenditures for the maintenance, upkeep and repair of the
wastewater service system and said fund shall be used and maintained for such and for construction, enlargement or extension of the wastewater
disposal facilities. (Ord. 1569, 10-11-2011, eff. 3-1-2012)
7-2B-4: BILLINGS; DELINQUENCIES:
All billings for wastewater service charges shall be made by the clerk either by mail or personal service and the rates or charges shall be paid at the
clerk's office. All billings for each month's service charge shall be due and payable upon receipt and shall become delinquent if not paid on or before the
twentieth day of the month immediately following the receipt of the bill by the customer. There shall be a late charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) assessed
against all wastewater customers for service charges not paid on or before the twentieth day of each month. In the event the occupant or property
owner shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay such charges within thirty (30) days of the date when due the same shall become delinquent and may be
turned over to a collection agency for collection and an additional fee imposed as allowed by Idaho Code section 67-2358. If any wastewater service
charge becomes delinquent and is not paid, the clerk may notify the person in charge of wastewater maintenance, which notification shall be in writing,
and shall instruct such person to disconnect the wastewater hookup and plug the same for nonpayment of said service charges. (Ord. 1577, 2-13-2012)
7-2B-5: DISPOSITION OF MONEY:
All monies collected by the clerk under the provisions of this article shall be paid over to the treasurer in the same manner as required for the payment
of other city money. (Ord. 595, 5-15-1961)
7-2B-6: BOARD OF EQUALIZATION CREATED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1594, 1-14-2013)
7-2B-7: WASTEWATER INSPECTION FEE:
A charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) is hereby assessed and imposed for each connection to the city wastewater disposal system, which shall be known
as the wastewater inspection fee. The fee shall be for the inspection of a wastewater line to the city wastewater disposal system. All fees collected
pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the city wastewater fund. The wastewater inspection fee shall be paid at the development services office at
the time of the issuance of the building permit for any structure or trailer space that is to be connected to the city wastewater system, or at the time of
the connection to the city wastewater system, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 1569, 10-11-2011, eff. 3-1-2012)
7-2B-8: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any substance into the wastewater disposal system which shall be deleterious to such system or
which shall endanger the employees, operation or treatment process of the wastewater disposal plant or which shall cause encrustations, chemically or
physically attached, so as to corrode or erode the wastewater lines or wastewater disposal system of the city. These substances shall include, but not
be limited to, the following materials:
A. Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters.
B. Gasoline, benzene or other flammable and/or explosive solid, liquid or gaseous petroleum derivative.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 94/258
C. Waters or wastes having a pH less than 5.5 or greater than 9.5.
D. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in wastewater facilities, or other interference with
the proper operation of the wastewater works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either
whole or ground by garbage grinders.
E. Fats, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify
or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees Fahrenheit (32F) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150F) (0 and 65
centigrade).
F. Iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic heavy metals.
G. Radioactive wastes or isotopes.
H. Unusual biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities so as to constitute a significant load on
the wastewater treatment works.
I. Additionally, it shall be unlawful to dump septic tank and chemical toilet septage at any point, other than that designated by the city public works
director. Such dumpings shall only be undertaken with the knowledge of and under the supervision of city personnel.
The council may, upon notice, require any users of the wastewater facilities to install separators, traps and chemical, physical or biochemical
processes for preliminary treatment so as to assure that the wastewater contributed from the user's property will meet the requirements of this
section. (Ord. 1569, 10-11-2011, eff. 3-1-2012)
7-2B-9: CONNECTION OF BUILDINGS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
Whenever it appears to be in the best interests, and for the promotion of the health, safety and well being of the inhabitants of the city, the mayor and
council may enter into a contract on behalf of the city with individuals, groups or association of persons, or corporations owning property outside of the
city limits, to connect such property to the city wastewater system, if the following circumstances exist:
A. Such property is not adjacent to the city limits or is otherwise incapable of being annexed to the city due to factors beyond the control of the property
owner.
B. Said property owner is willing to, and does, enter into a contract agreeing, among other things:
1. The proposed wastewater connection and service lines will conform to all requirements of law and regulations and will be subject to inspection by
the public works director both prior to the connection and during all times thereafter that such service is furnished.
2. The proposed wastewater connection will comply with all requirements contained in this article for wastewater disposal lines, and meets all other
specifications of city, state and federal laws.
3. The property owner will pay all expenses of installing and maintaining said wastewater connection and service lines, and in the event the city must
perform any work thereon, that he will reimburse the city for the reasonable value or costs of such work.
C. Said contract shall automatically terminate when and if such property ever becomes capable of being annexed with the property owner's cooperation
and consent.
D. Said contract shall provide for the property owner to pay an agreed deposit, and a monthly charge for such wastewater service, comparable to
monthly charges made to other properties outside the city. The amount of such deposit and rate shall be set by the city, and it must be at least equal
to, or exceed, the deposits and rates charged for similar service to residents within the city. However, that portion of the applied rate that accounts
for the operation and maintenance cost of the wastewater treatment facility (but not necessarily for its capital amortization) shall not differ from the
operation and maintenance cost as applied to rates assessed within the city. (Ord. 1569, 10-11-2011, eff. 3-1-2012)
7-2B-10: BULK SEPTAGE DEPOSIT OR DUMPING:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, dump, place or leave septage, wastewater or effluent from any septic tank, cesspool or other private
wastewater disposal system within the corporate limits of the city, except at site(s) designated by the city's public works director. Recreational
vehicles will use approved RV dump stations.
For disposal of such septage, wastewater or effluent, a charge per gallon shall be made, imposed and collected, but such charge or fee shall never
be less than established by resolution of the city council for each use or act of dumping such septage, wastewater or effluent. The fee or charge
shall be based on the actual gallonage or wastewater dumped. An additional fee to be established by resolution of the city council shall be charged
for dumping wastewater after scheduled hours. All charges and fees so collected shall be deposited in the wastewater fund in the manner prescribed
in section 7-2B-3 of this article. (Ord. 1621, 9-22-2014, eff. 10-1-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 95/258
B. Any vehicle used for the purpose of transporting or hauling septage, wastewater or effluent shall be watertight and airtight.
C. Every person shall comply with all applicable codes and ordinances of the city, and all standards, rules and regulations relating to health and safety
prescribed by the department of health and welfare of the state and the Central district health department. Every person shall give notice, during
scheduled working hours, to the city's public works department or, after scheduled working hours, to the city on call public works technician of their
intent to dump wastes. Failure to comply will result in loss of disposal privilege in the municipal wastewater system. (Ord. 1569, 10-11-2011, eff. 3-1-
2012)
7-2B-11: WASTEWATER SERVICE AVAILABILITY FEE:
The owner of any property connecting to the city's wastewater system for the first time, or changing the use of the property which results in an increase
in the equivalent dwelling unit as provided in section 7-1D-1 of this title, or his or her agent, shall pay to the city prior to the issuance of a wastewater
service hookup permit a wastewater service availability fee of four thousand two hundred dollars ($4,200.00) per equivalent dwelling unit as that term is
defined in and as provided by section 7-1D-1 of this title. The wastewater service availability fee shall be placed in a separate city fund and shall be
used for the upgrade, replacement and expansion of existing wastewater facilities. This fee does not pay for the labor or parts required to install a
connection to the existing wastewater collection system. (Ord. 1569, 10-11-2011, eff. 3-1-2012)
7-2B-12: NEW SEPTIC TANKS PROHIBITED:
Property owners within the city limits of the city of Mountain Home who have septic tanks are encouraged to discontinue the use of the septic tanks and
begin using city wastewater facilities. No new septic tank installations shall be permitted inside the city limits, unless there is no adequate wastewater
main line within two hundred feet (200') of said property line. (Ord. 1600, 4-8-2013)
7-2B-13: MAINTENANCE, REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT OF WASTEWATER SERVICE LINES:
Wastewater service lines from the premises served to the wastewater main connection shall be owned, maintained, repaired and replaced by the owner
of the premises served. (Ord. 1600, 4-8-2013)
Chapter 3
GARBAGE
7-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings herein ascribed:
ASHES: The solid waste products of coal, wood and other fuels used for heating and cooking, from all public and private establishments and from all
residences.
BULKY WASTE: Large appliances, including stoves, water tanks, washing machines, or furniture, and other waste materials with weights or volumes
greater than those allowed for containers, which may be collected separately. Bulky waste does not include construction debris and demolition waste,
dead animals, hazardous materials, or stable matter.
CANS: All aluminum, steel and tin coated cans.
CARRYOUT SERVICE: A service by which contractor's collection personnel enter a residential customer's property to collect solid waste and recyclable
materials. This service may include an additional fee.
CITY: The city of Mountain Home, Idaho.
COMMERCIAL: An establishment used for sales, office, manufacturing, production, entertainment, service or a similar use, whether for profit or not.
Includes for profit and not for profit enterprises operated in residences or other structures, institutions, agricultural operations, short term housing, such
as hotels and motels, mobile home parks, and any apartment or other multi-unit complexes in excess of four (4) residential units.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS: Waste building materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations.
CONTAINER: A can, bag, wheeled trash tote or other authorized receptacle designed to prevent spillage or leakage of trash or recyclables. May be
customer owned or contractor supplied.
CONTRACTOR: The person or company with whom the city has entered into a contract to provide waste contractor services for the city.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD: Paper in which a portion has been made to have a wavy surface, alternating ridges and grooves, and is placed between
two (2) flat surfaces for the sake of strength and which is commonly used to form boxes.
COUNCIL: Mountain Home city council.
COUNTY: The county of Elmore, Idaho.
CUSTOMER: An occupant or owner of any residential or commercial premises, including a household, business, institution or other establishment in the
service area for which solid waste and/or recycling service is or has been provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 96/258
DWELLING: A separate household or residence, including residential units up to a fourplex, located in the service area, occupied by a person or group
of persons and not used for commercial purposes, which provides for waste and/or recycling collection in customer owned containers or contractor
supplied wheeled trash totes. Each household or residence is billed as an individual unit.
FORCE MAJEURE: Acts of God or the public enemy, fire, floods, epidemics, earthquakes, acts of terrorism, quarantine restrictions, labor stoppages,
and strikes not created by contractor.
GARBAGE: All putrescible wastes, from all public and private establishments and from all residences except sewage and body wastes, animal offal and
carcasses of dead animals, and recognized industrial byproducts.
GLASS: All bottles and jars, made of silica, sand, soda ash, and limestone, being transparent or translucent, used for packaging or bottling of various
materials.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance, or article which is designated by the United States environmental protection
agency or appropriate agency of the state of Idaho to be hazardous as defined by or pursuant to federal or state law.
HOUSEHOLD: A separate dwelling or residence, including residential units up to a fourplex, located in the service area, occupied by a person or group
of persons and not used for commercial purposes, which provides for waste and/or recycling collection in customer owned containers or contractor
supplied wheeled trash totes. Each dwelling or residence is billed as an individual unit.
MAGAZINES: All magazines and catalogs.
MEDICAL WASTE: Waste which may contain infectious agents generated or produced as a result of the diagnosis, treatment or immunization of human
beings or animals, or related research, including, but not limited to, noncontainerized sharps, infectious laboratory waste, waste from the production of
bacteria, viruses or spores, human surgery specimens, infectious animal parts, or trace amounts of chemotherapeutic agents affixed to items used for
the administration of same. This definition of medical waste excludes de minimis quantities of containerized sharps or other medical waste.
MIXED PAPER: All paper, junk mail, envelopes and cereal boxes.
MOTOR OIL: All petroleum based or synthetic oil that is used as a lubricant for internal combustion engines.
MOTOR VEHICLES: Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles,
buses, motor bikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers and trailers.
MULTI-FAMILY COMPLEX: A building or a group of buildings or structures in the service area with two (2) or more units, with trash and recycling
collection in centralized commercial sized customer owned or contractor supplied containers, excluding wheeled trash totes. All units are billed
collectively on one bill.
NEWSPAPERS: All newsprint grade paper, including inserts which come in the newspaper.
PLASTICS: All plastic bottles with threaded necks and: a) 1 PETE (polyethylene terephthalate); b) 2 HDPE (high density polyethylene); or c) 3 V
(polyvinyl chloride) on them.
PREMISES: Land, buildings or other structures or parts thereof upon or in which refuse is stored.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: All materials, as designated herein, which have passed through their originally intended usage and which have been
discarded or placed for collection by their owner and that would otherwise become solid waste and can be source separated, collected, processed, and
returned to the economic stream in the form of raw materials or products whether or not such products have monetary value.
RECYCLING RECEPTACLE: Tote or container serving as a receptacle for recyclable materials.
REFUSE: All solid wastes of the community, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, swill and all other putrescible and nonputrescible wastes except
sewage, from all public and private establishments and residences.
RESIDENT OR OWNER: Every person, including lessees and occupants, in possession, charge, custody, or control of any residence or commercial
establishment within the service area where solid waste and/or recyclable materials are accumulated.
RESIDENTIAL: Includes single-family units, duplexes, triplexes and fourplexes.
RUBBISH: All nonputrescible wastes including, but not limited to, paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, wood furniture, bedding, metals, tin cans, metal
frames, automobile frames and parts, quantities of rock, pieces of concrete, glass, crockery and other mineral wastes except for ashes, from all public
and private establishments and from all residences. Provided, further, that rubbish shall not include earth and waste from building operations, nor shall it
include solid wastes resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations.
SERVICE AREA: Incorporated areas of the city of Mountain Home. Includes all properties owned by the city.
SOLID WASTE: Trash generated by residential, industrial, commercial, institutional and agricultural customers, excluding hazardous materials.
STABLE MATTER: All manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or about a stable or any animal, livestock, or poultry enclosure, and
resulting from the keeping of animals, poultry, or livestock. Stable matter is considered commercial waste.
SWILL: Every refuse accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or
storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit and vegetables, except coffee grounds, animal offal and carcasses of dead animals.
TOTE: A plastic trash container that is ninety five (95) gallons in size with wheels and handles for easy movement to and from the curb, and with an
attached lid.
TRASH: Solid matter of animal, vegetable, metal or other materials discarded for landfilling, including bulky waste, construction and demolition waste,
and dead animals weighing ten (10) pounds or less. The definition of trash specifically excludes materials that have been properly set aside because
they contain hazardous materials, medical waste, and/or dead animals weighing over ten (10) pounds.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 97/258
WASTE CONTRACTOR: The person or company appointed by the city to oversee the city's solid waste management system.
WASTE MATERIAL(S): Solid waste, yard waste and recyclable materials.
YARD: A measurement of the cubic volume of solid waste and recyclable material.
YARD WASTES: Plant materials (grass, branches, brush, flowers, tree wood waste, etc.) commonly thrown away in the course of maintaining yards and
gardens, and other biodegradable waste, including leaves and Christmas trees. (Ord. 1588, 9-24-2012)
7-3-2: MANDATORY COLLECTION BY CITY:
All refuse or waste accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city or its waste contractor. No person shall collect,
convey over the streets or alleys of the city, or dispose of, any refuse or waste accumulated in the city, except as follows:
A. Exception For Actual Producers: This chapter shall not prohibit the actual producers of refuse, or the owners of premises upon which refuse has
accumulated, from personally collecting, conveying and disposing of such refuse; provided such producers or owners comply with the provisions of
this chapter and with any other governing laws, ordinances, rules or regulations. The collecting, conveying and disposing of refuse by the producer
thereof or the owner of the premises upon which it has accumulated shall not relieve said person from the payment of the charges provided for
herein.
B. Exception For Outside Collectors: This chapter shall not prohibit collectors of refuse from outside of the city from hauling such refuse over city
streets; provided such collectors comply with the provisions of this chapter and with any other governing laws, ordinances, rules or regulations.
C. Exception For Governmental Entities: This chapter shall not prohibit other governmental entities from collecting, conveying and disposing of their
own refuse in such a manner as they deem in their best interest, including, but not limited to, the utilization of their own equipment or other
contractors not associated with the city, provided such collectors comply with the other provisions of this chapter and with any other governing laws,
ordinances, rules or regulations. (Ord. 1588, 9-24-2012)
7-3-3: COLLECTION SUPERVISED BY MAYOR OR HIS DESIGNEE:
All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city or its waste contractor under the supervision of the mayor or
his designee. The mayor or his designee may make rules and regulations governing the collection, conveyance and disposal of refuse as he deems
advisable, subject to the approval of the city council. Any rules and regulations adopted by the council through the passage of an ordinance shall be
published once in the official newspaper of the city prior to taking effect and shall be available at the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 1588, 9-24-2012)
7-3-4: CONTAINERS; OTHER ARTICLES LIMITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, tenant or lessee of a public or private premises to permit the accumulation upon his or her premises of any
waste, refuse or rubbish except in covered containers, except recyclables in recycling receptacles or totes. If the waste, refuse or rubbish cannot be put
in a covered container, or recyclables in recycling receptacles or totes, as hereafter provided, then it shall be placed in a tight building.
A. Semiautomated Trash Totes And Recycling Receptacles Or Totes: The city or its waste contractor shall provide each residential building or
commercial building not serviced by a dumpster with a ninety five (95) gallon semiautomated trash tote and a recycling receptacle or tote. The
semiautomated trash tote and recycling receptacle or tote provided by the city or its waste contractor shall be used by all residents of the city and
those businesses provided with trash totes and shall be filled before other containers for refuse are filled. The container supplied by the city or its
waste contractor shall be placed at the designated location with handles pointing toward the residence or other building with nothing blocking the
front and a minimum of thirty six inches (36") of space on each side and the back, including the space between totes. The space requirement may
not be applicable in certain areas, such as alleyways. After the refuse or recyclable materials are picked up, the trash totes or recycling receptacle or
tote, whichever the case may be, shall be promptly removed from the curb. No more than two hundred (200) pounds shall be loaded in the trash
totes by any person. No hot ashes shall be placed in the trash totes. Any damage or destruction to the semiautomated trash totes or recycling
receptacles or totes caused by the user or users thereof shall be paid for by the user or users causing the damage or destruction to the city or its
waste contractor.
B. Other Covered Containers: All other containers shall be constructed of strong, noncorrodible, rodentproof material; shall have two (2) handles; a
capacity of not more than thirty five (35) gallons; and shall have tight covers, which shall be in place at all times except when refuse is being
deposited therein or removed therefrom. No more than fifty (50) pounds shall be loaded in these containers by any person. These containers shall
not be used by residences supplied with trash totes until the trash totes are filled and fully utilized.
C. Plastic Bags: Plastic bags may be used inside of the supplied trash tote only and must be made of heavy gauge plastic of at least one and one-half
millimeters (11/2 mm) in thickness and securely tied and used only when the contents will not cause the bag to tear. No more than forty (40) pounds
shall be loaded in plastic bags by any person. Plastic bags are not permitted for use outside of the supplied trash tote and are not permitted for use
inside of the supplied recycling receptacle or tote.
D. Dumpster Or Roll-Off Type Containers: Dumpster or roll-off type containers shall be allowed only when and where approved by the mayor or his
designee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 98/258
E. Articles Not In Containers: Paper, tree cuttings and all odd articles not in containers shall be crushed and/or bundled in lengths not to exceed four
feet (4') and not to exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight, except articles in special hauls. Regulations for commercial hauls shall be made to provide for
efficient and convenient handling of refuse where the circumstances warrant.
F. Prohibited Articles: No vehicle tires, batteries, waste oil, paint, paint thinners or other items prohibited from sanitary landfills by the United States
environmental protection agency or any department or agency of the state of Idaho shall be picked up by the city, except as provided herein for
recyclable materials. (Ord. 1588, 9-24-2012)
7-3-5: BURNING OF REFUSE OR WASTE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn refuse or waste within the city except wastepaper, boxes, brush, grass, weeds and cuttings from trees, lawn
or gardens for which a permit must be had from the city fire department in accordance with state and federal regulations. (Ord. 1588, 9-24-2012)
7-3-6: ACCUMULATION OF REFUSE OR WASTE PROHIBITED:
The accumulation of refuse or waste in violation of these provisions shall be deemed a nuisance. (Ord. 1588, 9-24-2012)
7-3-7: TRANSPORTING AND DISPOSING OF REFUSE OR WASTE:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to haul refuse or waste upon any public thoroughfares of the city unless said person has a vehicle equipped with a
tight box which shall be completely covered at all times when in transit by a heavy canvas or other suitable cover which will prevent refuse or waste
from escaping from said box. It shall be unlawful for any person to bury, dump, burn, collect, remove or in any other manner dispose of refuse or
waste upon public or private property within the city.
B. It shall be unlawful to dump or place any refuse or waste on any premises within the city, whether or not in an approved container, without the
consent of the owner of such premises.
C. It shall be unlawful to dump or place any refuse or waste in any garbage can, trash can, dumpster or other waste receptacle, wherever located,
without the consent of the owner, lessee or person in control of such waste receptacle.
D. It shall be unlawful to dump or place any household refuse or waste or refuse or waste created by a business in any garbage can, trash can,
dumpster or other waste receptacle maintained by the city in any city park for the use of people using the park.
E. It shall be unlawful to dump or place any animal offal or carcasses of dead animals or any parts thereof, in any garbage can, trash can, dumpster
type container or other waste receptacle within the city. (Ord. 1588, 9-24-2012)
7-3-8: SERVICE CHARGES:
A. Residential: There shall be a monthly service charge for each dwelling within the city as established by resolution of the city council.
B. Oversized Items: The city's waste contractor may charge a reasonable service charge for the special pick up of all oversized items. This charge shall
be collected by the waste contractor directly from the customer and the city will not be charged.
C. Carryout Service: Carryout service is available from the waste contractor and must be requested from the waste contractor by the customer. An
additional monthly service charge as established by resolution of the city council shall be added to the monthly statement from the city. Customers
who have qualified for temporary or permanent disabilities under the Americans with disabilities act may receive free carryout service by providing
written proof of such disability to the waste contractor and the city.
D. Containers:
1. Dumpster Type Containers: Dumpster type containers shall be available from the city waste contractor for short term or temporary use. The city's
waste contractor may charge a reasonable service charge to deliver each dumpster type container within the city limits and for each pick up of and
disposal of refuse in a dumpster type container.
2. Mobile Home Or Apartment Complex Containers: The city and its waste contractor both agree that it would be more convenient and efficient for
the residents and the owner of the mobile home park or apartment complex and the city or its waste contractor to use one or more dumpsters,
rather than individual trash totes for each dwelling in the mobile home park or apartment complex.
3. Additional Totes: Additional totes are available from the waste contractor and must be requested by the customer through the city. An additional
monthly service charge as established by resolution of the city council shall be added to the monthly statement from the city for each additional
tote. (Ord. 1650, 4-11-2016)
7-3-9: DELINQUENCY OR REFUSAL OF PAYMENT AND FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 99/258
In the event the owner, tenant or property management company of the property shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay such charges listed above, within the
due date indicated on the monthly statement, the same shall become delinquent and may be turned over to a collection agency for collection and an
additional fee imposed as allowed by Idaho Code section 67-2358.
A. Discontinue Waste Collection Service: The city may discontinue waste collection service in the event the owner, tenant or property management
company responsible for the payment of any waste collection charges shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay such charges within the due date indicated
on the monthly statement.
B. Failure To Establish Account: The city may discontinue waste collection service to any dwelling, office or business establishment where the owner,
tenant or property management company responsible for the payment of any waste charges fails to establish an account with the city at city hall.
C. Account Responsibility: No waste collection service shall be provided to any residence, business or other waste disposal user unless an account is
established with the city for said premises with the owner, tenant or property management company of the property. The city shall not be required to
stop waste collection services at the request of the owner of the property if the account is in the name of a person other than the owner and the
account is current.
D. Late Charge: There shall be a fee as established by resolution of the city council assessed against all waste service charges not paid on or before
the twentieth day of each month. (Ord. 1650, 4-11-2016)
7-3-10: YARD WASTE:
It shall be unlawful for any city resident to dispose of yard waste materials in violation of this chapter. These materials shall be mulched or composted
on the premises where generated to the maximum extent possible. Materials not mulched or composted shall be placed in the city provided trash tote
and placed for collection in the manner described. The following types of refuse are designated as yard waste by the city and shall be handled in the
following manner:
A. Small plant material (grass, flowers and leaves) shall be placed in the city provided trash tote, and placed at the curb or other designated spot by the
resident on collection days specified by the city.
B. Large plant material (tree limbs and shrubs) shall be bundled in securely tied bundles of no more than four feet (4') in length, not more than eighteen
inches (18") in diameter and not more than fifty (50) pounds in weight. The bundle shall be placed by the resident at the curb or other designated
spot on collection days specified by the city.
C. The city shall pick up properly set out yard waste on collection days designated by the city.
D. Additional yard waste containers owned by the resident shall not be larger than thirty five (35) gallons, nor weigh more than fifty (50) pounds.
Additional totes provided by the city may be requested as outlined in subsection 7-3-8D3 of this chapter.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to put yard waste in a city supplied recycling receptacle. (Ord. 1588, 9-24-2012)
7-3-11: RECYCLABLE MATERIALS:
The following types of refuse are designated as recyclable materials by the city of Mountain Home. The city or its waste contractor shall provide a no
sort recycling receptacle for each residential building. Only materials designated for recycling shall be placed in the no sort recycling receptacles. All
recyclable material should be removed from plastic bags and placed directly into the recycling receptacle or tote provided. It shall be unlawful for any
person to use a recycling receptacle or tote for anything other than what it is designated for by the city. Recycling receptacles or totes shall be placed at
the curb or other designated spot by the resident on collection days specified by the city. Recycling receptacles or totes shall be promptly removed by
the resident after recyclables have been collected by the city or its waste contractor. Damage or loss of the recycling container or tote shall be paid for
by the resident. If the amount of recyclable materials is greater than the container or tote provided, such materials shall be boxed and marked
recyclables and placed adjacent to the recycling receptacles or tote on collection days. The city or its waste contractor shall pick up properly set out
recyclables on collection days designated by the city. It shall be unlawful for any resident to dispose of recyclable materials in violation of this chapter.
These materials are not required to be sorted but shall be separated from other refuse and placed in the recycling receptacles or totes or at collection
facilities in the manner described below:
A. Plastic containers: Shall be emptied, rinsed and placed inside the recycling receptacle or tote provided. All tops, caps, and lids should be removed
and placed with nonrecyclable materials.
B. Mixed paper: Shall be placed inside the recycling receptacle or tote provided.
C. Newspaper: Shall be placed inside the recycling receptacle or tote provided.
D. Cans: Shall be rinsed and placed inside the recycling receptacle or tote provided.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 100/258
E. Frozen food and cereal boxes: Shall be placed inside the recycling receptacle or tote provided.
F. Magazines and catalogs: Shall be placed inside the recycling receptacle or tote provided.
G. Corrugated cardboard: Shall be broken down and placed inside or next to the recycling receptacle or tote provided.
H. Used motor oil: Shall be placed in a labeled clear plastic jug with a cap, limited to two (2) gallons per week and set next to the recycling receptacle or
tote provided. (Ord. 1588, 9-24-2012)
7-3-12: PROHIBITED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS:
The following types of refuse are prohibited as recyclable materials by the city of Mountain Home and shall not be allowed to be placed in the recycling
receptacle:
Chip and candy wrappers.
Food contaminated paper (such as pizza boxes, plates and coffee cups).
Glass.
Hazardous waste.
Hazardous waste containers.
Plastic bags.
Plastic bottle caps.
Styrofoam/packaging.
Tissues, napkins and paper towels.
Wax coated cardboard.
Wax coated milk and juice cartons.
Yard waste. (Ord. 1588, 9-24-2012)
7-3-13: HAZARDOUS WASTE COLLECTION:
Once per year the Mountain Home parks and recreation department will sponsor a hazardous waste collection day. The following materials will be
accepted on that date at the designated location:
CFL bulbs.
Computer monitors.
Fluorescent tubes.
Gasoline.
Herbicides.
Oil.
Paint (however, paint may be thrown in your regular trash cart if you mix it with kitty litter or crack the lid and let it dry before disposing of it).
Pesticides.
Stain.
Televisions.
Tires.
Varnish.
Vehicle batteries. (Ord. 1588, 9-24-2012)
7-3-14: SCAVENGING AND UNAUTHORIZED COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 101/258
A. Recyclable materials shall be placed at curbside for collection, or in any recycling receptacle placed by the city of Mountain Home or its authorized
waste contractor. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person unauthorized by the city to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked
up any such recyclable materials or receptacles.
B. Nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent any resident from donating or selling recyclable material from their own garbage or refuse.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, locate, establish, maintain, erect, leave, or otherwise make available any unattended recycling receptacle
or tote that is in public view in the city for the purpose of collecting discarded recyclable materials; provided, however, that in the case of
undertakings sponsored by and located on a site owned by a bona fide nonprofit organization, the city shall be authorized to issue temporary permits
for the location and use of recycling receptacles or totes. (Ord. 1588, 9-24-2012)
7-3-15: PENALTIES:
It shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for any person to violate any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 1588, 9-24-
2012)
Chapter 4
REFUSE PROHIBITED
7-4-1: REFUSE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or suffer to be in or accumulate in, or upon any yard, lot, block, place or premises or in any building or shed
owned or occupied by him or for which he may be agent within the limits of the Municipality, any stagnant water or impure water, refuse, vegetable
decay or decaying substance, garbage or filth of any kind, nor suffer such yard, lot, place, building or premises to be or to remain in such condition as to
cause or create a nuisance or offensive smell or to pollute or render unhealthful the atmosphere or the premises or thereby to be, become, cause or
create a public nuisance. (Revised Code 1958)
Chapter 5
WEEDS
7-5-1: DECLARATION OF CERTAIN WEEDS A NUISANCE:
Any weeds found growing in any lot or parcel or adjoining public right of way are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to permit
such weeds to grow or remain on any such place. (Ord. 759, 12-10-1973; amd. 1990 Code)
7-5-2: REMOVAL OF WEEDS REQUIRED:
All occupants or owners of real property located within the city are hereby required to destroy and remove all weeds upon their premises to the center of
the adjoining street or alley. (Ord. 759, 12-10-1973; amd. 1990 Code)
7-5-3: NOTICE ON FAILURE OF OWNER TO ABATE NUISANCE:
When the owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of land in the city fails to remove said weeds from their premises, it shall be the duty of the
superintendent of public works to serve or cause to be served a notice, (by certified mail), upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which said
weeds are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this chapter and to demand abatement of said nuisance within ten (10) days. (Ord. 759, 12-
10-1973; amd. 1990 Code)
7-5-4: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY CITY:
If the owner or occupant of the premises so served does not abate the nuisance within ten (10) days of the service of the notice, the city may abate
such nuisance by either burning the weeds, by mowing the weeds, or where necessary, by both mowing and burning the weeds. The abatement of the
nuisance shall be at the expense of the property owner and the charges for such removal of weeds shall be made according to the following schedule:
The charges for removal of weeds by the city shall be as follows:
Parcel Size Mowing Fee Burning Fee
0_1,200 square yards $150.00 $150.00
1,201_3,600 square yards $150.00 plus $0.0625 $150.00, plus $0.03
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 102/258
per square yard over
1,200 square yards
per square yard over
1,200 square yards
3,601 square yards and
larger
$300.00 plus $0.03
per square yard over 3,600 square yards
$175.00, plus $0.02
per square yard over 3,600 square yards
There shall be an additional charge of five cents ($0.05) per square yard for lots or parcels of land that contain excessive or unusual amounts of debris,
junk or lumber. (Ord. 1324, 11-13-2000)
7-5-5: EXPENSES OF ABATEMENT; SPECIAL ASSESSMENT:
After abatement of the nuisance by the city, the city shall send a statement for the expenses of abating the nuisance to the owner or occupant of the
property. If full payment is not made within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of the statement, a special assessment, pursuant to Idaho Code sections 50-
1008 and 50-334, shall be levied on the property where the nuisance was abated. Notice of the special assessment shall then be mailed to the property
owner. If payment to the city clerk is not made within thirty (30) days after mailing the notice of assessment, the assessment shall be declared
delinquent and shall be by said tax collector placed upon the tax roll and collected in the same manner and subject to the same penalties as other city
taxes. All money received on special assessments or from the abatement of said nuisances shall be held by the city clerk as a special fund to be
applied to the payment of the costs of abating said nuisances, and said money shall be used for no other purpose. (Ord. 759, 12-10-1973; amd. 1990
Code)
7-5-6: LISTING OF PROPERTY:
The city clerk shall maintain a listing of all vacant lots and other parcels of land within the city where the growth of said weeds constitutes or may
constitute a nuisance. This listing shall contain the following information: a) the size of the lot or parcel; b) the record owner of said lot or parcel; and c)
the occupant of said lot or parcel, if different from the record owner. (Ord. 759, 12-10-1973)
7-5-7: NOTICE TO OWNER OR OCCUPANT OF LOT OR PARCEL:
The notice required in section 7-5-3 of this chapter shall contain, among other things: a) a demand that the nuisance be abated by removal of the weeds
within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice; b) a description of the property on which the nuisance is located; c) the approximate size of the property on
which the nuisance is located; d) the estimated cost of abating the nuisance, if the city does the work; e) that if the nuisance is not abated, the city will
abate the same; f) that if the charge for such abatement is not paid within the required time, a special assessment will be levied against the described
property; and g) said notice will refer the owner or occupant to this chapter for further information. (Ord. 759, 12-10-1973)
Chapter 6
TREES AND SHRUBBERY
7-6-1: DECLARATION OF NUISANCE:
Any trees, shrubbery or other plants are hereby declared a public nuisance if: a) any portion of them interferes with vehicular or pedestrian traffic in a
public right of way, including the vision triangle; or b) they are diseased, damaged, or insect-ridden so as to constitute a threat to life or property. (Ord.
1304, 8-9-1999)
7-6-2: REMOVAL OF BRANCHES OR TREES:
It shall be unlawful to allow a public nuisance to continue. It shall be the duty of all occupants or owners of real property within the City to: a) trim trees
or shrubbery that interfere with vehicular or pedestrian travel; b) trim or remove all trees and shrubbery in excess of three feet (3') in height located in
the vision triangle; and c) treat or remove any trees, shrubbery, or plants that are damaged, diseased, or insect-ridden as to constitute a hazard. (Ord.
1304, 8-9-1999)
7-6-3: NOTICE ON FAILURE OF OWNER TO ABATE NUISANCE:
When the owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of land in the City fails to abate a nuisance as described in this Chapter, the Administrator shall serve
or cause to be served a written notice, by certified mail, upon the occupant or owner of the premises on which said trees, shrubbery, or plants are
growing in violation of this Chapter and demand abatement of said nuisance within ten (10) business days. (Ord. 1304, 8-9-1999)
7-6-4: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY CITY:
If the owner or occupant of the premises served with the notice as provided above does not abate the nuisance within ten (10) business days, of the
service of the notice, the City may abate said nuisance by any means deemed appropriate by the City. The reasonable cost of the abatement of the
nuisance shall be at the expense of the property owner. (Ord. 1304, 8-9-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 103/258
7-6-5: EXPENSES OF ABATEMENT; SPECIAL ASSESSMENT:
After abatement of the nuisance by the City, the City shall send a statement for the expenses of abating the nuisance to the owner of the property. If full
payment is not made within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of the statement, a special assessment, pursuant to Idaho Code sections 50-1008 and 50-
334, shall be levied on the property where the nuisance was abated. Notice of the special assessment shall then be mailed to the property owner. If
payment to the City Clerk is not made within thirty (30) days after mailing the notice of assessment, the assessment shall be declared delinquent and
shall be certified to the Tax Collector of Elmore County by the City Clerk and shall be by said Tax Collector placed upon the tax roll and collected in the
same manner and subject to the same penalties as other City taxes. All money received on special assessments or from the abatement of said
nuisances shall be held by the City Clerk as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the costs of abating said nuisances, and said money shall be
used for no other purposes. (Ord. 1304, 8-9-1999)
7-6-6: NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND OCCUPANT:
The notice required in Section 7-6-3 of this Chapter shall contain, among other things:
A. A demand that the nuisance be abated by the trimming, removal, or treatment of the trees or shrubbery, whichever is applicable, within ten (10)
business days of the receipt of the notice;
B. A description of the property on which the nuisance is located;
C. The estimated cost of the City's abatement of the nuisance;
D. That if the nuisance is not abated, the City will abate same;
E. That if the expense for such abatement is not paid within the required time, a special assessment will be levied against the described property; and
F. Said notice will refer the owner and occupant to this Chapter for further information. (Ord. 1304, 8-9-1999)
7-6-7: INJURY TO TREES OR SHRUBBERY:
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, without lawful authority so to do, to injure wilfully, deface, disfigure, or destroy any public tree or shrub.
(Ord. 1304, 8-9-1999)
7-6-8: TREE PROTECTION:
Every effort shall be made to preserve and protect those trees and shrubs identified as assets to the community by the most recent community forest
inventory. (Ord. 1304, 8-9-1999)
Chapter 7
NOISE CONTROL REGULATIONS
7-7-1: POLICY:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to minimize the exposure of its citizens to the physiological and psychological dangers of excessive
noise and protect, promote and preserve the public health, safety and welfare. It is the express intent of the city council to control the level of noise and
sounds in a manner which promotes commerce, the use, value and enjoyment of property, sleep and repose and the quality of the environment. (Ord.
102, 12-13-1982)
7-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
In this chapter the following terms shall mean:
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT: All areas zoned by this code as commercial areas, as shown in section 9-7-6 of this code.
dB(A): The sound level measured in decibels using the A-weighting network.
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT: All areas zoned by this code as an industrial area, as shown in section 9-7-6 of this code.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be transported upon a public roadway and is self-propelled.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the driver and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in
contact with the ground, including all types of motorcycles, motor scooters or motorized bicycles having an engine with more than one hundred fifty
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 104/258
(150) cubic centimeter's displacement or with five (5) brake horsepower or more, but excluding a tractor.
PUBLIC ROADWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained by the United States government, the state of Idaho,
the Mountain Home highway district or the city of Mountain Home when any part thereof is generally opened to the use of the public for the purposes of
vehicular traffic as a matter of right.
RECEIVING PROPERTY: Real property within which sound originating from sources outside the property is received.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: All areas zoned by this code exclusively as residential areas, as shown in section 9-7-6 of this code.
SOUND: An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that causes
compression and rarefaction of that medium, the description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and
frequency.
SOUND LEVEL: The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network as specified in the
American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters. (Ord. 1002, 12-13-1982; amd. Ord. 1478, 7-9-2007)
7-7-3: UNLAWFUL SOUNDS:
It is unlawful for any person to cause sound, or for any person in possession of property to permit sound originating from such property to intrude into
the real property of another person whenever such sound exceeds the maximum permissible levels established by this chapter. (Ord. 1002, 12-13-
1982)
7-7-4: MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND LEVELS:
For the sound sources located within the city, the maximum sound levels permissible are as follows:
Receiving Property Maximum dBA Level
Residential 80
Commercial 80
Industrial 90
(Ord. 1002, 12-13-1982)
7-7-5: MAXIMUM NIGHTTIME SOUND LEVELS:
Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M., the levels established by section 7-7-4 of this chapter are reduced by fifteen
(15) dBAs. (Ord. 1002, 12-13-1982)
7-7-6: PUBLIC DISTURBANCE SOUNDS:
It is unlawful for any person to cause or for any person in possession of property to allow to originate from the property sound that is a public
disturbance. The following sounds are hereby determined to be public disturbances:
A. Frequent, repetitive or continuous sounds made by any animal which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort and repose of
property owners or possessors.
B. Frequent, repetitive or continuous sounding of a horn or siren except as a warning of danger or as specifically permitted or required by law.
C. The creation of frequent, repetitive or continuous sounds in connection with the starting, operation, repair, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle,
motorcycle, off highway vehicle or internal combustion engine within a residential district, so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace,
comfort or repose of the owners or possessors of real property.
D. The use of a sound amplifier or other device capable of producing or reproducing an amplified sound upon public roadways for the purposes of
commercial advertising or sales or attracting the attention of the public to any vehicle, structure or property or the contents therein, except as
permitted by law.
E. The making of any loud, raucous sound within one thousand feet (1,000') of any school, hospital, nursing or convalescent facility.
F. The creation by the use of a musical instrument, whistle, sound amplifier or other device capable of producing or reproducing sounds of loud and
raucous character which emanate frequently, repetitively or continuously from any building, structure or property located within a residential district.
(Ord. 1002, 12-13-1982)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 105/258
7-7-7: MEASUREMENT OF SOUND:
If the measurement of sound is made with a sound level meter, it shall be an instrument in good operating condition, and shall meet the requirements
for a type I or type II instrument as described in the American National Standards Institute specifications. (Ord. 1002, 12-13-1982)
7-7-8: SOUNDS EXEMPT AT ALL TIMES:
The following sounds are exempt from the provisions of this chapter at all times:
A. Sounds originating from aircraft in flight and sounds which originate from airports and are directly related to flight operations.
B. Sounds originating from trains and locomotives and sounds directly related to rail operations.
C. Sounds created by emergency alarms and emergency equipment including ambulances, police automobiles, fire engines and related vehicles. (Ord.
1002, 12-13-1982)
7-7-9: SOUNDS EXEMPT DURING CERTAIN HOURS:
The following sounds are exempt from the provisions of this chapter between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.:
A. Sounds originating from temporary construction sites, which sounds are necessary to the construction.
B. Sounds originating from parades, carnivals and athletic events.
C. Lawn mowers, chain saws and other power tools when used in the normal intended manner.
D. The normal sounds associated with public swimming pools, excluding loud speakers. (Ord. 1002, 12-13-1982; amd. 1990 Code)
7-7-10: VARIANCE; APPLICATION, PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED:
Any person who owns or is in possession of any property or use, or any process or equipment, may apply to the city council for a variance from the
requirements of this chapter or the rules promulgated hereunder. The city council may grant a variance if there is a finding that: a) the sound occurring
or proposed to occur does not endanger public health or safety, and b) the owners or possessors of property in the area of the sound will not be
unreasonably adversely affected. Variances may only be granted after a public hearing on the proposed variance and may be granted for any period of
time at the discretion of the city council, said hearing to be conducted in accordance with section 1-10-1 of this code. (Ord. 1002, 12-13-1982; amd.
1990 Code)
7-7-11: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall subject the offender to penalties in accordance with section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1002, 12-13-1982; amd. 1990
Code)
Chapter 8
NUISANCE ABATEMENT
7-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
ABATEMENT: The removal, stoppage, prostration, or destruction of that which causes or constitutes a nuisance, whether by breaking or pulling it down,
or otherwise destroying, or effacing it.
BUILDING DEPARTMENT: The duly appointed building official of the city of Mountain Home or his designated representative.
FIRE HAZARD: Any thing or act which increases or may cause an increase of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than that customarily
recognized as normal by persons in the public service regularly engaged in preventing, suppressing, or extinguishing fires; or any thing or act which
may obstruct, delay, hinder, or interfere with the operations of the fire department or the egress of occupants in the event of fire.
OWNER: The owner of record based on the county assessor's records or any person with legal, financial or equitable interest in the property on which
the alleged public nuisance exists at the time of the violation.
PROPERTY: Any real property, premises, structure or location on which a public nuisance is alleged to exist.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Any fence, wall, shed, house, garage, building, structure or any part of any of the aforesaid; or any tree, pole, smokestack, or any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 106/258
excavation, hole, pit, basement, cellar, sidewalk subspace, or landing dock; or any lot, land, yard, premises or location which in its entirety, or in part
thereof, by reason of the condition in which the same is found or permitted to be or remain, shall or may endanger the health, safety, life, limb or
property, or cause any hurt, harm, inconvenience, discomfort, damage or injury to any one or more individuals in the city, in any one or more of the
following particulars:
A. By reason of being a public nuisance at common law or in equity jurisprudence.
B. By reason of being an attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an
empty lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements, or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; or any structurally
unsound fences, buildings or structures; or any lumber, trash, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors.
C. By reason of being a menace, threat and/or hazard to the general health and safety of the community.
D. By reason of being a fire hazard.
E. By reason of being unsafe for occupancy, or use on, in, upon, about or around the aforesaid property.
F. By reason of lack of sufficient or adequate maintenance of the property, or buildings or structures thereon, or by being vacant or abandoned, any
of which depreciates the enjoyment and use of the property in the immediate vicinity to such an extent that it is harmful to the community in which
such property is situated or such condition exists.
SUMMARY ABATEMENT: Abatement of the nuisance by the city, or by a contractor employed by the city, by removal, repair, or other acts without notice
to the owner, agent, or occupant of the property except for the notice required by this chapter. (Ord. 1343, 7-23-2001)
7-8-1-1: MAINTENANCE OF NUISANCE UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful to maintain a public nuisance within the city limits of the city of Mountain Home, Idaho. To enforce this chapter, the city of Mountain
Home may elect to proceed criminally, or to use the abatement procedures set forth herein, or any other procedure authorized by law, including both
criminal and abatement procedures. (Ord. 1527, 6-22-2009)
7-8-2: SUMMARY ABATEMENT:
A. Whenever a complaint is made to the building department of the existence of a "public nuisance", as defined in section 7-8-1 of this chapter, the
building department shall promptly cause to be inspected the property on which it is alleged that such public nuisance exists. Should the building
department find that a public nuisance exists, and that the public health, safety or welfare may be in immediate danger, then summary abatement
procedures shall be implemented and the building department may cause the nuisance to be removed or abated.
B. When summary abatement is authorized, notice to the owner, agent or occupant of the property is not required. Following summary abatement, the
building department shall cause to be posted on the property liable for the abatement a notice describing the action taken to abate the nuisance.
(Ord. 1343, 7-23-2001)
7-8-3: ABATEMENT IN OTHER CASES; NOTICE:
A. If, after inspecting the property on which the nuisance is reported, the building department declares the existence of a public nuisance, but the nature
thereof is not such as to require the summary abatement of such nuisance, then regular abatement procedures shall be followed. Photographs and
reports of the findings and inspections shall be made and filed with the building department.
B. The building department shall determine the individual, firm or corporation who, from the records in the county recorder's or assessor's office,
appears to be the owner of record of the aforesaid property and immediately cause a written notice to be served on such individual, firm or
corporation by personal service or by leaving a copy of the notice at the usual place of residence or business of such owner, or address of such
owner shown in the county recorder's or assessor's records, or by copy mailed to such owner at such place or address by United States certified
mail, return receipt requested. If service of such written notice is unable to be perfected by any of the methods described above, the building
department shall cause a copy of the aforesaid notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, once a week for two (2)
consecutive weeks, and shall further cause a copy of the aforesaid notice to be left with the individual, if any, in possession of such property on
which it is alleged such public nuisance exists, or if there is no individual in possession thereof, the building department shall cause a copy of the
notice to be posted at such structure, location or premises. The building department shall also determine from the recorder's office who may be a
lien holder on the property, if any, as documented therein, and cause a written notice to be served on such lien holder by United States certified mail,
return receipt requested.
C. The aforesaid notice to the owner, and lien holder, if any, of the property shall state clearly and concisely the findings of the building department with
respect to the existence of a public nuisance. The notice shall further state that unless the owner thereof shall cause the abatement of the public
nuisance, pursuant to the orders contained in the building department's notice, the public nuisance shall be abated by the city at the expense of the
owner.
D. Any person who is the record owner of the premises, location or structure at the time an order pursuant to this chapter is issued and served upon
him, shall be responsible for complying with that order, and liable for any costs incurred by the city therewith, notwithstanding the fact that he
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 107/258
conveys his interest in the property to another after such order was issued and served.
E. It shall not be a defense to the determination that a public nuisance exists that the property is boarded up or otherwise enclosed. (Ord. 1343, 7-23-
2001)
7-8-4: ABATEMENT BY OWNER:
A. Within thirty (30) days after the posting and mailing of a notice to abate a nuisance, the owner, agent of the owner, or individual in possession of the
affected property shall remove and abate such nuisance or show that no nuisance in fact exists. Such showing shall be made by filing a written
statement that no nuisance exists. The statement shall be filed with the building department.
B. The building department upon written application by the owner within the thirty (30) day period after the notice has been served, may grant additional
time for the owner to effect the abatement of the public nuisance, provided that such extension is limited to a specific time period. (Ord. 1343, 7-23-
2001)
7-8-5: APPEAL PROCEDURES; HEARING:
A. The owner or occupant of the property who has been served with a notice pursuant to this chapter that a public nuisance exists and that it must be
abated within thirty (30) days, may, within seven (7) calendar days after receipt of such notice, make a written demand to the building department for
a hearing on the question of whether a public nuisance in fact exists. The hearing shall be held within seven (7) calendar days following receipt by
the building department of the written demand and at least two (2) days' notice of the hearing shall be given to the individual who made the written
demand for the hearing.
B. The hearing shall be conducted by the city council. The city council may amend or modify the notice and/or order, or extend the time for compliance
with the building department's order by the owner by such date as the majority of the city council may determine.
C. The owner, agent of the owner, occupant and lien holder, if any, of the subject property shall be given the opportunity to present evidence to the city
council during the course of the hearing.
D. In those instances where the nuisance has been abated by the city, the city council shall have discretion to waive the cost of abating a nuisance, in
whole or part, if, in the course of the hearing and reviewing the decision, the city council finds that any of the following did not conform to the
provisions of this chapter:
1. The notice to remove the nuisance;
2. The work performed in abating the nuisance; or
3. The computation of charges. (Ord. 1343, 7-23-2001)
7-8-6: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
A. Should any public nuisance not be abated at the expiration of time stated in the notice/order or within such additional time as the building department
or city council may grant, the building department shall have the authority to enter upon the property and abate the public nuisance found thereon. In
abating such nuisance, the building department may go to whatever extent may be necessary to complete the abatement of the public nuisance and
should it be practicable to salvage any material derived in the aforesaid abatement, the building department may sell the salvaged material at private
or public sale at the best price obtainable and shall keep an accounting of the proceeds thereof.
B. The proceeds, if any, obtained from the sale of any material salvaged as a result of an abatement of a public nuisance by the building department
shall be deposited in a special fund of the city and any deficit between the amount so received and the cost of the abatement may be levied as an
assessment against the property in question by the city council and collected as any other assessment by the city; however, any other alternative
collection method may be utilized by the city to recoup the deficit. Should the proceeds of the sale of such salvaged material exceed the cost of
abatement, the surplus, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the property from which the public nuisance was abated when a proper claim to the
excess is established.
C. In abating a public nuisance, the building department may call upon any of the city departments or divisions for whatever assistance shall be deemed
necessary or may by private contract cause the abatement of the public nuisance.
D. The building department shall, after completing the removal and abatement, file a statement of costs with the city clerk. (Ord. 1343, 7-23-2001)
7-8-7: NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT; APPEAL OF CHARGES:
A. Upon receipt of the statement of costs from the building department, the city clerk shall mail to the owner of the property upon which the public
nuisance has been abated notice of the amounts set forth in the statement, plus an additional amount sufficient to defray the costs of the notice, and
stating that the city proposes to assess against the property the amount set forth in the notice and that objections to the proposed assessment must
be made in writing and received by the city clerk within thirty (30) days from the date of mailing such notice. Upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day
period, if no objections have been received by the city clerk, the city clerk shall declare the amount of the assessment delinquent and certify the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 108/258
amount due to the Elmore County tax collector, which shall be by said tax collector placed upon the tax roll and collected in the same manner and
subject to the same penalties as other city taxes, pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-1008. All money received on special assessments or from the
abatement of said nuisances shall be held by the city clerk as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the costs of abating said nuisances, and
said money shall be used for no other purpose.
B. If objections by either the property owner or his representative are received by the city clerk prior to the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the
city clerk shall refer the matter to the building department for administrative review.
C. Upon conclusion of administrative review, the building department shall make a written determination that the amount of the charges shall be
canceled, reduced, or remain the same. A copy of this determination shall be furnished to the person making the objection together with a notice of
such person's right to appeal to the city council.
D. If no appeal of a determination by the building department is filed within the time period allowed, a copy of the determination will be furnished to the
city clerk who shall then certify the assessment to the Elmore County tax collector in the amount determined by the building department as provided
in subsection A of this section.
E. If a timely appeal is received by the city council, a hearing shall be scheduled and held on the matter. If, after the hearing, the city council determines
that the proposed assessment does not comply with subsection G of this section, the city council shall so certify to the city clerk and the proposed
assessment shall be canceled. If, after the hearing, it is determined that the proposed assessment or any part of it is proper and authorized, the city
council shall so certify to the city clerk who shall certify such amount as determined appropriate to the Elmore County tax collector.
F. The determination of the city council is a final administrative decision and is not appealable.
G. 1. The building department, in administrative review, or the city council, on appeal, may reduce or cancel a proposed assessment if it is determined
that:
a. Any of the following did not conform to the provisions of this chapter:
(1) The notice to remove the nuisance; or
(2) The work performed in abating the nuisance;
(3) The computation of charges; or
(4) The current owner was not in possession of the property at the time the notice required in section 7-8-3 of this chapter was posted; or
b. The owner of the property was eligible for a waiver of costs under section 7-8-9 of this chapter.
2. The building department, in administrative review, or the city council, on appeal, may reduce a proposed assessment by eliminating the civil
penalty portion of the invoice, if it is determined that:
a. The current owner was not in possession of the property at the time the notice required in section 7-8-3 of this chapter was posted, or
b. The owner did not receive the notice to remove the nuisance, did not have knowledge of the nuisance and could not, with the exercise of
reasonable diligence, have had such knowledge.
H. If, after an assessment has been certified to the Elmore County tax collector, there is a written request of an owner who alleges that the owner did
not receive notice of the proposed assessment, the city clerk shall refer the matter for review pursuant to subsection B of this section.
I. The tax assessment may be canceled or reduced by the building department, in administrative review, or the city council, on appeal, if it is determined
that the owner did not receive notice of the proposed assessment, did not previously have knowledge of the lien or of the nuisance abatement work
constituting the basis of the lien, could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, have had such knowledge, and in addition, that the
circumstances are such that a reduction or cancellation of the charges would have been appropriate had the matter been reviewed pursuant to this
section prior to assessment. Upon receipt of a certification from the city council, pursuant to subsection E of this section, the city clerk shall cancel or
reduce the tax assessment if required by the determination of the city council. (Ord. 1343, 7-23-2001)
7-8-8: PERSONAL LIABILITY OF OWNER:
The person who is the owner of the property at the time at which the notice required under section 7-8-3 of this chapter is posted shall be personally
liable for the amount of the assessment including all interest, civil penalties, and other charges. (Ord. 1343, 7-23-2001)
7-8-9: COST OF ABATEMENT; LOW INCOME, ELDERLY PERSONS:
A. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, the cost of abating a nuisance shall be waived for low income and elderly persons, if upon
application it appears to the building department that the conditions set forth in this section are met.
B. To be eligible for waiver of nuisance abatement costs a person must be classified as "low income", as defined by the building department, or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 109/258
C. Be more than sixty five (65) years of age, and
1. A person living alone, whose total income for the preceding calendar year did not exceed one and one-half (11/2) times the maximum amount a
social security recipient at age sixty five (65) may have earned in that year without having any benefits withheld; or
2. The head of a household which household received a total income for the preceding calendar year that did not exceed two and one-quarter (21/4)
times the maximum amount a social security recipient at age sixty five (65) may have earned in that year without having any benefits withheld.
D. Additionally, all persons wishing to qualify for waiver of nuisance abatement costs must:
1. Furnish proof of the age and/or income requirements as set forth above in the manner and form designated by the building department;
2. Must own, or be in the process of purchasing the property from which the nuisance is abated; and
3. Be living on the property from which the nuisance is abated.
E. The removal of the nuisance in question must have been required by the building department and the person requesting the waiver of costs must
have been officially notified by the building department to remove the nuisance.
F. Applications for waiver of nuisance abatement costs shall be filed with the building department, on forms supplied by the city, within ten (10) days
after receipt of a notice to remove a nuisance or a work order notice unless the building department extends the time for good cause shown. All
information required to be given on such form shall be supplied and verified by the applicant.
G. The maximum amount that may be waived under this section for any one parcel of real property or any one person shall be five hundred dollars
($500.00) per calendar year.
H. No overhead charge or civil penalty shall be imposed for any real property for which a waiver, pursuant to this section, shall have been approved.
(Ord. 1343, 7-23-2001)
7-8-10: OVERHEAD CHARGE, CIVIL PENALTIES:
A. Whenever a nuisance is abated by the city, the building department shall keep an accurate account of all expenses incurred, including an overhead
charge of twenty five percent (25%) for administration and a civil penalty of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each nuisance abated.
B. When the city has abated a nuisance maintained by any owner of real property, for each subsequent nuisance that is abated by the city within two (2)
consecutive calendar years concerning real property owned by the same person, an additional civil penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the cost of
abatement, or a minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00), shall be added to the costs, charges and civil penalties provided for in subsection A of this section.
The civil penalty shall be imposed without regard to whether the nuisances abated by the city involve the same real property or are of the same
character. (Ord. 1343, 7-23-2001)
7-8-11: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the final decision
of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it
would have adopted this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof, despite the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases, or portions would be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1343, 7-23-2001)
7-8-12: ENFORCEMENT:
The provisions of this title shall be enforced by a code enforcement officer and the building and zoning official designated as such by the mayor. The
code enforcement officer and building and zoning official shall have the authority to act on behalf of the city, including, but not limited to, the authority to
investigate complaints, issue written warnings and citations. They shall have the authority to issue citations on an Idaho uniform citation form pursuant
to the Idaho misdemeanor criminal rules and the Idaho infraction rules for violations of the provisions of this chapter. It shall be a separate violation of
this title to interfere with a code enforcement officer or the building and zoning official in the performance of his or her duties. In addition to enforcement
of this title, the code enforcement officer and/or the building and zoning official shall have the authority to issue citations under any other section of this
code or state law as designated elsewhere in this code. The establishment of a code enforcement officer shall not prevent any other official or law
enforcement officer from issuing citations for any offense that officer has authority to enforce. (Ord. 1462, 1-8-2007)
7-8-13: PENALTIES:
Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor unless otherwise specified. (Ord. 1527, 6-22-2009)
Title 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 110/258
Chapter 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
ARTICLE A. STANDARD CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS
8-1A-1: ADOPTION OF STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS:
The book entitled "Idaho Standard For Public Works Construction", as now constituted, and as may hereafter be amended, is hereby adopted by
reference as the standard of the city for construction of public works projects; said book is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as fully
as though set out at length, and not less than three (3) copies of said book, as certified by the clerk, shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the
clerk for examination by the public. (Ord. 1086, 10-26-1987)
8-1A-2: DUTY OF OFFICIALS:
It shall be the duty of all city officials to enforce the provisions set forth in said book, and it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
construct public works projects in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of the adopted standards
without the prior written consent of the city engineer and mayor. (Ord. 1086, 10-26-1987)
ARTICLE B. SIDEWALKS
8-1B-1: SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS:
A. Any building site, lot, parcel or tract of land located within the corporate limits of the city and that abuts upon or adjoins any public street, road,
avenue, boulevard, highway or other public way shall be subject to this section.
B. As used in this section, "proper authority" shall mean the city's director of public works, building official or their designated representatives.
C. The owner of property abutting on a public street which has curbs, gutters or sidewalks shall be responsible for the repair, maintenance or
replacement of that section of sidewalk (curb and gutter) which adjoins said property. If the owner of the property does not repair, maintain or replace
the sidewalk, curb or gutter that is determined by the city to be dangerous and unsafe within a reasonable time after the city has notified the owner
of the problem, then the city may repair the curb, gutter or sidewalk, fix the problem and bill the owner for the costs of labor, equipment, and
materials and assess the costs to the owner as provided in Idaho Code section 50-1008. The owner of such property shall also be responsible for
removing snow, ice1 or debris2 from the sidewalk which fronts or abuts their property and for the removal of any obstructions from shrubs3, weeds4,
tree limbs or other materials which interfere with pedestrian movement upon any part of said sidewalk.
D. New curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be constructed at the expense of the property owner in conjunction with any new construction or
modifications of existing buildings on any property which abuts a public street, road, avenue, boulevard, highway or other public street, road,
avenue, boulevard, highway or other public way. New curb, gutter and sidewalk will not be required under the following conditions:
1. If, in the opinion of the proper authority, the existing curb, gutter and/or sidewalk is in good repair and to an acceptable line and grade which
conforms to the line and grade of the connecting curb, gutter and/or sidewalk in the same area, it may be retained.
2. Curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall not be required or allowed to be constructed or may be deferred if, in the opinion of the proper authority, the
improvement would create a traffic hazard or an unusual drainage problem.
3. Curbs, gutters and sidewalks are not required for minor modifications and improvements to existing buildings when the modifications and
improvements do not constitute more than twenty percent (20%) of the square footage of the existing building or ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00).
E. Any person altering, removing, replacing, repairing or installing any portion of sidewalks and/or curbs and gutters shall first obtain a permit from the
city's building department. A nonrefundable permit fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be paid to the city at the time the permit is obtained. All
sidewalks, curbs and gutters, corners, and/or approach and access ramps shall be installed in compliance with the current edition of the "Idaho
Standards For Public Works Construction (ISPWC) Technical Manual" and the Americans with disabilities act (ADA) both of which may be reviewed
on the city of Mountain Home website with the following conditions:
1. When placing new curbs, gutters and sidewalks any damaged sections of the existing asphalt or concrete street must be replaced. If the
construction of new curbs, gutters and sidewalks does not meet the edge of the existing street, the street must be widened to the new curb. This
additional paving must meet all city standards and must be graded to drain as required and built at owner expense.
2. Failure to comply with this article may result in rejection of all or a part of any work completed and reconstruction at the expense of the owner.
F. No person shall place any obstruction on any sidewalk within the city of Mountain Home that interferes with the movements of any person or persons
upon the sidewalk. (Ord. 1607, 9-23-2013)
ARTICLE C. NUMBERING OF STREETS AND BUILDINGS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 111/258
8-1C-1: NUMBERING STREETS:
There is hereby established a uniform system of numbering streets within the city. For the purpose of numbering streets, all such streets will be
numbered in accordance with the official city street addressing map which shall be located in the office of the city engineer. (Ord. 389, 4-16-1951; amd.
1990 Code)
8-1C-2: NUMBERING OF HOUSES AND BUILDINGS:
There is hereby established a uniform system of numbering houses and buildings fronting on all streets and public ways in the city. All such houses and
buildings shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of this article and in accordance with the official city street addressing map which shall be
located in the office of the city engineer. (Ord. 389, 4-16-1951; amd. 1990 Code)
8-1C-3: BUILDINGS ON DIAGONAL STREETS:
All buildings and lots on diagonal streets shall be numbered the same as north and south streets if the diagonal runs more from north to the south, and
the same on east and west streets and if the diagonal runs more from the east to the west. (Ord. 389, 4-16-1951)
8-1C-4: NUMBERING OF BLOCKS:
The numbering for each block shall begin upon the side nearest the base line. The numbers within the first block shall be from 100 to 199 and the
numbers of each succeeding block shall increase from the base line in units of 100 for each succeeding block, namely, the first block shall be from 100
to 199, the second block from 200 to 299, the third block shall be from 300 to 399, progressively. (Ord. 389, 4-16-1951)
8-1C-5: DESIGNATION OF ODD AND EVEN NUMBERS:
The last digit of the numbers on all houses and buildings on the north and west side of all streets shall be odd digits, each number commencing with the
100 assigned to that block. The last digit of the numbers on all houses and buildings on the south and east side of all streets shall be even digits in the
same manner. (Ord. 389, 4-16-1951)
8-1C-6: WHEN STREETS NOT EXTENDED:
All streets not extending through to the baseline shall be assigned the same relative numbers as if said street had extended to the baselines. (Ord. 389,
4-16-1951)
8-1C-7: NUMBERS REQUIRED; PLACEMENT:
The council shall cause a survey to be made and there shall be assigned to each house and building located on any street or public way within the city
its respective number through the uniform system provided by this chapter. All owners or occupants of each respective house or building shall, at his
own expense, place or cause to be placed upon each house or building owned or occupied by him the number assigned within thirty (30) days from the
date the number is assigned to him.
The numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately above or at the side of the door of the building or in such a place that the number can be
readily seen from the street, and the numbers used shall be not less than three inches (3") in height. (Ord. 389, 4-16-1951)
8-1C-8: RECORD TO BE KEPT BY CLERK:
A list of the numbers assigned and the location thereof shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the clerk, which list of numbers shall be available
for inspection by the public. It shall be the duty of the clerk to inform any party applying for a number, the numbers to be assigned to his property and in
case of doubt of the proper number to be assigned, the matter shall be referred to the council for final determination. No building permit shall be issued
for any house or building until the owner has procured from the clerk the official number of the premises. (Ord. 389, 4-16-1951)
8-1C-9: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
If the owner or occupant of any house or building required to be numbered by this article shall fail at any time to attach and maintain the proper number
on such house or building, the superintendent of public works shall serve upon the owner or occupant a notice in writing requiring such owner or
occupant properly to affix such number to said premises and advise him that if he fails or neglects to do so within ten (10) days from the date of the
service of such notice, he will be deemed to have violated the provisions of this article and shall be punishable as provided in this code. (Ord. 389, 4-16-
1951; amd. 1990 Code)
8-1C-10: INCONSISTENT NUMBERING:
Notwithstanding any provision in this article to the contrary, the city council of the city of Mountain Home shall have the authority, by resolution duly
enacted, to change the names of streets and to assign numbers to houses and buildings on any street or public way within the city that is not consistent
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 112/258
with the city's current uniform system of street names and the numbering of houses and buildings when necessary for the public safety. All other
provisions of this article that are not inconsistent with this section shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1450, 7-24-2006)
Chapter 2
REMOVAL OF SNOW AND/OR ICE
8-2-1: REMOVAL OF SNOW AND/OR ICE1:
It shall be the duty of the owner or resident of any premises abutting or adjoining any public sidewalk to remove all snow and/or ice from such sidewalk.
(Revised Code 1958; amd. 1990 Code)
8-2-2: NOTICE TO BE GIVEN:
It shall be the duty of the municipality to give notice to any owner or tenant of any property to remove snow and/or ice, which notice shall be sent by
registered mail to the last known address of such owner or resident. The owner or resident shall have not more than twenty four (24) hours from and
after receipt of such notice within which to remove the snow and/or ice as set forth in said notice. (Revised Code 1958; amd. 1990 Code)
8-2-3: UPON FAILURE TO COMPLY, MUNICIPALITY TO REMOVE:
Upon failure of an owner or resident to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the municipality shall have the right to remove such snow and/or ice
and assess the cost thereof against the premises abutting the sidewalk. Such assessment to be certified to the county assessor or other proper county
official having charge of the making of the assessment roll and such charge shall be placed on the assessment roll and collected in the same manner as
other municipal taxes are collected. (Revised Code 1958; amd. 1990 Code)
Chapter 3
CEMETERY
8-3-1: LOT OWNERSHIP; FEES:
The City shall have the power to sell lots and parts of lots in the Mountain Home Cemetery, now known as the Mountain View Cemetery, by certificates
signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk, under the Seal of the City, specifying that the person to whom the same is issued is the owner of
the lot or lots described, according to the plat of said cemetery now on file in the Office of the County Recorder of Elmore County, Idaho. Such
certificates shall vest in the proprietor, his or her heirs or assigns, a right in fee simple to said lots for the sole purpose of interment, under such
regulations as the City Council may provide. The City shall perform the interment and disinterment. Said lots shall be sold and the interment and
disinterment shall be performed by the City according to the fee schedule as established by resolution of the City Council.
An additional fee as set by resolution of the City Council shall be charged for any burial or disinterment services held on Saturdays or holidays. There
shall be no burials or disinterments on Sundays. An additional fee as set by resolution of the City Council shall be charged for each additional remains
buried in one lot.
For the purpose of this chapter, the term "resident" shall mean the decedent who at the time of his/her death resided or owned real estate in the City or
a member of the decedent's immediate family who is purchasing the cemetery lot who resides in the City or owns real estate located in the City. The
term "nonresident" shall mean every other person. (Ord. 1649, 2-22-2016)
8-3-2: COFFINS AND IMPERVIOUS LINER:
A rigid casket or container shall be required for the burial of human remains. All coffins interred in the Mountain View Cemetery shall be required to be
placed in a concrete box or other liner of equivalent performance, such as a vault. (Ord. 1511, 6-23-2008)
8-3-3: USE OF CEMETERY LOTS DEFINED:
Cemetery lots shall be used only for the burial of the human dead and for the burial of cremains of the human dead. A cemetery lot shall be used to
contain no more than two (2) full caskets and two (2) containers of ashes or cremains, or up to four (4) containers of ashes or cremains. Burial of the
caskets or cremains does not have to take place at the same time, however the decision to bury more than one casket in a single lot must be made and
communicated to the City Clerk at the time that the first casket is placed in the cemetery lot. The placement of more than one casket in a cemetery lot
shall require the placement of a double depth concrete box. No single container stacking, such as a Monticello vault or a concrete box, shall be allowed
for a double depth burial. Double depth burials are not permitted within some of the locations within the cemetery. At the time a cemetery lot is
purchased, any purchaser of the cemetery lot who intends to use the lot for a double depth burial shall notify the City Clerk of such and the City Clerk
will confer with the Cemetery Sexton at the time the lot is purchased and a decision shall be made by the City Clerk and Cemetery Sexton whether a
double depth burial is permitted in the cemetery lot that is being purchased. The City Clerk shall notify the purchaser of the cemetery lot at the time it is
purchased if a double depth burial will be permitted in the lot being purchased. Each burial shall incur opening and closing fees as established by the
City. (Ord. 1668, 3-12-2018)
8-3-4: FENCING PROHIBITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 113/258
It is unlawful to enclose any cemetery lot with a fence, wall or coping of any kind. (Ord. 1141, 12-10-1990)
8-3-5: SHRUBS AND TREES PROHIBITED:
No trees, shrubs, or vegetation, other than grass or flowers shall be planted or grown on cemetery lots, without the prior written permission of the
Cemetery Sexton. "Shrubs" and "trees" are defined as any plant that develops a woody type root, including roses, azaleas, etc. (Ord. 1141, 12-10-1990)
8-3-6: MONUMENT SPECIFICATIONS, OWNERSHIP AND DECORATIONS:
Mountain View Cemetery is divided into sections in which raised monuments or gravestones are allowed and sections in which they are not allowed. In
the sections in which raised monuments or gravestones are not allowed, no monument, marker or gravestone shall exceed ground level. No monument,
marker or gravestone of any kind shall be placed or set in Mountain View Cemetery without the prior approval of the method of setting or placing by the
Cemetery Sexton. All gravestones and monuments shall be set by a marker company or an installer approved by the Cemetery Sexton. The concrete
surrounding the headstone shall contain at least one hole for decoration placement. Once a gravestone or monument is set in Mountain View Cemetery
it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the cemetery lot to maintain the gravestone or monument placed or set on the lot, or if the owner is
deceased, it shall be the responsibility of the spouse, children or grandchildren of the person buried in the lot to maintain the gravestone or monument.
If there is no owner or family member who is capable or willing to maintain the gravestone or monument upon the declaration of the Mayor any
gravestone or monument on the lot shall become the property and responsibility of the City of Mountain Home. Except on Memorial Day decorations of
any kind shall only be placed at the head of the grave and no decorations shall be placed on a headstone in the center or at the foot of any grave. Any
questions pertaining to monument specifications, placement or decorations shall be addressed to and decided by the Cemetery Sexton. (Ord. 1618, 5-
27-2014)
8-3-7: HOURS OF OPERATION:
The cemetery shall be open to the public every day of the year from one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise until one-half (1/2) hour after sunset. Persons and
vehicles shall be excluded from the cemetery during the hours of closure. Burials shall take place between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and
three o'clock (3:00) P.M. Additional fees shall be charged for work which must be performed after regular cemetery staff hours in order to meet
deadlines for a funeral service. Such additional fees shall be eighty dollars ($80.00) per hour at the onset of each hour in one hour increments. All family
members of a deceased person whose remains or cremains are being buried shall be out of the cemetery by three o'clock (3:00) P.M. to allow for the
burial closure to be completed. Because of safety reasons, no family member shall be allowed to watch or help lower the casket into the vault. This shall
not prohibit friends or family members from placing dirt on or over the casket in a symbolic gesture as a part of the graveside service. There shall be
only two (2) burials per day, except as otherwise decided by the Mayor in extenuating circumstances. (Ord. 1511, 6-23-2008)
8-3-8: EMERGENCY CLOSURE:
The City Parks and Recreation Director shall have the authority to temporarily close the cemetery, or any portion thereof, at such times as he deems
necessary to protect the cemetery, and in the best interest of the City. (Ord. 1590, 11-26-2012)
Chapter 4
EXCAVATIONS
8-4-1: PURPOSE; INTENTION OF CHAPTER:
It is the intention of the mayor and council to provide for an orderly method of protecting the city streets and alleys from unwarranted depredations, and
to protect and preserve utilities located beneath streets and alleys in the city. It is also recognized and the intent of the council and mayor that, from time
to time, it is absolutely necessary for the installation of utilities and other important installations, that the surface of the streets and alleys be cut into and
it is their intention to provide for an orderly procedure in such events and for a just repayment to the city for such costs of repair. (Ord. 964, 8-10-1981)
8-4-2: EXCAVATION PERMITS REQUIRED:
When utility installations and other installations require the cutting into the surface and subsurface of the streets and alleys of the city, persons desiring
to do such excavation and cutting into the surface and subsurface of the streets and alleys shall apply to the public works department of the city for a
permit to authorize such surface cutting and digging into the streets and alleys of the city. Application for such permits shall be upon forms prepared and
provided by the public works department. (Ord. 1440, 3-27-2006)
8-4-3: APPROVAL OF APPLICATION:
Upon receipt of the application for an excavation permit, the applicant shall show the plans and location of the proposed excavation to the city of
Mountain Home public works department and notify Dig Line. If the proposed location of the excavation would interfere with any existing underground
utility, the location of the excavation shall be changed to avoid the conflict with said utility. Upon the payment of the proper fee, an excavation permit
shall be issued. (Ord. 1440, 3-27-2006)
8-4-4: TAPERING OF EXCAVATIONS REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 114/258
All such excavations and cuts shall be tapered from the top to the bottom as shall be located and directed by the engineer and the public works
superintendent. (Revised Code 1958)
8-4-5: EXCAVATION FEES:
Each applicant shall pay to the city a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each excavation permit issued by the city's public works department. All permits will
be picked up and paid for at the building department. All fees shall be nonrefundable. (Ord. 1440, 3-27-2006)
8-4-6: BONDING FEES:
All excavations (street cuts) shall be bonded with a cashier's check for one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which shall be refundable upon final inspection
of the excavations or street cuts and acceptance by the city public works and/or street department. The one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) bond shall be
good for up to five (5) excavations (street cuts) at a time. No refund of the bond shall be made until all excavations have been accepted by the city. If a
contractor wishes more than five (5) permits, an additional one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) bond shall be required. If the work is not finished within thirty
(30) days from the commencement of the excavation or street cut, weather permitting, the bond will be forfeited and used by the city of Mountain Home
to finish repairing the street. (Ord. 1440, 3-27-2006)
8-4-7: INSPECTIONS:
All work shall be done to city and state specifications using the latest version of the Idaho standards for public works construction. The city of Mountain
Home street department shall inspect all backfill material for compliance and compaction, and if requested by the city an independent testing company
shall be retained or employed by the contractor at his, hers or its expense to verify that all requirements have been complied with, including compaction.
If a compaction test is required, no asphalt shall be placed into the trench until the public works department has received the compaction test results. All
asphalt or concrete will be over cut on all sides by one foot (1') surrounding the excavation site. (Ord. 1440, 3-27-2006)
8-4-8: COMPLETION OF WORK:
If all work cannot be finished the same day it was started, the contractor that was issued the permit shall be responsible to provide adequate signing
and traffic control as required by the latest edition of the MUTCD (manual of uniform traffic control devices) and shall maintain the excavation site in a
smooth and appropriate manner to allow traffic to cross the excavation at legal speeds without noticeable effects. Failure to comply with this
requirement shall be considered a misdemeanor and subject to punishment as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1440, 3-27-2006)
8-4-9: COMPLIANCE WITH INSTRUCTIONS REQUIRED:
The public works department shall instruct the permittee as to the manner, the time and the place for the proposed surface cutting of streets and alleys
and the conditions under which the cuts shall be made. Violations of these instructions and the conditions on the permit shall be unlawful and
punishable as hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 1440, 3-27-2006)
8-4-10: VIOLATION:
It shall be unlawful to cut into or dig into the streets and alleys of the city without first obtaining a permit therefor, and failure to comply with the terms of
the permit and the instructions of the public works department and/or failure to obtain a permit for such purpose shall be unlawful and shall subject a
person to the penalty prescribed by section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1440, 3-27-2006)
8-4-11: RESTORATION OF SURFACE:
The permittee shall restore the surface of all streets and alleys broken into or damaged as a result of the excavation work, to its original condition in
accordance with specifications provided by the city public works department. The permittee shall maintain the resurfacing of said excavation in its
condition prior to the excavation for a period of one year, normal wear and tear excepted. If the city is required to restore or repair the surface of the
street or alley after any excavation, the permittee shall promptly pay to the city the cost of such restoration or repair. (Ord. 1440, 3-27-2006)
8-4-12: STREETS IN NEW SUBDIVISIONS:
The streets in new subdivisions shall not be allowed to be cut for three (3) years from the date the city accepts the subdivision. Emergency cases will be
reviewed on a case by case basis. In all nonemergency cases, a nonrefundable fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be charged. (Ord. 1440,
3-27-2006)
Chapter 5
AIRPORT REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. COMPREHENSIVE PROVISIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 115/258
8-5A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
AIRPORT: The Mountain Home Municipal Airport and all of the area, buildings, facilities and improvements within the exterior boundaries of such airport
as it now exists or as it may hereafter be extended or enlarged.
AIRPORT MANAGER: The Mayor shall appoint, with the recommendation of the Public Works Director, an Airport Manager who shall be under contract
with the City of Mountain Home.
CITY: The City of Mountain Home, Elmore County, Idaho.
COMMITTEE: The Airport Advisory Committee of the City of Mountain Home, Idaho.
COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Mountain Home, Idaho.
FAA: The Federal Aviation Administration.
ITD: Idaho Transportation Department Division of Aeronautics.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, limited liability company, body politic or club, and
includes any receiver, assignee or other similar representative thereof. (Ord. 1667, 2-26-2018)
8-5A-2: AIRPORT MANAGER:
The Mayor of the City of Mountain Home shall appoint, with the recommendation of the Public Works Director, an Airport Manager who shall be under
contract with the City of Mountain Home. The Airport Manager shall at all times have authority to take such action as may be necessary for the
handling, policing, protection and safeguarding the public while present at the airport and to regulate vehicular traffic at the airport. The Airport Manager
may suspend or restrict any or all operations without regard to other conditions whenever such action is deemed necessary in the interest of safety,
subject to the review of such action by the Public Works Director. (Ord. 1537, 12-28-2009)
8-5A-3: LICENSES REQUIRED OF ALL BUSINESSES OPERATING AT AIRPORT:
No person shall use the airport, or any portion thereof, or any of its improvements or facilities for commercial or business activities without first obtaining
all appropriate permits and licenses for such activities from the City. (Ord. 816, 4-26-1976)
8-5A-4: APPLICATION FOR ANNUAL CITY LICENSES:
All applications for annual City licenses to conduct any commercial or business activity at the airport shall be made to the Council through the
committee upon forms provided by the City Clerk. Each such application shall be signed by every party owning an interest in the proposed business, the
manager or managers of the business and all officers and directors of a corporation seeking a license.
All applicants shall be required to provide or adhere to the following license requirements:
Type and quantity of aircraft to be used;
Services required from the airport;
Proof of liability insurance in the amount of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) will need to be provided before license can be issued and it
should also list the City of Mountain Home as an additional insured;
Operator is responsible for any spill and cleanup on airport property;
Pilots will be responsible to fly normal traffic patterns at all times;
Pilots will be required to use normal VHF communication coming and going from the airport;
A company representative is required to appear before the Airport Advisory Committee before a license can be issued, unless waived by the committee
Chairman.
Upon receipt of an application by the City Clerk, if time allows the City Clerk shall forward that application to the Airport Committee which shall examine
and consider the application and forward it to the Council with their recommendation as to the granting or denial of the license. The Council shall grant
or deny the license at their next regularly scheduled Council meeting. (Ord. 1667, 2-26-2018)
8-5A-5: DOCUMENTS SUPPORTING APPLICATION:
If requested by the committee or Council, the applicant shall submit any or all of the following information and documents in writing with its application,
together with such other information requested by the committee or Council:
A. The current financial statement prepared or certified by a certified public accountant;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 116/258
B. A list of the assets owned or being purchased by the applicant that will be used in the proposed business at the airport;
C. A current credit report covering all areas in which the applicant has done business during the past ten (10) years;
D. Authorization for the FAA and the ITD and all aviation or aeronautic commissions, administrators or departments of all states in which the applicant
has engaged in aviation business to supply the City with all information in their files relating to the applicant or his operation. The applicant shall
execute such forms, releases and discharges as may be requested by any of the above agencies. (Ord. 1667, 2-26-2018)
8-5A-6: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF APPLICATION:
The Council may deny an application for a license to conduct a business or commercial activity at the airport for any of the following reasons:
A. The applicant for any reason does not meet the qualifications, standards or requirements established by this article;
B. The applicant's proposed operations will create a safety hazard at the airport;
C. The granting of the application will require the City to spend City funds or to supply labor or materials in connection with the proposed business or
operation to an extent which the Council determines is not in the best interests of the public;
D. There is no appropriate, adequate or available space or building at the airport to accommodate the activity of the applicant at the time of the
application;
E. The proposed operation or development does not comply with the Master Plan or approved airport layout plan (ALP) of the airport;
F. The applicant has supplied to the council any false information or has misrepresented any material fact in its application or supporting documents, or
has failed to make full disclosure on his application or supporting documents;
G. The applicant has a record of violating this article or the rules and regulations of any other airport, the ITD, federal aviation regulations or any other
applicable rules and regulations;
H. The applicant has defaulted in the performance of any lease or other agreement with the city;
I. The applicant has a credit report which contains derogatory information and the applicant does not appear to be of satisfactory business responsibility
and reputation;
J. The applicant does not appear to have, or have access to, the financial resources necessary to conduct the proposed operation;
K. The applicant has violated any law of such a nature that it indicates to the council that the applicant would not be a desirable operator at the airport;
L. The protection of the health, welfare, safety or morals of the inhabitants of the city require such denial.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the council from granting or denying, for any reason it deems sufficient, an application to do
business at the airport for the purpose of selling or furnishing nonaviation products and supplies or any service or business of a nonaeronautical nature.
(Ord. 1537, 12-28-2009)
8-5A-7: AIRPORT LICENSE FEES:
Prior to the issuance of any license to conduct business at the airport, an annual license fee shall be paid to the city according to the following schedule:
A. Fixed base operator (FBO): Four hundred dollars ($400.00). To include the following:
1. Aircraft maintenance.
2. Aircraft rental.
3. Flight instruction and ground school.
4. Aircraft and accessories sales.
5. Aircraft storage.
6. Charter operations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 117/258
7. Skydiving operations.
B. Agricultural operations: Four hundred dollars ($400.00). To include the following:
1. Agricultural plane maintenance.
2. Agricultural plane flight instruction.
3. Agricultural plane storage.
C. Aerial ambulance: Four hundred dollars ($400.00). To include the following:
1. Aircraft maintenance.
2. Aircraft storage.
3. Flight instruction.
D. Firefighting operations: One hundred dollars ($100.00) annual fee plus twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day per aircraft fee. To include the following:
1. Aircraft storage.
2. Aircraft maintenance.
3. Flight instruction.
E. Aircraft maintenance and inspection operations: One hundred dollars ($100.00) annual fee.
Each of the above services or businesses offered by each applicant shall be listed on the application. Regardless of the number of services offered,
no applicant shall be required to pay more than a total of four hundred dollars ($400.00) in annual license fees. Each license shall commence
January 1 of each year and expire December 31 of the same year. An applicant applying for a license after July 1 of any year shall pay only one-half
(1/2) of the above fees and the total fee shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 1634, 6-8-2015)
8-5A-8: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS FOR FLYING CLUBS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1537, 12-28-2009)
8-5A-9: AIRPORT LICENSE NOT TO BE TRANSFERRED:
Licenses and permits issued to conduct any business or other activity at the airport shall not be assigned, sold or transferred in any manner. (Ord. 1537,
12-28-2009)
8-5A-10: CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
No lessee, licensee or any other person shall construct, alter or remove any improvements of any kind at the airport without the prior approval of the
public works director and council. The council may require an appropriate bond to guarantee the completion of any construction or alteration in
accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the public works director and council. All improvements shall be constructed or altered in
compliance with the Mountain Home airport master plan, approved airport layout plan and any building permits or regulations required. (Ord. 1537, 12-
28-2009)
8-5A-11: TIE DOWN FEES:
The city shall maintain aircraft parking spaces with appropriate tie downs which shall be available to residents and nonresidents under the direction and
supervision of the airport manager. There shall be tie down fees as established by resolution of the city council.
For the purposes of this section a "resident of the city" shall mean anyone who maintains his or her primary domicile within the city limits of the city of
Mountain Home, Idaho. (Ord. 1651, 5-23-2016)
8-5A-12: COMMERCIAL OPERATORS:
A "commercial operator" is a person who carries on one or more of the following services for profit at the airport:
A. Aircraft sales;
B. Sale of parts and accessories;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 118/258
C. Charter operations, including, without limitation, passenger or "air taxi", freight or delivery, photography, aerial survey and agricultural spraying;
D. Aircraft rental;
E. Flight instruction or ground school;
F. Maintenance services including airframe overhaul and repair, engine overhaul and repair, radio and electrical shop, instrument shop, aircraft interior
work and refinishing and painting;
G. Line services including supplying fuel, oil and other fluids, deicing fluids, interior cleaning and in flight food service;
H. Aircraft storage, whether inside a hangar or outside a hangar;
I. Airline services, including fueling of airlines, exterior cleaning of airline equipment, interior cleaning of airline equipment, turbine starting and other
special contractual services;
J. Air ambulance;
K. Firefighting operations;
L. Agricultural operations. (Ord. 1537, 12-28-2009)
8-5A-13: LICENSE FOR COMMERCIAL OPERATORS:
No person shall operate as a commercial operator at the airport until such person has applied for and received from the city a license therefor and has
met the requirements of this article.
An applicant for a commercial operator's license shall specify in his application all services which the applicant desires to conduct at the airport. A
commercial operator shall engage in only those services for which he qualifies and which are specified in the license granted by the city. Upon issuance
of a license to a commercial operator, he shall, as the construction of any required physical facilities permit, immediately commence and conduct on a
full time basis all business activities and services authorized by his license. (Ord. 953, 3-9-1981)
8-5A-14: PERMITS REQUIRED OF COMMERCIAL OPERATORS:
A commercial operator and all of his employees and agents shall be competent and shall hold all current, valid certificates, permits and licenses
required by the ITD and FAA, including required FAA air taxi permits and public commission certificates. Commercial operators shall not utilize any pilot
in any aircraft operation who does not hold valid and current certificates from the ITD and FAA necessary for him to conduct such activities. If as a result
of any action, order or ruling of the ITD or FAA any commercial operator is grounded or his commercial pilot certificate or instructor's certificate is
suspended or revoked for a period of ninety (90) days or more, the council may revoke the commercial operator's license and authority to conduct
business activities at the airport as a commercial operator. (Ord. 1537, 12-28-2009)
8-5A-15: MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS AND UTILITIES BY COMMERCIAL OPERATORS:
Unless otherwise provided, a commercial operator shall, at his own expense, provide, construct, install, equip and maintain all utilities, buildings,
structures, ramps, tie down areas, taxiways, fences, weed control and all other facilities and improvements associated with the leased premises,
approved by the council for the commercial operator to carry on the activities or services authorized in his license. A commercial operator shall promptly
pay when due all charges for sewer, water, power, telephone services and other utilities and services supplied to his place of business at the airport.
(Ord. 1537, 12-28-2009)
8-5A-16: AREA OF OPERATION OF COMMERCIAL OPERATORS:
A commercial operator shall carry on his business operations strictly within the areas assigned him by the city and his operations shall not interfere with
the operations of other commercial operators, agencies or other businesses operating at the airport, the use of the airport by the general public or with
any common use area. Commercial operators shall not use any common use area except as authorized. (Ord. 953, 3-9-1981)
8-5A-17: COOPERATION OF COMMERCIAL OPERATORS WITH CITY:
Commercial operators shall cooperate with the airport manager in the operation, management and control of the airport and shall do all things
reasonable to promote the Mountain Home airport and aeronautical activities thereon and to develop the airport into an attractive, efficient and modern
airport. (Ord. 953, 3-9-1981)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 119/258
8-5A-18: COMPLAINTS AGAINST COMMERCIAL OPERATORS:
Complaints against any commercial operator for the violation of the ordinances of the city or any other rule or regulation shall be made in writing, signed
by the complaining party, specify the nature of the complaint, the time of its occurrence and witnesses, if any. (Ord. 953, 3-9-1981)
8-5A-19: DISCRIMINATION BY COMMERCIAL OPERATOR PROHIBITED:
Commercial operators shall conduct their business in a fair and nondiscriminatory manner and shall not discriminate in the prices charged for their
services, except they may make reasonable allowances, discounts or rebates to volume purchasers, if permitted by law. (Ord. 953, 3-9-1981)
8-5A-20: REVOCATION OF LICENSE OF COMMERCIAL OPERATORS:
The council shall have the right to terminate and revoke the license of any commercial operator to conduct any services or business at the airport for
any cause or reason provided in this article and in addition thereto, upon the happening of any one or more of the following:
A. Filing of a voluntary or involuntary petition for the adjudication of a commercial operator as a bankrupt;
B. A general assignment for the benefit of creditors by a commercial operator;
C. The abandonment or discontinuance of any permitted operation at the airport by a commercial operator without prior approval of the council;
D. A violation of any provision of this article or the default in any provision of a lease of airport property from the city to a commercial operator;
E. The failure to promptly pay to the city, when due, any license fees;
F. The commission by a commercial operator or any partner, officer or director thereof, of any unsafe or reckless conduct in the operation of any aircraft
or in the operation of any business at the airport;
G. Providing the city with any false information or misrepresenting any material fact to the city in its application for a license, supporting documents or in
any statements in the city.
In the event of the termination or revocation of a license of a commercial operator, he shall cease and desist all business operations at the airport at
once. (Ord. 953, 3-9-1981)
8-5A-21: VIOLATION OF ARTICLE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this article. The violation of any of the provisions of this article shall subject the
offender to penalties in accordance with section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 816, 4-26-1976; amd. 1990 Code)
ARTICLE B. GENERAL PROVISIONS
8-5B-1: COMPLIANCE WITH ITD AND FAA REQUIREMENTS:
All persons utilizing the airport for any purpose shall comply with all pertinent rules, regulations, orders and rulings of the ITD and the FAA, which are
made a part of this article by this reference. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this article and any law, rule, regulation or order of the
ITD, FAA or other federal or state agency exercising the same or similar jurisdiction, the latter shall prevail. (Ord. 1538, 12-28-2009)
8-5B-2: SPECIAL EVENTS:
Special events such as airshows, air races, fly ins, skydiving and all events requiring the general use of the airport, other than normal or routine airport
traffic, shall be held only upon the prior written approval of the council, and on such dates, and in such areas, and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be specified by the council. (Ord. 817, 4-26-1976)
8-5B-3: HOURS OF PUBLIC USE:
The airport shall be open for public use at all hours of the day, subject to regulations or restrictions due to weather, the conditions of the landing area,
the presentation of special events and other causes, as may be determined by the airport manager and as otherwise provided in this article. (Ord. 817,
4-26-1976)
8-5B-4: COMMON USE AREAS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 120/258
All runways for landing and takeoff, all runway, marker guide, signal and beacon lights used to guide operating aircraft, wind and navigation devices and
all aprons, ramps, turnoffs, tie down areas, taxiways and other areas of the airport as the airport manager may designate as common use areas, shall
be considered common use areas available for use, in common, by all persons flying or operating aircraft in the airport and shall be kept clear and
available for aircraft traffic. No commercial operator or other person shall use any common use area for the parking or storing of aircraft, the repair,
servicing or fueling of aircraft or for any other purpose other than the flying and operation of aircraft, without the prior consent of the airport manager.
Common use areas are subject to change. (Ord. 953, 3-9-1981)
8-5B-5: VEHICULAR TRAFFIC:
The traffic1 laws of the city shall apply to the streets, roads and parking areas at the airport, and are hereby incorporated in this article as though fully
set forth herein. Except for firefighting equipment, ambulances and other emergency vehicles, no person shall take or drive any vehicle on the airport,
other than on established streets, roads and automobile parking facilities, unless permission has first been obtained from the airport manager. To
minimize unnecessary vehicular traffic, only airplanes shall be stored in hangars, unless the council grants prior approval for other uses. (Ord. 817, 4-
26-1976; amd. 1990 Code)
8-5B-6: ADVERTISING:
No signs or other advertising shall be placed or constructed at the airport or any building or structure or improvement thereon, without the prior approval
of the board. No signs or advertising shall be permitted if, in the board's opinion, it is undesirable, unnecessary or in any way creates a safety hazard.
(Ord. 817, 4-26-1976)
8-5B-7: AIRPORT RUNWAY TRAFFIC PATTERNS ADOPTED:
The city hereby adopts the standard FAA left hand traffic pattern for runway 10 at the Mountain Home Municipal Airport and a standard left hand traffic
pattern for runway 28 at the Mountain Home Municipal Airport, and every person operating an aircraft at the airport shall comply with said traffic
patterns. (Ord. 817, 4-26-1976)
8-5B-8: REMOVAL OF DAMAGED AIRCRAFT:
In the event any aircraft is wrecked or damaged to the extent that it cannot be moved under its own power, the airport manager shall be immediately
notified, who in turn shall notify the city's public works director. Subject to governmental investigations and inspection of the wreckage, the registered
owner or pilot of the wrecked or damaged aircraft, or the registered owner's agent or legal representative shall, as soon as reasonably possible, obtain
the necessary permission for removal of the aircraft and shall promptly remove such aircraft from any landing area, taxi strip, ramp, tie down area and
any traffic area as designated by the airport manager. No such wrecked or damaged aircraft shall be permitted to remain exposed to the general public
at the airport for more than forty eight (48) hours without the consent of the airport manager. In the event the registered owner of the aircraft fails for any
reason to remove the wrecked or damaged aircraft from the traffic areas as herein provided, the airport manager may cause the removal and storage or
disposal of such wrecked or damaged aircraft at the expense of the registered aircraft owner. Each day the registered owner of a wrecked or damaged
aircraft fails to remove the wrecked or damaged aircraft from the airport premises, after having been given ten (10) days' prior notice in writing to do so
by the airport manager, shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 1538, 12-28-2009)
8-5B-9: PARKING OF AIRCRAFT:
No person shall park, store, tie down or leave any aircraft on any area of the airport, other than as prescribed by the airport manager. No aircraft shall
be parked or stored at the airport unless it is properly tied down and secured. It shall be the sole responsibility of the owner or pilot of any aircraft to tie
down or secure the aircraft at all times required by this article or by weather or other conditions at the airport. It shall be the responsibility of the owner
or pilot of all aircraft to secure the aircraft in the best manner possible and not park the aircraft in an area or manner so that it causes damage to other
aircraft or buildings at the airport. Owners of all aircraft shall be held solely responsible for any damage or loss resulting from the failure of such owner
or the pilot of such aircraft to comply with this article. No person shall take or use any aircraft anchoring or tie down facility when such facilities are
already in actual use by another person. (Ord. 817, 4-26-1976)
8-5B-10: REPAIR OF AIRCRAFT:
All repairs to aircraft or aircraft engines shall be made in the spaces or areas designated for this purpose by the airport manager and not on any part of
the landing area, taxiways, or gassing or service areas of a commercial operator, unless such commercial operator consents to such use for repairs.
(Ord. 953, 3-9-1981)
8-5B-11: STARTING AIRCRAFT:
No aircraft engine shall be started on any aircraft unless a competent operator is in control of the aircraft and parking brakes have been set or the
wheels have been set with blocks that are equipped with ropes or other suitable means for removing such blocks. The engine shall be started, warmed
up and run up only in the places designated for such purposes by the airport manager. No aircraft engine shall be started, run or run up unless the
aircraft is in such a position that the propeller blast clears all hangars, shops, other buildings, persons, other aircraft and vehicles in the area and the
flight path of the landing aircraft. (Ord. 817, 4-26-1976)
8-5B-12: REFUSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 121/258
No person shall throw, dump or deposit any waste, refuse or garbage on the airport. All waste, refuse or garbage shall be placed and kept in closed
garbage cans or containers and all operating areas shall be kept in a safe, neat, clean and orderly condition at all times and in such a manner so as to
minimize any hazards. (Ord. 817, 4-26-1976)
8-5B-13: NOTICE OF ARTICLE AND RESPONSIBILITY OF FLIGHT INSTRUCTORS:
All persons licensed to do business or conducting operations of any kind at the airport shall keep a current copy of this article in its office or place of
business and make it available to all persons. Flight instructors shall fully acquaint their students with this article, and shall be responsible for the
conduct of students under their direction, except when a student is flying solo. (Ord. 1651, 5-23-2016)
8-5B-14: AUTHORITY OF CONTROL TOWER:
The provisions governing the use of the airport contained in this article may be altered upon the authorization of a control tower, when one is
established at the airport. (Ord. 817, 4-26-1976)
8-5B-15: VIOLATION OF ARTICLE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this article. The violation of any of the provisions of this article shall subject the
offender to penalties in accordance with section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 817, 4-26-1976; amd. 1990 Code)
8-5B-16: FUEL STORAGE:
No fuel shall be stored on the airport unless the storage of such fuel meets all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and has been previously
approved by both the city's fire chief and the airport manager. (Ord. 1538, 12-28-2009)
Chapter 6
LIBRARY
8-6-1: LIBRARY, CREATION OF:
A public library and reading room is hereby established under and by virtue of the provisions of this Chapter. (Revised 1958 Code)
8-6-2: LIBRARY AND READING ROOM:
The library and reading room hereby established shall be forever free for the use of the inhabitants of the City, always subject to such reasonable rules
and regulations as the Library Board1 may find necessary to adopt and publish in order to render the use of the library and reading room of the greatest
benefit to the greatest number, and they may exclude and cut off from the use of said library and reading room any and all persons who shall wilfully
violate such rules. (Revised 1958 Code)
8-6-3: DONATIONS FOR LIBRARY:
All persons desirous of making donations of money, personal property or real estate for the benefit of such library may vest the title to the same in the
Board of Trustees, to be controlled by said Board and such Board shall have the right to receive the same and shall be held and considered to be the
special trustees therefor. (Ord. 1017, 8-22-83)
8-6-4: FUNDS FOR OPERATION:
There is hereby created a special fund to be known as the Library Fund, which shall be kept by the Treasurer separate and apart from other moneys of
the City to be used exclusively for the purchase of books, periodicals, necessary furniture and fixtures and compensation for a librarian and assistant
and whatever is required for the maintenance of such library and reading room and all moneys for the use and benefit of said library shall be kept in
said Library Fund. (Revised 1958 Code)
Chapter 7
RAILROADS
8-7-1: SPEED OF TRAINS WITHIN CITY LIMITS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership to operate any railroad rolling stock (train) within the City limits of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 122/258
City, at a speed in excess of forty-five (45) miles per hour. Any violation shall subject the offender to penalties in accordance with Section 1-4-1 of this
City Code. (Ord. 1078, 5-11-87; 1990 Code)
Chapter 8
TREE ORDINANCE
8-8-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to encourage the preservation, expansion, protection, and proper maintenance of the community forest of Mountain Home.
Protecting the public, enhancing the beauty of the City, stimulating the planting and growing of desirable trees, and educating the public about the
community forest are the primary goals of this chapter. (Ord. 1304, 8-9-1999)
8-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, and words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words in the future tense include the present tense. Also,
words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, "should" is advisory, and
"may" is permissive. Words not defined in this section shall have their common and ordinary meanings.
COMMUNITY FOREST: The sum of trees and shrubs within the City of Mountain Home.
FOREST ADMINISTRATOR: A City staff member appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council to be responsible for the coordination of
requests to and recommendations from the Mountain Home Tree Committee. The Administrator oversees the community forest and acts to effectuate
the community tree ordinance. In the absence of such a qualified staff member, the Mountain Home Tree Committee shall serve as the Administrator.
INJURIOUS PEST OR DISEASE: Refers to organisms capable of seriously damaging the form or structural integrity of trees or shrubbery.
MOUNTAIN HOME TREE COMMITTEE: The Parks and Recreation Committee of the City of Mountain Home shall serve as the Mountain Home Tree
Committee.
PRIVATE TREE: A tree that is not a public tree.
PRUNING: The removal of plant parts, dead or alive, in a manner consistent with the methods outlined in the latest revision of the "American National
Standards for Tree Care Operations" (ANSI A300).
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY: Improved or unimproved public property owned by, dedicated to, or deeded to the public for the public's use. Such public
property provides circulation and travel to abutting properties and includes, but is not limited to, streets, alleys, sidewalks, tree lawns, provisions for
public utilities, cut and fill slopes, and open public space.
PUBLIC SHRUB: A shrub that is situated in such a manner that fifty one percent (51%) or more of the shrub trunk base at ground level is on public
property or public right-of-way, including the tree lawn. Public shrubs are part of the community forest.
PUBLIC TREE: A tree that is situated in such a way that fifty one percent (51%) or more of the tree trunk base at ground level is on public property or
public right-of-way, including the tree lawn. Public trees are part of the community forest.
REGISTER: The list of tree trimmers approved by the City to work on all public trees.
SHRUB: Any woody plant that does not exceed a height of eight feet (8') at maturity.
STREET: The entire width between the boundary lines of a public right-of-way dedicated to the City for the use of the public for purposes of vehicular
travel, whether or not maintained by the City and whether or not open for vehicular traffic.
TOPPING: The severe cutting back of limbs within a tree's crown to such a degree that only stubs remain, or the removal of the top part (trunk and
limbs) of a coniferous tree, thereby removing a significant portion of the normal crown.
TREE: Any woody plant that exceeds a height of eight feet (8') at maturity.
TREE LAWN: That portion of the public right-of-way lying between the street and private property boundary lines which is generally unimproved and
planted with grass or other vegetation.
TREE STANDARDS: Those standards eventually adopted by the Tree Committee for use in Mountain Home.
VISION TRIANGLE: That triangle of land defined in any corner lot by measuring from the intersection of the property line of the adjacent streets thirty
feet (30') along each property line and connecting the two (2) points with a line. On land adjacent to an alley, the vision triangle is found by measuring
seven and one-half feet (71/2') along the alley edge and the future projected curb line of the street and connecting the two (2) points with a line. (Ord.
1667, 2-26-2018)
8-8-3: CREATION OF TREE COMMITTEE:
The Parks and Recreation Committee of the City of Mountain Home shall serve as the Mountain Home Tree Committee for the City. (Ord. 1667, 2-26-
2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 123/258
8-8-4: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF COMMITTEE:
A. The Tree Committee shall be advisory in nature with the purpose of providing recommendations to the Mayor and City Council as to the preservation,
protection, and management of the community forest of Mountain Home in accordance with the intents and purposes of this chapter.
B. The Tree Committee will report findings and make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council as requested by them or as appropriate.
C. The Tree Committee may help develop and implement educational materials and programs addressing community forest issues.
D. The day to day enforcement of this chapter will be the responsibility of the duly appointed department head as deemed appropriate by the Mayor and
the City Council.
E. The Tree Committee shall develop and maintain a list of desirable trees in three (3) sizes, small, medium and large, for planting along City streets.
(Ord. 1578, 2-13-2012)
8-8-5: TERM OF OFFICE:
(Rep. by Ord. 1578, 2-13-2012)
8-8-6: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter provides full power and authority over all trees and shrubs located within street rights-of-way, parks, and public places of the City; and to
trees and shrubs located on private property that constitute a hazard or threat as described herein. (Ord. 1304, 8-9-1999)
8-8-7: SPACING OF TREES:
No trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, thirty feet (30'); medium trees, forty feet (40'); and large trees, fifty feet (50'). No
trees shall be planted in the vision triangle. (Ord. 1304, 8-9-1999)
8-8-8: UTILITIES SPACING:
No street trees other than those species listed herein as small trees shall be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or
over or within five (5) lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line, or other utility. (Ord. 1304, 8-9-1999)
8-8-9: DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK:
No trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small trees, two feet (2'); medium trees, three feet (3'); large trees, four feet
(4'). (Ord. 1304, 8-9-1999)
8-8-10: TOPPING:
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any public tree. Topping of private trees is also strongly
discouraged. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices
are impracticable may be exempted from this stricture at the determination of the Mountain Home tree committee. (Ord. 1578, 2-13-2012)
8-8-11: ADJACENT LANDOWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
No person shall plant, remove, cut above the ground, or disturb any tree on any street, park, or other public place without first obtaining written approval
from the forest administrator. The person receiving permission shall abide by the standards set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1304, 8-9-1999)
8-8-12: LANDSCAPING:
(Rep. by Ord. 1578, 2-13-2012)
8-8-13: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to
the penalties in accordance with section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1304, 8-9-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 124/258
Title 9
LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 1
INTRODUCTION
9-1-1: TITLE, AUTHORITY, AND JURISDICTION:
A. Title: This title shall be known as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF MOUNTAIN HOME, and includes, in addition to the text, the "official
zoning map" as is now or hereafter adopted and/or amended by ordinance and shall have the same force and effect as if said map or maps are fully
set forth and described herein. Said title is adopted by ordinance. Said map(s) shall be filed in the office of the city clerk.
B. Authority: This zoning ordinance is adopted pursuant to authority granted by chapter 65, title 67 of the Idaho Code; and article 12, section 2 of the
Idaho constitution as amended or subsequently codified.
C. Jurisdiction: These regulations shall apply to the development of all land within the territorial limits of the city of Mountain Home and to land over
which the city has jurisdiction pursuant to chapter 2, title 67, Idaho Code, and under the area of city impact agreement as negotiated between the
city of Mountain Home and Elmore County, which may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
A. Intent: In enacting this title, special attention has been given to ensuring these regulations are in accordance with the city's comprehensive plan. The
general intent of this title is to implement those goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan that are best addressed through zoning approaches.
Should a provision of the comprehensive plan conflict with a provision of this title, the provision of this title shall take precedence until such time as
either the plan or this title can be amended to reconcile the conflict.
B. Purpose: The purpose of this zoning ordinance for land uses within the city of Mountain Home shall be to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the people of the city of Mountain Home as follows:
1. To protect property rights while making accommodations for other necessary types of development such as low cost housing and mobile home
parks.
2. To ensure that adequate public facilities and services are provided to the people at reasonable cost.
3. To ensure that the economy of the city is protected.
4. To ensure that the important environmental features of the city are protected.
5. To encourage the protection of prime agricultural, forestry and mining lands and land uses for production of food, fiber and minerals, as well as the
economic benefits they provide to the community.
6. To encourage urban and urban type development within the city.
7. To avoid undue concentration of population and overcrowding of land.
8. To ensure that the development on land is commensurate with the physical characteristics of the land.
9. To protect life and property in areas subject to natural hazards and disasters.
10. To protect fish, wildlife and recreation resources.
11. To avoid undue water and air pollution.
12. To allow local school districts to participate in the community planning and development process so as to address public school needs and
impacts on an ongoing basis.
13. To encourage orderly growth and development.
14. To protect property values.
15. To promote excellence, creativity and aesthetics in the design of all new development.
16. To establish reasonable standards to which buildings or structures must conform.
17. To provide for the manner and form of preparing and processing applications, for establishment, modification, conditional uses, and/or variances
from zoning districts and regulations.
18. To provide for living areas in a variety of dwelling types with a range of population and densities with guidelines for sunlight, air and open space.
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-1-3: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 125/258
Wherever the requirements of this title are in conflict with the requirements of this or any other lawfully adopted ordinances, rules or regulations, the
most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern, with the one exception: that this provision shall not be construed as to prohibit the
use of planned unit developments and development agreements. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-1-4: EFFECT ON EXISTING BUILDINGS AND USES:
Lawfully situated buildings and/or structures and the lawful use of land, structures, and buildings which are existing at the time of the adoption hereof
may have their existing use or occupancy continued although such use does not conform to the regulations specified by this title for the zone in which
they are located, until such use is enlarged or expanded. Such structures, buildings or land uses must have conformed to any and all laws and
regulations in force and effect when such usage was commenced and/or the use, structure or building was lawfully situated. Provided, such continued
use or structure is not dangerous to life or safety and meets any special requirements that may have been previously established for the use. (Ord.
1628, 1-12-2015)
9-1-5: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
Should any section or provision of this title be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the title
as a whole or a part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-1-6: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES; EFFECTIVE DATE:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this title or inconsistent with the provisions of this title are hereby repealed to the extent necessary
to give this title full force and effect. This title shall become effective from and after the date of its approval, adoption, and publication as provided by law.
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
Chapter 2
ORGANIZATION AND ENFORCEMENT
9-2-1: DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT/POWERS AND DUTIES:
This section establishes the duties and responsibilities for the development services department, which shall include building, engineering and planning
departments, and other officials and agencies, with respect to the administration of this title.
A. Administrative Duties:
1. Review Of Building Applications: All applications for building permits shall be submitted for plan review to the development services department.
2. Conditional Use Permits/Variances: The development services department shall receive all applications for conditional use permits and variances,
review for completeness and prepare them for submittal for review by the appropriate body.
3. Amendments: All requests for amendments or changes to the subdivision or zoning ordinance, zoning map or comprehensive plan shall be
submitted to the development services department for processing.
4. Code Enforcement: Responsible for all enforcement actions and compliance of this title.
B. Secretary Of Planning And Zoning Commission: The secretary of the commission shall prepare staff reports, assist with findings of fact for all
commission meetings, post notices, take and transcribe minutes of all meetings and prepare recommendations for the city council.
C. Interpretations: The interpretation and application of the provisions of this title shall be by the code official or designated person. An application for
appeal of an interpretation by the development services department shall be submitted to the department, who shall prepare all the necessary
reports and submit, with the application, to the commission, who shall make a recommendation to the council. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-2-2: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
See title 2, chapter 1, of this code. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-2-3: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
No member or employee of the council or commission shall participate in any proceeding or action under this title where he or she has a conflict of
interest as described in Idaho Code 67-6506, title 59, chapter 7 Idaho Code, or city policy. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-2-4: CONFORMANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 126/258
All uses of land, buildings or structures, whether publicly or privately owned, that are established after the adoption hereof shall conform with the
comprehensive plan, the area of impact agreement, and shall be subject to all the regulations of this title.
The code official, prior to the issuance of a building permit, may require the submission of statements and plans indicating the manner in which
dangerous and objectionable elements involved in processing and in equipment operations are to be eliminated or reduced to acceptable limits and
tolerances. Methods and procedures for the determination of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall conform to applicable
standard measurement procedures by the health authority, and any other applicable regulatory agency. All new development within the city and
applicable development under the area of impact agreement shall comply with the most recently adopted edition of the international building code, state
regulatory agencies, federal regulations and the ordinances, resolutions and policies of the city. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-2-5: ENGINEERS' OR ARCHITECTS' PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
For any plans, construction drawings or specifications for commercial applications submitted to the city as required by this title, the review and approval
by the city shall not constitute an engineering/architectural review of project plans and calculations. The review is for the purpose of ensuring general
conformance to city policies and requirements. The submitting engineer and/or architect is solely responsible for the design. All submissions to the city
shall be stamped by a professional engineer and/or architect registered in the state of Idaho. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-2-6: FEE SCHEDULE FOR LAND USE PLANNING ACTIONS:
A. Fee Schedule Established: The department of development services, at the time of the filing of an application for a land use planning action, shall
collect the fee for such action established through a resolution of the city council together with any direct costs incurred by the city in obtaining a
review of the application by architects, engineers, attorneys, or other professionals necessary to enable the city to approve or disapprove the
application in an informed manner.
B. Payment Of Fees Prior To Action By The City: Until all fees charged and expenses established by this section have been paid in full, no action shall
be taken by the city on any application or referral to which this section applies.
C. Refunds: Fees charged pursuant to this section shall not be refundable.
D. Waivers: The city council shall have the authority, in its sole discretion, to waive, in whole or in part, the foregoing fees, for good cause shown. (Ord.
1628, 1-12-2015)
9-2-7: PERMITS AND LICENSING:
All departments, officials and employees which are charged with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall issue no permit or license for
uses or purposes where the same would be in conflict with this code. Any permit or license, if issued in conflict with this code, shall be null and void.
Reliance on a staff member's opinion does not create a legal right or implied variance that would otherwise conflict with this code.
If no commencement of construction has occurred within one hundred eighty (180) days of issuance of the building permit or approval then such permit
or approval shall be expired, unless a different time of issuance of the permit or approval is allowed in this code, or unless an extension is granted by
the issuing agency prior to the expiration. Failure to comply fully with the terms of any permit or approval may be grounds for cancellation or revocation.
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-2-8: APPEALS:
See chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-2-9: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. General: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy
or maintain any building or land, or cause or permit the same to be done, in violation of this title. When any building or parcel of land regulated by
this title is being used contrary to this title, the city, through its authorized agents, may initiate injunction or abatement proceedings, or other
appropriate action, in the courts against any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this title. Such person shall discontinue the
use within the time prescribed by the city building inspector or designee after receipt of such notice to make the structure, parcel of land, or portion
thereof, comply with the requirements of this title.
B. Penalty Provisions And Enforcement: Pursuant to Idaho Code, a violation of this title is hereby declared to be an infraction and the violator may be
punished as provided in this code for each such violation.
C. Enforcement: The building and zoning official and the code enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue citations for violations of this title.
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 127/258
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
9-3-1: PURPOSE:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this chapter. These definitions are
applicable to the comprehensive plan and this title. Where the terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings within the
context within which they are used. "Webster's Third New International Dictionary Of The English Language, Unabridged", copyright 1986, shall be
considered as providing ordinarily accepted meanings.
For the purpose of this title, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
A. The word "structure" shall include the word "building".
B. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual.
C. The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular.
D. The word "shall" is a mandatory requirement, the word "may" is a permissive requirement, and the word "should" is a preferred requirement.
E. The words "use", "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied".
F. The word "lot" includes the words "plot", "parcel" and "tract". (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-3-2: DEFINITIONS ENUMERATED:
ABUT: To physically touch or border upon; or to share a common property line; or being separated from such common border by an alley or easement.
(See definitions of Adjoining Lot Or Land and Contiguous.)
ACCESS OR ACCESSWAY: The place, means or way by which pedestrians or vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a
property, use or parking space.
ACCESSORY SIGN: An on premises sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, offered, or
manufactured upon the premises where the sign is located.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE: A use of land or of a building, or portion thereof, customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of
the land or building and located on the same lot with such principal use. An accessory use or structure does not alter the essential characteristics of the
principal permitted use and does not include a building which is defined herein as a "dwelling unit".
ADDITION: A structure added to the original structure at some time after the completion of the original.
ADJOINING LOT OR LAND: A lot or parcel of land which shares all or part of a common lot line with another lot or parcel of land. (See definition of
Contiguous.)
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE: An establishment primarily engaged in management and general administrative functions, such as executive, personnel,
finance, and sales activities, performed centrally for other establishments of the same company.
ADMINISTRATOR: See definition of Code Official/Administrator.
ADULT ARCADE: A premises where, for any form of consideration, one or more motion picture or slide projectors or similar machines for viewing by
five (5) or fewer persons each, are used to display any images emphasizing the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or graphically
exposed specified anatomical areas. This shall also apply to any arcade which is not customarily open to the general public because minors are
excluded by virtue of their age as a prevailing business practice or as required by law.
ADULT BOOKSTORE: A premises which is not customarily open to the general public because minors are excluded by virtue of their age as a
prevailing business practice as required by law and has, at any one time, a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade and offers for sale, trade
or rent of one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
slides or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or exposed
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT CARE FACILITY: A profit or nonprofit place of residence for the sheltered care of unrelated adult persons, which may provide food, limited
nursing facilities and minimum maintenance living accommodations by the day, week, month, etc.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A premises where, for any form of consideration, has, at any one time, a substantial or significant portion of its
stock, rented or owned, which shows films, motion pictures, videocassettes, digital images, slides or similar reproductions, and in which one of the
principal business purposes is devoted to the showing of material which is characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar premises which, for any form of consideration, features live performances, which are
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas as one of the principal business purposes or by specified sexual activities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 128/258
AESTHETIC: Those qualities of a development or natural features which contribute to a pleasant environment.
AGRICULTURE: The science, art, business, and use of land for farming, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, animal and poultry
husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or storing the produce, provided, however, that: a) the operation of any such
accessory uses shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural activities; and b) the above uses shall not include the feeding or sheltering of animals
or poultry in penned enclosures within two hundred feet (200') of any residential zoning district. "Agriculture" does not include the operation of a dairy; or
the operation or maintenance of a commercial stockyard or feed yard where large numbers of livestock are fed concentrated feeds; pig farms and/or
similar intensive agricultural related uses.
AIRPORT: A place where aircraft can land and take off, usually equipped with hangars and facilities for refueling and repair.
ALLEY/LANE: A passageway open to public travel, not more than twenty five feet (25') wide, which is used primarily for utility service lines and for
vehicular service access to the back or side of lots otherwise abutting on a street and which is not intended for general traffic circulation.
ALTERATION: Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or
interior partitions, as well as any change in doors or windows, or any enlargement to or diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally or
vertically, or the moving of a building or structure from one location to another. This definition excludes normal repairs and maintenance, such as
painting, but includes substantial changes. (See definition of Structural Alterations and Substantial Alteration/Substantial Improvement.)
AMUSEMENT AND RECREATION SERVICES: Establishments engaged in providing amusement or entertainment for a fee or admission charge and
include such activities as dance halls, studios; theatrical producers; bands, orchestras, and other musical entertainment; bowling alleys and billiard and
pool establishments; commercial sports such as arenas, rinks, racetracks, public golf courses and coin operated devices; amusement parks;
membership sports and recreation clubs; amusement and bathing beaches; swimming pools; riding academies; carnival operations; expositions; game
parlors and horse shows.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to short term care
incidental to the hospital use.
ANIMATED SIGN: A sign with action or motion, flashing, color changes requiring electrical energy, electronic or manufactured sources of supply, but not
including wind actuated elements such as flags, banners, or specialty items. This definition does not include public service signs such as time and
temperature units.
ANNEXATION: The incorporation of a land area into an existing community with a resulting change in the boundaries of that community.
ANTENNA/TV DISH/BROADCASTING TOWER: A device used for radiating or receiving radio or television waves.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure which is arranged, designed or used as a single housekeeping unit and has
complete and permanently installed kitchen and bathroom facilities.
APPEAL: A request for a rehearing or reconsideration or a request to a higher authority for a change of the decision on the application, usually because
said application has been denied or approved with the conditions by the administrator, commission or council.
APPLICANT: A person submitting an application for development of land, rezone, conditional use, accessory use, annexation, or request to be allowed
to make any application authorized under this title.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT: The application form and all accompanying documents and exhibits required of an applicant by an approving
authority for development review purposes.
APPRAISAL: An estimate or opinion of the value of real or personal property or an interest or estate in that property as determined by a qualified
appraiser.
ARCHITECT: A professional architect licensed in the state of Idaho.
AREA OF CITY IMPACT: That area negotiated and adopted pursuant to Idaho Code by the city of Mountain Home and Elmore County by means of a
separate ordinance.
AREA OF CRITICAL CONCERN/COUNTY CDO: Area within the city or area of impact which needs special development consideration for one or more
of the following reasons: a) floodplain; b) land incapable of meeting percolation requirements; c) land formerly used for landfill operations or hazardous
industrial use; d) aquifer recharge and discharge areas north of the city limits and interstate.
ARTERIAL STREET: See definition of Street, Urban System.
ASSESSED VALUATION: The value at which property is appraised for tax purposes. The estimated value of property as appraised by the Elmore
County assessor for the purpose of property tax assessment.
ATTIC: That part of a building which is immediately below and wholly or partly within the roof framing.
AUTOMOBILE OR MOBILE HOME SALES AREA: An open area, other than the street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used automobiles,
mobile homes, travel trailers, or farm implements, but not including repair work except minor incidental repair of same to be displayed, sold or rented on
the premises.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR: See definitions of Garage, Repair and Repair.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Premises primarily used for the retail sale and delivery to the vehicle of motor vehicle fuel and of lubricating oils,
tires and incidental vehicular accessories which also provides vehicular lubrication and related services, including minor motor vehicle repairs.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: Premises on which there are two (2) or more currently nonlicensed motor vehicles or two (2) or more motor vehicles
not in operating condition outside a fully enclosed building and standing more than sixty (60) days and are dismantled, on blocks, or stored. "Motor
vehicles" also includes motor homes, boats, trailers, and trucks.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 129/258
BABY SITTING: Exempt from child daycare regulations. The act of caring for children for consideration while the parents or usual guardians are absent.
BAR/TAVERN: A structure or part of a structure used primarily for the sale or dispensing of beer, wine, alcoholic beverages or liquor by the drink.
BASEMENT: A portion of a building all or partly underground but having at least one-half (1/2) of its height below the average level of the adjoining
ground (7 foot 6 inch ceiling height).
BED AND BREAKFAST/BOARDING HOUSE: Owner occupied lodging facility that provides breakfasts to its guests. Establishments that are exclusively
indoor lodging facilities which may provide meals only to paying lodgers who may or may not be transient. Such land uses may provide indoor
recreational facilities for the exclusive use of their customers.
BICYCLE FACILITIES: A general term denoting improvements and provisions made by public agencies to accommodate or encourage bicycling,
including parking facilities, all bikeways, and shared roadways not specifically designated for bicycle use.
BIKE LANE: A portion of a roadway which has been designated by striping, signing, and pavement markings for preferential or exclusive use of
bicyclists.
BIKE PATH: A bikeway physically separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within the highway right of way or
within an independent right of way.
BILLBOARD SIGN/POSTER: A sign upon which advertising matter is posted and which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or
entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located.
BLIGHTED AREA: An area characterized by deteriorating and/or abandoned buildings, inadequate or missing public or community services, vacant
land with debris, litter, lack of sanitation facilities, trash and junk accumulation, and impacted by adverse environmental nuisances such as noise, heavy
traffic, and odors.
BLOCK: A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public land, railroad rights of way, waterways or any other barrier to the
continuity to development.
BUFFER STRIP: Land area, which may include a combination of berms, fences, block walls, grass, shrubs, and trees, used to visibly separate one use
from another or to shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances. (See chapter 11 of this title.)
BUFFER YARD: See chapter 11 of this title.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process,
equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A subordinate structure on the same lot as the principal or main building or use occupied or devoted to a use incidental to
the principal use.
BUILDING AREA: The space remaining on a zoning plat after the minimum open space requirements of this title have been complied with.
BUILDING COVERAGE: The horizontal area measured within the outside of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory
buildings on a lot. Any uncovered structures, e.g., porches and decks, are excluded.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished grade within twenty feet (20') of the
structure to the highest point of the roof.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The official appointed by the city to enforce the adopted building codes and any other applicable codes.
BUILDING LINE: A line established by law or agreement, usually parallel to the property line, beyond which a structure may not extend. This generally
does not apply to uncovered entrance platforms, terraces and steps.
BUILDING PERMIT: Written permission issued by the proper municipal authority for the construction, repair, alteration or addition to a structure.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which a building is situated.
BULK: A term used to describe the size and relationships of buildings and other structures, spaces, streets and parking and overall land area.
BUMPERS: Permanent devices in each parking stall which block the front wheels of a vehicle.
BUSINESS: See definition of Commercial Use Or Business.
CALIPER: The diameter of a tree trunk.
CANOPY/AWNING: A permanent overhanging shade or shelter, especially canvas, that is usually temporary in nature (but may be a permanent
structure) and that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements and on which a sign may be
located.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT: A government acquisition of real property, major construction project, or acquisition of long lasting, expensive equipment.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM: A proposed timetable or schedule of all future capital improvements to be carried out during a specific period
and listed in order of priority, together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project.
CARETAKER'S/WATCH GUARD FACILITY: An accessory structure, which is located on the same parcel as the principal use, and which is used
exclusively by either the owner, manager, or operator for the purpose of watch guard or maintenance but not a dwelling unit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 130/258
CARPORT: A roofed structure providing space for the parking or storage of motor vehicles which may be enclosed on two (2) or three (3) sides.
CARPORT IN SETBACK AREAS: A removable metal structure being built of metal only providing space for parking a motor vehicle, trailer, and/or boat,
which will not be enclosed on any sides.
CEMETERY: Property dedicated as a cemetery for the burial of deceased humans or animals, including crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries, if
operated in connection with and within the boundaries of such cemetery, for which perpetual care and maintenance is provided.
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-2): The downtown core area of the City as designated on the parking overlay map.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE: A letter stating that a residential dwelling complies with the building codes.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: A certificate which is issued by the Building Inspector to indicate that, after construction of the building has been
completed or a use in an existing building has been changed, the purpose for which that building was constructed or changed is being carried out in
accordance with the terms of this title and applicable building and fire codes.
CHANGE OF USE: Any use which substantially differs from the previous use of a building or land.
CHILD: A person less than twelve (12) years of age.
CHURCH, HOUSE: A residential structure, which by design and construction is primarily intended as a dwelling unit and is located in a residential zone,
and is used jointly as a dwelling unit and a church building to house a small congregation for church meetings.
CHURCH/RELIGIOUS FACILITIES: A building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, which by design and construction are primarily intended
for the conducting of organized religious services and/or a household unit for persons employed in the building.
CITY: The City of Mountain Home.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Mountain Home.
CLINIC (MEDICAL, DENTAL, OPTICAL): A building, other than a hospital, used by one (1) or more healthcare practitioners for the purpose of care,
diagnosis and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or injured patients and those who are in need of medical attention. Patients are not kept overnight.
CLUB/LODGE: A building and related facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, or group of individuals established for the fraternal,
social, educational, recreational or cultural enrichment of its members and not primarily for profit, and usually characterized by certain membership
qualifications, payment of fees and/or dues, regular meetings, and a constitution and bylaws.
CLUBHOUSE: A building, or portion thereof, used by a club.
CLUBHOUSE/COUNTRY CLUB OR SUBDIVISION CLUBHOUSE: A land area and buildings containing recreational facilities, clubhouse and usual
accessory uses, open only to members and their guests for a membership fee.
CLUSTER: A development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on the site to allow the remaining land to be used for
recreation, common open space, and preservation of environmentally sensitive features.
CODE OFFICIAL/ADMINISTRATOR: The official of the City having knowledge in the principles and practices of zoning, who is authorized by the
Council to administer this title.
COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE: A structure in which plants, vegetables, flowers and similar materials are grown for sale.
COMMERCIAL USE OR BUSINESS: Any person or persons engaged in the purchase, sale or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of
any article, substance or commodity for remuneration, livelihood or profit, or the maintenance and use of offices by professions and trades rendering
services.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle licensed by the state as a commercial vehicle.
COMMISSION: The planning and zoning commission which is appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council.
COMMON AREA/OPEN SPACE: See definition of Open Space.
COMMUNITY INFORMATION SIGN: An officially designated sign which may be illuminated and is limited to the display of information of interest to the
general community regarding scheduled public events and public activities or provides historical or other special information of public interest.
COMPOSTING OPERATION: A controlled process of degrading organic matter by microorganisms.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A comprehensive long range plan intended to guide the growth and development of a community or region and one that
includes analysis, recommendations and proposals for the community's population, economy, housing, transportation, community facilities and land
use.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN/PROJECTED LAND USE MAP: A map which projects and guides future growth patterns in a contiguous and orderly manner.
CONCEPT PLAN: Preliminary drawings and pertinent information for the express purpose of initiating preliminary discussions for project development.
(See definition of Plat.)
CONDITIONAL USE: A use that is marginally prohibited but which may be permitted within a certain zoning district, as shown on the land use chart,
when particular care is taken to integrate the use with its natural and built surroundings and will comply with all the conditions and standards specified in
this title and permit for the location and/or operation. A "conditional" use is a use which may have the potential to create problems or nuisances to the
surrounding properties. The uses shall be listed in each respective zone in this title.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: A permit which may allow a prohibited use within a certain zoning district if a conditional use permit is issued by the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 131/258
authorized board stating that the conditional use meets all conditions set forth in local ordinances, plus additional requirements which may be added.
CONDOMINIUM: A building, or group of buildings, in which units are owned individually, and the structure, common area and facilities are owned by all
the owners on a proportional undivided basis.
CONDOMINIUM, COMMERCIAL: A building, or group of buildings, used for offices, businesses, professional services, other commercial enterprises
and may contain a mixed residential/commercial use, owned and maintained as a condominium as per Idaho state law.
CONFERENCE CENTER: A facility used for business or professional conferences and seminars, often with accommodations for sleeping, eating and
recreation.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: Any sign which warns persons of construction or demolition for a project or which describes the project and indicates the
builder, architect or others involved in the project.
CONTIGUOUS: Next to, abutting, or touching and having a boundary or portion thereof, which is coterminous. (See definitions of Abut and Adjoining
Lot Or Land.)
CONTRACTOR'S PROJECT OFFICE: Any structure, of a temporary nature, containing an on site construction management office for an active
construction project. (See definitions of Temporary Use and Temporary Structure.)
CONVENIENCE STORE: A neighborhood store engaging primarily in the sale of basic food items. Nonfood items may also be sold provided they are
considered everyday convenience goods.
CONVERSION: A change in the use of land or a structure.
COPY: As part of a sign regulated under chapter 13 of this title, any combination of letters or numbers which is intended to inform, direct or otherwise
transmit information.
COUNTY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The official master plan for the physical development of Elmore County.
COUNTY RECORDER: The office of the county recorder of Elmore County, Idaho.
COURT: An open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building(s) which is bounded on two (2) or more sides by such
building(s), including the open space in a house or apartment, providing access to the units.
COVENANT: A written promise or pledge which is recorded at the Elmore County recorder's office.
CRAWL SPACE: A space between the ceiling of one story and floor of the next story, which usually contains pipes, ducts, wiring and lighting fixtures
and permits access but is too low for an individual to stand. Also between the floor of a single-story structure and ground.
CROSSWALK: A public right of way for pedestrian traffic that crosses a public street or alley.
CUL-DE-SAC: The turnaround at the end of a dead end street.
CULTURAL FACILITIES: Establishments such as museums, art galleries, botanical and zoological gardens of a historic, educational or cultural interest
which are not operated commercially.
CURB: A stone or concrete boundary usually marking the edge of the roadway or paved area.
CURB CUT: The opening along the curb line at which point vehicles may enter or leave the roadway.
DAYCARE: Care and supervision provided for compensation, during part of a twenty four (24) hour day, for a child or children not related by blood or
marriage to the person or persons providing the care in a place other than the child's or children's own home or homes.
DAYCARE CENTER: A place or facility providing daycare, for compensation, for thirteen (13) or more children.
DECIBEL: A unit of sound pressure level.
DECK/TERRACE: A floorlike structure (may be different levels) requiring a building permit, which may or may not be covered.
DEDICATION: The deed or other instrument of conveyance of land or interests in land for use by the public by ordinance, resolution or entry in the
official minutes as by the recording of a plat. Dedicated land becomes public land upon the acceptance by the city.
DEED: A legal document conveying ownership of real property.
DENSITY: The number of families, individuals, dwelling units, or housing structures per unit of land.
DESIGN REVIEW: Review of development proposals for building and site plan, signs, grading, parking, landscaping, etc., to ensure compliance with
codes.
DETERIORATION: The marked diminishing of the physical condition of structures or buildings.
DEVELOPER: The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land included in a proposed development, including the holder of an option or
contract to purchase, or other persons having enforceable proprietary interests in such land. (See definition of Subdivider/Developer.)
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN: All plats, plans and/or submissions by a subdivider or developer in whole or in part describing a development and considered
by the development services department, commission and council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 132/258
DISTRICT: A part, zone or geographic area within the municipality within which certain zoning or development regulations apply.
DOUBLEWIDE UNIT: Two (2) mobile home units, designed to be attached side by side, which constitute the complete mobile home. One unit without
the other would not provide all the necessities for a dwelling unit.
DOWN ZONING: An action which results in the lowering of the zoning classification of a given tract, tracts or area to a lesser land use; for example, an
adjustment from commercial to residential land use.
DRAINAGE: A. Surface water runoff.
B. The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading or other means which include runoff controls to minimize erosion and
sedimentation during and after construction or development.
C. The means for preserving the water supply and the prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Pipes, swales, natural features and manmade improvements designed to carry drainage.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment which by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits
customers to purchase a commodity or receive services, or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles. (See unique use/drive-in, chapter 9
of this title.)
DRIVEWAY: A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling or other structure.
DRUGSTORE: A retail store where medical prescriptions, drugs, medical devices and supplies, and nonprescription medicines are sold, but where a
variety of nonmedical products are sold as well.
DRY LINE: A utility line that is installed in accordance with city design specifications in anticipation of future connection to the municipal facility. (See
chapter 16 of this title.)
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building consisting of three (3) or more attached dwelling units where all such units are on the same lot.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means and is used exclusively for the occupancy of one
family, including a "group home" as defined by Idaho Code.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED: A building containing two (2) dwelling units attached by a common wall(s), where each dwelling unit is
located on a separate lot.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE: A townhouse/row house is a building containing three (3) or more dwelling units attached by a common wall(s), where
each dwelling unit is located on a separate lot, and no unit is located over another unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY DUPLEX: A building, on a single lot, designed or used exclusively for the occupancy of two (2) families, consisting of two (2)
dwelling units which may be either attached by a common wall side by side or one above the other.
DWELLING UNIT: Any structure or portion thereof which meets adopted building codes and is used as a residence or living quarters of one or more
persons. The dwelling unit does not include any attached or detached accessory structures.
EASEMENT: A permanent or temporary limited right of use of land for specific purposes, excluding alleys.
EAVE: The projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building.
EGRESS: An exit.
EMISSION: A discharge of pollutants into the air.
ENCROACHMENT: Any obstruction in a delineated floodway, right of way or adjacent land.
ENGINEER: A professional engineer registered in the state of Idaho.
ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES: Any structure housing any "for profit" activity, which is generally related to the entertainment field, such as motion
picture theaters, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, bars, bowling alleys and similar entertainment activities.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance of underground/surface or overhead electrical, gas, steam, water and
sewage transmission and collection systems, streets, sidewalk/curb and gutter, fire protection, and the equipment and appurtenances necessary for
such systems to furnish an adequate level of public service.
EXCAVATION: Removal or recovery by any means whatsoever of soil, rock, minerals, mineral substances, or organic substances, other than
vegetation, from water or land on or beneath the surface thereof, or beneath the land surface whether exposed or submerged.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME PARK/SUBDIVISION: A parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land divided into two (2) or more mobile home
lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed before the effective date
hereof.
EXISTING USE: The use of a lot or structure at the time of the enactment of a zoning ordinance.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME PARK/SUBDIVISION: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the mobile homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, either final site grading or pouring of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 133/258
concrete pads, or the construction of streets).
FACADE: The front of a building given special architectural treatment; a false or artificial appearance.
FACE OR FRONTAGE OF BUILDING: The wall of a building fronting on a street or alley.
FAMILY: A person living alone or two (2) or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit as distinguished from a group
occupying a boarding house, motel or hotel.
FAMILY DAYCARE HOME: A home, place or facility providing daycare, for compensation, for six (6) or fewer children. This use includes the care of the
operator's children or legal wards and children related by blood or marriage. It does not include any occasional personal guests and children aged
twelve (12) years and over. (See unique use/family daycare, chapter 9 of this title.)
FASCIA SIGN: A sign which is mounted flat on the face of the building or parapet and projects no more than eighteen inches (18") from the wall.
FAST FOOD RESTAURANT: An establishment whose principal business is the sale of preprepared or rapidly prepared food directly to the customer in a
ready to consume state for consumption either within the restaurant building or off the premises.
FENCE: An artificially constructed barrier of an approved material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
FENCE, VISIBILITY: A fence, wall or latticework screen that does not obstruct more than fifty percent (50%) visibility through the vertical surface area.
FINAL PLAT: The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivision is presented to the city for approval.
FINANCE, INSURANCE AND REAL ESTATE: Establishments such as, but not limited to, banks and trust companies, credit agencies, investment
companies, brokers and dealers of securities and commodities, security and commodity exchanges, insurance agents, brokers, lessors, lessees,
buyers, sellers, agents and developers of real estate.
FLEA MARKET: An occasional or periodic market held in an open area or structure where groups of individual sellers offer goods for sale/resale to the
public.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A self-supporting sign resting on or supported by means of poles, standards, or any other type of base on the ground. This
type of sign includes monument signs and pylon signs.
FRONTAGE ROAD: A street which is parallel and adjacent to arterial streets and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from
through traffic.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building or an attached accessory portion of the principal building designed and/or used for shelter or
storage of vehicles or boats owned and operated by the occupants of the principal building, and which is not a separate commercial enterprise available
to the general public.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building, or portion thereof, other than a private customer and employee garage or private residential garage, used primarily for
the parking and storage of vehicles and available to the general public.
GARAGE, REPAIR: Any building, premises, or land in which or upon which a business, service or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, repair
or painting of vehicles is conducted or rendered for profit.
GARAGE SALE: An occasional sale of used household or personal articles, furniture, tools, or clothing held on the seller's own premises.
GATEWAYS: Main entrances into the city requiring special attention and additional landscaping to enhance the city's image. The following
highways/streets are designated as "gateways": Highway 30, American Legion Boulevard and Air Base Highway (excluding areas of these streets
which are within the C-2 zone).
GENERAL TEMPORARY OUTDOOR SALES: Includes the display of any items outside the confines of a building which is not otherwise permitted as a
permitted, special, or conditional use, or a special event otherwise regulated by the city of Mountain Home ordinances. This definition does not include
garage or yard sales.
GLARE: The effect produced by brightness sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility.
GRADE: The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface.
GRADE, FINISHED: The final elevation of the ground surface after development.
GRANDFATHER RIGHTS: See chapter 10 of this title, and definitions of Nonconforming Lot, Nonconforming Land Use, and Nonconforming Structure
Or Nonconforming Building.
GRAVEL PIT: An open land area where sand, gravel and rock fragments are mined or excavated for sale or off tract use.
GREENBELT: An open area which may be cultivated or maintained in a natural state surrounding development or used as a buffer between land uses
or to mark the edge of an urban or developed area.
GROUND LEVEL: The average elevation of the ground upon which the sign supports are placed, except when the sign supports rest upon a berm or
other area elevated above the surrounding ground. In such cases, the average elevation of the base of such berm or other area shall be considered as
the ground level.
GROUP CARE FACILITY: A facility or dwelling unit housing persons unrelated by blood or marriage and operating as a group family household. May
include recovery home, home for elderly, battered women and children, etc.
GROUP DAYCARE FACILITY: A home, place or facility providing daycare, for compensation, for seven (7) to twelve (12) children.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 134/258
GROUP HOME: As per Idaho Code, a profit or nonprofit place of residence for the sheltering of eight (8) or fewer mentally and/or physically
handicapped or elderly persons to live in normal residential surroundings as single-family dwellings as provided for by Idaho Code.
GROUP IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign displaying the collective name of a group of uses such as the title of a shopping center, office park, or industrial
park and its tenants.
HANDCRAFTED ITEMS: Intent is crafting of small items, e.g., tying flies, sewing articles, shell crafts, flower craft, etc. Does not include the manufacture
of furniture or large items.
HARD SURFACE: Durable and dustless materials designed to bear the weight for the parking and storage of motor vehicles, including concrete,
asphalt, compacted crushed stone, compacted gravel, recycled asphalt, open and closed pavers, including turf block pavers and other similar materials
approved by the development services department.
HEALTH SERVICE FACILITY: A facility or institution, whether public or private, principally engaged in providing services for health maintenance,
diagnosis or treatment of human disease. Including, but not limited to, a general hospital, a special hospital, public health center, rehabilitation center,
extended care facility, skilled nursing home and hospital outpatient clinics, but not including doctor, dentists, etc., offices or clinics.
HILLSIDE SUBDIVISION/DEVELOPMENT: Any subdivision having an average slope of ten percent (10%) or more.
HISTORIC SITE/BUILDING: A structure or place of outstanding historical and cultural significance and designated as such by the state or federal
government.
HOME OCCUPATION: See unique uses/home occupation, chapter 9 of this title.
HOSPITAL: An institution which provides health services primarily for inpatient and medical or surgical care for sick or injured persons, and may include
outpatient department/clinic, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign which uses a source of light for illumination.
IMPROVEMENT: Any alteration to the land or other physical constructions associated with subdivision and building site developments.
INDUSTRIAL: Manufacturing/industrial processing, assembling, storing, testing and similar industrial uses which are generally major operations and
extensive in character, require large sites, open storage and service areas, extensive services and facilities, ready access to regional transportation and
may generate some nuisances such as emissions (i.e., smoke, vapor), noise, vibration, dust, glare, air pollution or water pollution.
INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT: Manufacturing/industrial uses which are usually controlled operations, relatively clean, quiet and free of objectionable or
hazardous elements such as emissions (i.e., smoke, vapor), noise, odor or dust; which operate and store within enclosed structures; and which
generate little industrial traffic and no nuisances.
INFILL: To allow new construction or replacement of a previously existing building on property located within the original townsite; or where twenty five
foot (25') lots have been platted; or the lot was of record at the time this title was adopted; and the lot is not large enough to enable meeting of the
adopted setbacks and/or standards.
INFRASTRUCTURE: Facilities and services needed to sustain industry, residential and commercial activities, i.e., water and sewer lines, streets, roads,
public facilities, fire stations, parks, etc.
INGRESS: Access or entry.
JUNK: Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage, storage,
baling, disposal or other use or disposition.
JUNKYARD: An outdoor space where waste, discarded or salvage materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled, stored or
handled. "Junkyard" also includes house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment, two (2) or more unregistered inoperable vehicles
(stored in the open), automobile salvage and wrecking yards and includes any area where "junk" materials are stored in the open. This does not include
such places where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building such as pawnshops or establishments for the sale, purchase
or storage of used furniture and household equipment or for used cars in operable condition, or salvaged materials which are incidental to
manufacturing operations.
KENNEL: Any person, group of persons or corporation engaged in the commercial business of breeding, buying, selling, boarding or training of dogs or
who keeps and maintains for any reason, four (4) or more dogs. This does not include the young of an adult dog that are under six (6) months of age.
LAND USE: A description of how land is occupied or utilized.
LAND USE MAP/PROJECTED: The official city projected land use map for future growth as adopted in the comprehensive plan.
LAND USE PLAN: The Mountain Home comprehensive plan.
LANDSCAPING: The planting and maintenance of some combination of grass, trees, shrubs, vegetation, flowers, walkways, etc.
LIGHTING, DIRECT: Lighting, the source of which is visible to a viewer.
LIGHTING, FLOODLIT: Lighting which is reflected from the ground or the surface of a sign or building.
LIGHTING, INDIRECT OR INTERNAL: Lighting for which the source of light is located in such a manner that the light must travel through a translucent
material other than the bulb or tube necessary to enclose the light source, which material has the effect of dispersing the light before it strikes the eye of
the viewer.
LOADING SPACE: An off street space or area on the same lot with a principal building or contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of
commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 135/258
LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT (LID): A legal tool where public improvements can be made and paid for by property owners over a period of time.
LOT: A parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet the minimum zoning requirements for lot coverage and area, yards and/or open spaces, etc., as
herein required, in the zone in which the lot is located. Such lot shall have frontage or legal access to a public or private street.
LOT AREA: The area of any lot shall be determined exclusive of streets, highways, alleys, roads, rights of way, irrigation easements, drainage water or
creek floors.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection or upon two (2) parts of the same street forming an interior angle less
than one hundred thirty five degrees (135). The point of intersection of the street lines is the "corner".
LOT COVERAGE: That area of a lot which is occupied by the principal building(s) or accessory building(s). Uncovered decks, porches, terraces are not
figured into lot coverage. The ratio is expressed as a percentage.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot with frontage on two (2) streets.
LOT, FLAG LOT: A lot in the shape of a flag on a pole or similar design.
LOT FRONTAGE: That portion of a lot which abuts a street right of way or other access.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot with only one frontage on a street.
LOT LINE, FRONT: On interior lots, the front lot line is the property line which is contiguous with the street line.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. For a triangular or gore shaped lot, the "rear lot line" shall mean
a line ten feet (10') in length within the lot which is parallel to the front lot line, or parallel to the chord of a curved front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: A property line which is not a front or rear lot line.
LOT LINES: Property lines bounding the lot.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot shown as a part of a recorded subdivision, or any parcel of land described by metes and bounds in a recorded deed, record of
survey or other appropriate document recorded in the office of the county recorder.
LOT SPLIT: The dividing of a lot or parcel of land into no more than two (2) parcels/lots.
MANUFACTURED BUILDINGS/TRANSPORTABLE DWELLING STRUCTURE (Other Than Manufactured/Mobile Homes): These structures are
constructed according to building code and built at a location other than a permanent home site and are known by a variety of names such as: modular
homes, factory built dwellings, prefabricated houses, relocatables, factory crafted homes, and similar names. These structures are built at one site for
the specific purpose of being moved to a permanent home site. This type of dwelling normally remains at one permanent home site, unless moved by
special moving equipment to another permanent home site. This type of dwelling must be built to meet the requirements of the adopted building code
and city building code, and a regular footing and foundation must be prepared before the structure can be moved into the city. These structures may
consist of one or more sections. However, each section or unit requires the use of special mobility equipment for transportation to a permanent home
site. "Manufactured home" means a structure, constructed after June 15, 1976, in accordance with the HUD manufactured home construction and
safety standards, and is transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or is forty (40) body
feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating,
air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein, except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this
paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing
and urban development and complies with the standards established under 42 USC section 5401 et seq.
MARQUEE/MARQUEE SIGN: Any hood, canopy, awning or permanent construction which projects from a wall of a building.
MASTER PLAN: A long range plan intended to guide the development and funding for capital improvements.
MESSAGE CENTER SIGN: An electronically activated sign which provides general public service information such as time, date, temperature, and
messages of interest to the public.
METES AND BOUNDS: A method of describing the boundaries of land by directions and distances from a known point of reference.
MIXED USE: See definition of Use.
MOBILE HOME: A factory assembled structure or structures generally constructed prior to June 15, 1976, and equipped with the necessary service
connections and made so as to be readily movable as a unit or units on their own running gear and designed to be used as a dwelling unit or units with
or without a permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A mobile home park (MHP overlay) means any site or tract of land under single ownership or control which has been planned
and improved for the placement of more than one mobile home for nontransient use.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A parcel of land divided into two (2) or more mobile home lots for sale and/or rent.
MONUMENT: Any permanent marker (either concrete, galvanized iron pipe or iron or steel rods) used to identify any tract, parcel, lot or street lines, as
specified in Idaho Code.
MONUMENT SIGN: A freestanding sign, not over four feet (4') in height and attached to the ground.
MORATORIUM: As per Idaho Code, a legally authorized period of delay or suspension of ordinances authorized under title 67, chapter 65 Idaho Code.
MOTEL/HOTEL: A commercial lodging facility occupied by individuals on a less than weekly basis which may be detached, in connected units, or
designed as a single structure, the units of which are used as individual sleeping or dwelling units, having their own private toilet facilities and may or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 136/258
may not have their own kitchen facilities.
NEIGHBORHOOD: An area of a community with characteristics that distinguish it from other community areas and which may include distinct ethnic or
economic characteristics, schools, or boundaries defined by physical barriers such as major highways and railroads or natural features such as rivers.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date hereof.
NONCONFORMING LAND USE: Any lawfully situated or occupied use of the land and/or building which does not conform to the zoning district in which
it is located after the effective date hereof.
NONCONFORMING LOT: A lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning
ordinance, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign which does not conform to the requirements of this title, but which was legally erected prior to the adoption date
hereof.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR NONCONFORMING BUILDING: Any lawfully occupied or situated building or structure which does not conform
to the regulations of this title after the effective date hereof, unless otherwise provided for herein.
NONREVOCABLE BOND/PERFORMANCE OR SURETY BOND: A financial guaranty by a subdivider or developer deposited and filed with the city in
the amount of the estimated construction cost guaranteeing the completion of physical improvements according to plans and specifications within the
time prescribed by the agreement by the developer. The bond involves an amount of money or other negotiable security which is paid by the subdivider
or developer to the city clerk. The bond also guarantees that the subdivider or developer will perform all actions required by the governing body
regarding an approved plat or plan, and provides that if the subdivider or developer defaults and fails to comply with the provisions of an approved plat
or plan, the subdivider, developer or his surety will pay damages up to the limit of the bond, or the surety will itself complete the requirements of the
approved plat or plan.
NOXIOUS MATTER/MATERIALS: Physically harmful or destructive to living beings.
NUISANCE: Any environmental pollutant such as, but not limited to, smoke, odors, liquid wastes, solid wastes, radiation, noise, vibration, glare or heat.
NURSING HOME: An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide full time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by
reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. Includes long term care facilities, extended care facilities and
intermediate care facilities. (Also see definitions of Group Home and Adult Care Facility.)
OCCUPANCY PERMIT: See definition of Certificate Of Occupancy.
OFF PREMISES SIGN/ADVERTISING SIGN/BILLBOARDS: A sign which directs attention to a person, business, commodity, service, or entertainment
which is promoted, conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign is displayed. "Off premises signs" or "advertising
signs" include billboards.
OFF STREET PARKING SPACE: An open, concrete or asphalt parking space which is located within the lot lines of the lot or parcel being developed.
ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign which is related to the property upon which it is located, or to the business or activity being conducted thereon.
OPEN SPACE: An area substantially open to the sky which may be on the same lot with a building. The area may include, along with the natural
environmental features, water areas, swimming pools, tennis courts and any other recreational facilities. Streets, parking areas, structures for
habitation, buildings, covered structures and the like shall not be included.
ORDINANCE: A municipally adopted law or regulation.
ORIGINAL TOWNSITE: The original township as platted. Contains twenty five foot (25') lots.
OWNER: The person or entity having the ownership of record in the property.
OWNERSHIP: The individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or corporation who has title to property.
PARK/COMMERCIAL: A privately owned park and/or recreation area which is used for financial gain.
PARK/PLAYGROUND, PRIVATE: A privately owned park and/or playground which may be located within a subdivision, mobile/manufactured home
park, planned unit development or elsewhere and used and maintained primarily by the owner(s) or residents of a subdivision, etc., for recreation.
PARK, PUBLIC: A tract of land designated and used by the general public for active and passive recreation.
PARKING LOT OR AREA, PRIVATE: An open, hard surfaced area, other than a street, alley or public way, designed, arranged and made available for
use by the tenants, employees or owners of the property for which the parking is required and not open for use by the general public.
PARKING LOT OR AREA, PUBLIC: An open, hard surfaced area, other than a street, alley or public way, to be used for the storage, for limited periods
of time, of operable passenger vehicles and commercial vehicles and available to the public whether for compensation, free or as an accommodation to
clients or customers. Public parking lots may include parking lots which may be required by this title for retail customers, patrons and clients.
PARKING SPACE: A permanently maintained space with proper access for one standard sized automobile with dimensions conforming to the
requirements of this title.
PATIO: A level, landscaped and/or surfaced area directly adjacent to a principal building.
PAVEMENT: A. Brick, stone, concrete or asphalt placed on the surface of the land.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 137/258
B. That part of a street having an improved surface.
PERCOLATION TEST: A test designed to determine the ability of ground to absorb water and used in determining the suitability of soil for drainage or
for the use of a septic system.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: Standards which are often applied to industrial, residential and commercial districts including: neighborhood
compatibility, public facilities availability, resource protection, environmental standards, site design, design compatibility, etc. Typically used in
conjunction with planned unit developments (PUD) and development that may have the capability of creating a nuisance for adjacent properties.
PERMIT: Written governmental permission, issued by an authorized official, empowering the holder thereof to do some act not forbidden by law, but not
allowed without such authorization.
PERMITTED USE: Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district.
PHARMACY: A place where the primary business is dispensing and preparing medicines. (See definition of Drugstore.)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): An area of land which is developed under a single ownership or control in which a variety of residential,
commercial, industrial and other land uses may be permitted to create a variety in the development pattern and which is processed as a conditional use.
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION: The Mountain Home planning and zoning commission.
PLAT: The drawing, map or plan of a subdivision, cemetery, townsite, other tract of land or a replotting of such, including certifications, descriptions, and
approvals as described by Idaho Code.
PLAT, FINAL: The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision or site plan which is presented to the proper review authority for final approval.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: A preliminary map indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision or site plan which is submitted to the proper review authority
for consideration and preliminary approval as meets the requirements of the subdivision ordinance.
POLE SIGN: A sign wholly supported by a sign structure in the ground.
PORCH: A roofed open area, which may be glazed or screened, usually attached to or part of, and with direct access to or from, a building.
PORTABLE SIGN: A sign mounted on a frame or chassis designed to be easily relocated.
PRIMARY USE: The development or predominant use to which the property is or may be devoted, and to which all other uses on the premises are
incidental.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: See definition of Building, Principal.
PRIVATE COMMERCIAL SCHOOL: A school, regardless whether it is operated for profit, primarily devoted to instruction in dance, music, drama, art,
languages, martial arts training, etc.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES: Offices maintained and used as a place of business by schooled professionals such as physicians, dentists, lawyers,
architects, engineers, accountants, etc.
PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS: Site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development project
and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the project.
PROJECTING WALL SIGN: A wall sign which is attached to and projects generally perpendicular from the face of the building.
PROJECTION/SIGN: The distance by which a sign extends over public property or beyond the building line.
PROPERTY LINE: See definition of Lot Lines.
PUBLIC NOTICES: The required notice given by the city of Mountain Home, or the applicant, which provides notice to the public and area residents
stating that an application has been filed and that the city will be holding a public hearing on a given date and time, and whereby the public and property
owners will have an opportunity to submit their views and evidence as to the proposed development or zoning.
PUBLIC USES: Public parks, schools, administrative and cultural buildings, and structures, but not including public land or buildings devoted solely to
the storage and maintenance of equipment and materials and public service facilities. Also public owned buildings, fire and police stations, libraries,
post offices and public utility administration buildings.
PUBLIC UTILITY: A public service corporation performing some public service and subject to special governmental regulations, or a governmental
agency performing similar services, for the recipients thereof. Such services shall include, but are not limited to, water supply, electric power, gas, cable
TV and transportation for persons and freight.
PYLON SIGN: A freestanding sign erected upon a single pylon or post.
QUASI-PUBLIC USE: Churches, Sunday schools, parochial schools, hospitals, convalescent or retirement homes, colleges and other facilities of an
educational, religious, charitable, philanthropic or nonprofit nature.
REAL ESTATE OR PROPERTY FOR SALE, RENT OR LEASE SIGN: Any sign pertaining to the sale, lease or rental of land or buildings.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A portable vehicular unit or structure used primarily for hobbies, vacations, extended travel, camping, sports and aquatic
use. RVs may be self-propelled, towed or transported by trailer. RVs may include, but are not limited to, motor homes, converted buses, camping and
travel trailers, light duty trailers and transporters, horse and cattle trailers, boats, rafts and their trailers and off street vehicles such as snowmobiles,
dune buggies, all-terrain vehicles (4 wheels) and any type of three (3) or four (4) wheeled sport racing/drag vehicle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 138/258
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: A plot of land upon which two (2) or more recreational vehicles are located, established or maintained for occupancy
of recreational vehicles by the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes.
RECYCLING: The process by which waste products are reduced to raw materials and transformed into new and often different products.
REFUSE: See definition of Solid Waste.
REMODEL: To alter the structure of.
REPAIR: The reconstruction and/or renewal of any existing part of an existing structure for the purpose of its maintenance.
REPAIR, MAJOR MOTOR VEHICLE: General repair, engine rebuilding, repair or major reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers;
collision service, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; and overall painting of motor vehicles or trailers within an enclosed building.
REPAIR, MINOR MOTOR VEHICLE: Incidental repairs, replacement of parts and motor service to motor vehicles, but not including any operation
specified under the definition of "repair, major motor vehicle".
RESERVE STRIP: A strip of land between a partial street and adjacent property which is reserved or held in public ownership for future street extension
or widening.
RESOLUTION: A formal expression of the opinion, will, or intent of an official body or assembled group.
RESTAURANT: Any premises (other than a boarding house) where meals are provided for compensation.
REZONE: To change the zoning classification of particular lots or parcels of land. (See procedures/rezone, chapter 6 of this title.)
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land dedicated or reserved for use as a public way which normally includes streets, sidewalks, other public utilities, railroad
or service areas.
ROAD: See definition of Street.
ROOF SIGN: A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet of a building which is wholly or partially supported by said roof or parapet.
RUBBISH/REFUSE: A general term for solid waste, excluding food waste and ashes, taken from residences, commercial establishments and
institutions.
RURAL AREA: A sparsely developed area where the land is undeveloped or primarily used for agricultural purposes.
SALVAGE: The utilization of waste materials.
SALVAGE YARD: See definition of Junkyard.
SANITARY LANDFILL: A site for solid waste disposal.
SCHOOL (KINDERGARTEN, ELEMENTARY, INTERMEDIATE OR HIGH): An institution of learning, either publicly or privately supported, which offers
instruction in several branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools by the state of Idaho. High school includes junior and
senior high. (See definitions of Private Commercial School and Trade/Vocational School.)
SCREENING: A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berm or densely
planted vegetation.
SEAT: The place at or the thing on which one sits. For purposes of determining the number of off street parking spaces for certain uses, the number of
seats is the number of seating units installed or indicated, or each eighteen (18) linear inches of benches, pews or space for loose chairs.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE: A building or group of buildings, or portions thereof, which are divided into individually accessed units and are designed
and used exclusively for lease or rental storage.
SERVICE BUILDING: A building housing sanitary facilities, laundry facilities, recreational facilities or other necessary accessory uses for the health and
convenience of manufactured home/mobile home occupants.
SERVICE STATION: A retail place of business engaged in supplying gasoline, motor oils, lubricants and grease for the operation of motor vehicles and
the sale and servicing of accessories, tires, batteries, replacement items and other automotive accessories and where minor motor repair and services
may be rendered.
SERVICE YARD: Buildings and premises, including offices, used by any person or by the city for storage, maintenance, repair and processing of
equipment, materials and other items involved in the construction or maintenance of physical facilities having permanent fixed locations, or in the
operation of a fleet of rolling stock.
SETBACK: The space on a lot required to be left open and unoccupied either by the front, side or rear yard requirements of this title or by delineation on
a recorded subdivision map. The setback line is generally parallel with and measured from the lot line, defining the limits of a yard/open space in which
no building or structure may be located above ground, except as may be provided for in this title.
SEWER: Sewer lines which are connected to a municipal wastewater treatment facility as per city specifications/standards.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, or sexual encounter
premises; or any premises where employees engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE: Any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full time,
part time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. Employee does not
include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 139/258
SHELTER HOME: A building or facility operated on either a profit or nonprofit basis. (See definitions of Group Home and Adult Care Facility.)
SHOPPING CENTER: A shopping center which provides, in addition to the convenience goods of the neighborhood center, a wider range of facilities for
the sale of shopping goods such as apparel or furniture.
SIDEWALK: That portion of road right of way outside the roadway which is improved for the use of pedestrian traffic.
SIGHT TRIANGLE: See definition of Vision Clearance/Triangle.
SIGN: Any structure or natural object, such as a tree, rock, bush, the ground itself or part thereof, or device attached thereto or painted and represented
thereon, which shall be used to attract attention to any object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business or which shall display
or include any letter, word, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia device or representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an announcement,
direction or advertisement. For the purpose of this definition, the word "sign" does not include the flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, state, city or
other political unit or any political, educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, professional, religious or like campaign, drive, movement or event.
SIGN AREA: The area of the sign occupied by copy. It is computed by measuring the area enclosed by straight lines drawn to enclose the extremities of
the letters or numbers. The area of double faced signs shall be the area of the larger single face.
SIGN HEIGHT: The distance measured vertically from the finished elevation of the ground at the point of attachment to the highest point of the sign or
visual appurtenances.
SIGN/LIGHTING: See definition of Lighting.
SIGN STRUCTURE: Any structure which supports, has supported or is capable of supporting a sign but includes decorative cover so that the sign
support is not visible.
SIGN SUPPORT: Any support, i.e., wire, metal, wood, which supports the sign and is not an integral part of the sign structure.
SITE PLAN: A drawing of a development plan for one or more lots on which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot and may include
the following information: topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes and waterways; open spaces, walkways, means of ingress and
egress, utility services and/or easements, setbacks, structure height, location and size or square footage, off street parking, landscaping, structures and
signs, lighting, and screening devices; any other information that reasonably may be required by the development services department or other city
departments.
SOLID WASTE: Unwanted or discarded material, including garbage with insufficient liquid content to be free flowing.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Any of the following parts of the human body with less than full opaque coverings of the human genitals, anus, cleft
of the buttocks, or the female breast.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Shall mean and include any of the following:
A. The fondling or other erotic touching of any specified anatomical areas; or
B. Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or
C. Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, ejaculation; or
D. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections A through C of this definition; or
E. Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other contact with an animal by a human; or
F. The exposure or display of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or
G. Erotic dancing or rhythmic movements with a device, instrument, object or pole.
SPOT ZONING: Rezoning of a lot or parcel of land to benefit an owner for a use incompatible with surrounding uses and not for the purpose or effect of
furthering the comprehensive plan.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or
other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
or foundation or the erection of temporary forms.
STORMWATER DETENTION: Any storm drainage technique that retards or detains runoff, such as a detention or retention basin, parking lot storage,
rooftop storage, porous pavement, dry wells or any combination thereof.
STREET: A right of way which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties. The term "street" also includes the terms highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, road, route, avenue, boulevard, lane, place and other such terms.
STREET, HALF: A portion of the width of a street, usually along the edge of a subdivision or development, where the remaining portion of the street
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 140/258
could be provided in another subdivision or development.
STREET, PROPOSED: The undedicated portion of a street alignment, or proposed widening of an existing street.
STREET, URBAN SYSTEM: A. Arterial: Should carry the major portion of trips entering and leaving the urban area as well as the majority of the through
trips desiring to bypass the central city. In addition, significant interarea travel (such as between central business districts and outlying residential areas,
between major inner city communities, or between major suburban centers) should be served by this class of facilities.
B. Collector: That which provides both land access, service and traffic circulation within residential neighborhoods, commercial and industrial areas.
Collectors also collect traffic from local streets in residential neighborhoods and channel it into the arterial system.
C. Local: That which comprises all facilities not on either of the higher systems. Local streets serve primarily to provide direct access to abutting land
and access to the higher order system. Examples of local streets are: alleys (which provide secondary access at the back or side of a property
otherwise abutting a street); loop streets (a minor street with both terminal points on the same street or origin); cul-de-sac (a street connected to
another street at one end only and provided with a turnaround space at its terminus); partial street (a dedicated right of way providing only a
portion of the required street width, usually along the edge of a subdivision or tract of land); and private street (a parcel of land providing vehicular
and pedestrian access to adjacent properties from a publicly dedicated right of way and which is recorded in the Elmore County recorder's office
as a perpetual easement to the property owners taking access therefrom or the ownership of which is vested in the property owners taking access
therefrom).
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change which would prolong the live of the supporting members of a building or structure such as bearing walls,
columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE: Anything which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner. (As defined by building code.) Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, signs, walls,
fences and gas or liquid storage tanks that are principally above ground.
SUBDIVIDER/DEVELOPER: The person who executes an application or initiates proceedings for the subdivision of land in accordance with the
provisions of this title. The person need not be the owner of the property.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into more than two (2) lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale, development or
lease. The term "subdivision" shall also include the dedication of public streets, other rights of way and the addition to, or creation of, a cemetery.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR: Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: A subdivision which does not have more than six (6) lots and does not involve any of the following: a) a planned unit
development; b) any new street; or c) the extension of any municipal facilities.
SUBSTANTIAL ALTERATION/SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: A. Any extension, repair, reconstruction, or other improvements of a property or a
nonconforming property, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the assessed value of the structure (as determined by Elmore
County assessor):
1. Before the improvement or repair is started, or
2. If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial
improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
B. The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
2. Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of historic places or a state inventory of historic places.
SURETY BOND: See definition of Nonrevocable Bond/Performance Or Surety Bond.
SURVEYOR: As per Idaho Code, a person who is authorized by the laws of the state of Idaho to practice land surveying.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS: System improvements, in contrast to project improvements, means capital improvements to public facilities which are
designed to provide service to a service area including, without limitation, the type of improvements described in Idaho Code.
TAVERN: Any premises where beer, wine or liquor, as defined by Idaho Code, is sold for consumption on premises.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE: Not having or requiring a permanent attachment to the ground, or involving structures which have no required permanent
attachment to the ground.
TEMPORARY USE: A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period.
TRADE/VOCATIONAL SCHOOL: An institution or facility conducting instruction in the technical or trade skills such as business, secretarial training,
medical-dental technician training, beauticians, barbers, electronics, automotive technician training etc.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 141/258
TRAILER: A structure standing on wheels, towed or hauled by another vehicle and used for short term human occupancy, carrying materials, goods or
objects, or as a temporary office. (See definitions of Recreational Vehicle and Recreational Vehicle Park.)
TRANSITIONAL USE: A use of land designed to serve as a buffer between conflicting land uses such as single-family residential uses and commercial
or industrial uses.
UNDER CANOPY OR MARQUEE SIGN: A sign suspended below the ceiling or roof of a canopy or marquee.
URBAN SPRAWL: Scattered development which is not contiguous to the urbanized part of a municipality. Sprawl is characterized by significant
amounts of vacant land intermixed with parcels of urban development and with formless dispersal of a congested urban area with little or no regard for
the interrelationships of such factors as transportation, employment, health and recreational needs.
USE: The purpose for which land or a building is intended, designed, arranged, maintained, or zoned.
USE, MIXED: A combination of residential and commercial, i.e., commercial on the ground floor and an apartment on the second floor or commercial in
the front with an apartment in the rear, and in which both uses are contained within one structure.
VARIANCE: A modification of the requirements of the ordinance as to lot size, lot coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard, setbacks,
parking space, height of buildings or other ordinance provisions affecting the size or shape of a structure or the placement of a structure upon lots or
size of lots.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting devices
moved exclusively by human power or used upon stationary rails or tracks.
VEHICULAR NONACCESS STRIP: A one foot (1') wide barrier strip of land along the perimeter of a lot, that extends down and up to infinity, over
and/or through which no vehicle may access.
VISION CLEARANCE/TRIANGLE: Vision clearance in districts where front yards are required shall be:
A. That triangle of land defined in any corner lot by measuring from the intersection of the property line of the adjacent streets thirty feet (30') along
each property line and connecting the two (2) points with a straight line.
B. That triangle of land defined adjacent to any alley intersecting a street by measuring along the intersection of the alley edge and the future
projected curb line of the adjacent street seven and one-half feet (71/2') and connecting the two (2) points with a straight line.
WALKWAY: A public right of way for pedestrian traffic that crosses private or public property and does not cross a public street or alley.
WALL SIGN: A sign mounted parallel to a building facade or other vertical building surface.
WAREHOUSE: A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
WINDOW SIGN: Any sign attached to or painted on the window surface of a building or structure and designed to be viewed from public property.
WRECKING YARD: Any premises used for the storage, dismantling or sale of either used motor vehicles, trailers, machinery and/or building materials.
YARD: An open space that lies between the principal or accessory building or buildings and the nearest lot line.
YARD DEPTH: The shortest distance between a lot line and a yard line.
YARD, FRONT: A space extending the full width of the lot between any building and the front lot line, and measured perpendicular to the building at the
closest point to the front lot line.
YARD LINE: A line drawn parallel to a lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required yard.
YARD, REAR: A space extending across the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line, and measured perpendicular to the
building to the closest point of the rear lot line.
YARD, REQUIRED: The open space between a lot line and the buildable area within which no structure shall be located except as provided in this title.
YARD SALE: See unique uses/garage sale/temporary uses, chapter 9 of this title.
YARD, SIDE: A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal building and the side lot line measured perpendicular from
the side lot line to the closest point of the principal building.
ZERO LOT LINE: A building design which allows for a dwelling to be built to the side lot line and which may include an easement to a neighboring lot for
the purpose of upkeep and maintenance of each dwelling.
ZONE: A specifically delineated area or district in a municipality within which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use, placement,
spacing and size of land and buildings.
ZONING: The dividing of a municipality into districts and the establishment of regulations governing the use, placement, spacing and size of land and
buildings.
ZONING MAP: The map or maps, which are a part of the zoning ordinance, and delineate the boundaries of zone districts.
ZONING OFFICER: See definition of Code Official/Administrator.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 142/258
ZONING ORDINANCE: The land use regulations which govern the City.
ZONING PERMIT: A document signed by the Administrator authorizing the uses of land and structures in a particular zoning district. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-
2015; amd. Ord. 1648, 2-8-2016; Ord. 1658, 4-10-2017)
Chapter 4
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
9-4-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
The city council of the city of Mountain Home, Idaho, finds that:
A. Based on the city of Mountain Home comprehensive plan adopted by the city pursuant to title 67, chapter 65, Idaho Code, including, but not limited
to, the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan, and the general governmental goal of protecting the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the city, it is necessary that the city's public facilities for: 1) police; 2) fire protection; 3) parks; and 4) streets, to
accommodate new development within the city.
B. New residential and nonresidential growth and development imposes and will impose increasing and excessive demands upon the public facilities.
C. The revenues generated from new residential and nonresidential growth and development often does not generate sufficient funds to provide the
necessary improvements of these public facilities to accommodate new development.
D. New growth and development are expected to continue, and will place ever increasing demands on the city to provide and expand the public facilities
to serve new development. There is an average of eighty (80) building permit applications filed annually. This is used as part of the impact
calculation to the city's public facilities and infrastructure.
E. The city has planned for the improvement of the public facilities in the capital improvements element of the city of Mountain Home comprehensive
plan.
F. The creation of an equitable impact fee system would enable the city to impose a proportionate share of the costs of needed improvements to the
public facilities to accommodate new development, and would assist the city in implementing the capital improvements element of the
comprehensive plan.
G. Impact fees shall be assessed against new growth and development that increases the service area or places a demand on available service units
requiring a capital expenditure by the city to maintain the current level of service to the existing or new service area.
H. In order to implement an equitable impact fee system for the public facilities, the city has prepared an impact fee study for these types of facilities,
which may be updated from time to time or at least every ten (10) years. The "impact fee study", is on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of
Mountain Home.
I. The impact fee study is consistent with the capital improvements element of the city of Mountain Home comprehensive plan, and uses the levels of
service set forth in the comprehensive plan for these public facilities.
J. The impact fee study sets forth reasonable methodologies and analyses for determining the impacts of various types of new development on the
public facilities, and determines the cost of acquiring or constructing the improvements necessary to meet the demands for such public facilities
created by new growth and development.
K. The impact fee study uses a calculation methodology in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. This chapter shall not be deemed
invalid because payment of an impact fee may result in an incidental benefit to others within the service area other than the fee payer.
The impact fee study uses a calculation methodology in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles that is a net of credits for the
present value of revenues that will be generated by new growth and development based on historical funding patterns and that are reasonably
anticipated to be available to pay for system improvements including user fees, debt service payments, taxes, assessments, intergovernmental
transfers, and all other available sources of funding such system, and includes consideration of the following factors:
1. The cost of existing system improvements within the service area or areas;
2. The means by which existing system improvements have been financed;
3. The extent to which the new development will contribute to the cost of system improvements through taxation, assessment, or developer or
landowner contributions, or has previously contributed to the cost of system improvements through developer or landowner contributions;
4. The extent to which the new development is required to contribute to the cost of existing system improvements in the future;
5. The extent to which the new development should be credited for providing system improvements, without charge to other properties within the
service area or areas;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 143/258
6. Extraordinary costs, if any, incurred in serving the new development;
7. The time and price differential inherent in a fair comparison of fees paid at different times; and
8. The availability of other sources of funding system improvements including, but not limited to, user charges, general tax levies, intergovernmental
transfers, and special taxation. The governmental entity shall develop a plan for alternative sources of revenue.
L. The impact fees described in this chapter are based on the impact fee study, and do not exceed the costs of system improvements for the public
facilities to serve new development that will pay the impact fees.
M. The police, fire, parks and streets public facilities included in the calculation of impact fees in the impact fee study will benefit all new development
throughout the city, and it is therefore appropriate to treat all areas of the city as a single service area for purposes of calculating, collecting and
spending the impact fees collected.
N. There is both a rational nexus and a rough proportionality between the development impacts created by each type of development covered by this
chapter and the impact fees that such development will be required to pay.
O. This chapter creates a system by which impact fees paid by new development will be used to finance, defray or to provide capital improvements for
the public facilities in ways that benefit the development for which impact fees were paid.
P. This chapter creates a system under which impact fees shall not be used to correct existing deficiencies in public facilities, or to replace or rehabilitate
existing public facilities, or to pay for routine operation or maintenance of those public facilities.
Q. This chapter creates a system under which there shall be no double payment of impact fees, in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-8204(19).
R. This chapter is consistent with all applicable provisions of title 67, chapter 82, Idaho Code, concerning impact fee ordinances. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-4-2: AUTHORITY, APPLICABILITY, AND EFFECTIVE DATE:
A. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the city's general police powers pursuant to the authority granted to the city by title 50, Idaho Code, and pursuant
to the authority granted to the city by section 67-8201 et seq., Idaho Code.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all of the territory within the limits of the city and to any unincorporated areas of the city where the city
has executed an intergovernmental agreement with Elmore County for purposes of collection or expenditure of impact fees pursuant to section 67-
8204A, Idaho Code, and other applicable laws of the state of Idaho.
C. Applications for building permits received by the city prior to the effective date hereof, or amendments hereto, adopting impact fees or amending or
adopting any methodology by which impact fees are calculated, will be exempt from that portion of this chapter, or amendment enacted after such
building permit application, if a valid building permit has been issued or construction has commenced prior to the effective date hereof, or
amendment hereto. For building permits that expire or are revoked after the effective date hereof, the fee payer shall be entitled to a refund of
previously paid impact fees as provided further in this chapter, provided that in the case of reapplication for building permit, the impact fee in effect at
that time shall be paid.
D. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, development requirements for system improvements shall be imposed by the city only by way of impact
fees imposed pursuant to and in accordance with section 67-8201 et seq., Idaho Code. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-4-3: INTENT:
A. The intent of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city and its area of city impact.
B. The intent of this chapter is to be consistent with those principles for allocating a fair and proportionate share of the cost of capital improvements to
public facilities to serve new development in compliance with the provisions set forth in section 67-8201 et seq., Idaho Code. The provisions of this
chapter shall be interpreted, construed and enforced in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 67-8201 et seq., Idaho Code.
C. The intent of this chapter is that impact fees should be charged, collected, and expended for police, fire, parks and streets capital improvements to
increase the service capacity of such categories of public facilities, which capital improvements are included in approved capital improvements plans
that list the capital improvements that may be funded with impact fees.
D. The intent of this chapter is to ensure that: public facilities are available to serve new development; new development bears a proportionate share of
the cost of police, fire, parks and streets capital improvements to such public facilities; such proportionate share does not exceed the cost of the
capital improvements to such public facilities required to serve new development; and to ensure the funds collected from new development are used
for capital improvements for public facilities that benefit new development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 144/258
E. It is not the intent of this chapter to collect any monies from new development in excess of the actual amount necessary to offset new demands for
capital improvements to public facilities created by such new development.
F. It is not the intent of this chapter that the impact fees be used to remedy any deficiency in police, fire, parks and streets capital improvements existing
on the effective date hereof, or ever be used to replace, rehabilitate, maintain and/or operate any public facilities.
G. It is not the intent of this chapter that any monies collected from an impact fee deposited in an impact fee fund ever be commingled with monies from
a different fund, or ever be used for capital improvements that are different from those for which the impact fee was paid.
H. It is not the intent of this chapter that impact fees be used for:
1. Construction, acquisition or expansion of public facilities other than capital improvements identified in the capital improvements plan.
2. Repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements.
3. Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety,
efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards.
4. Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to serve existing development to provide better service to existing
development.
5. Administrative and operating costs of the city unless such costs are attributable to development of the capital improvements plans used to
determine impact fees by a surcharge imposed by ordinance on the collection of an impact fee, which surcharge shall not exceed a development's
proportionate share of the cost of preparing the capital improvements plan.
6. Principal payments and interest or other finance charges on bonds or other indebtedness except financial obligations issued by or on behalf of the
city to finance capital improvements identified in the capital improvements plan. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-4-4: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, terms shall have the meaning as defined in section 9-3-2, "Definitions Enumerated", of this title, "definitions" of the Idaho
development impact fees statute1, or in the absence thereof their plain, ordinarily accepted meaning. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-4-5: IMPOSITION AND COMPUTATION OF IMPACT FEES:
A. Any application for a building permit enabling the construction, and in the case of construction that does not require a building permit, any building
that takes place on or after the effective date hereof shall be subject to the imposition of impact fees in the manner and amount as set forth in the fee
schedule. The methodology adopted for the purpose of determining police, fire, parks and streets impact fees shall be based upon the assumptions
set forth in the impact fee study.
B. The development impact fee reflects the need for capital improvements to public facilities created by new development. Any application for a building
permit enabling the construction and in the case of construction that does not require a building permit, any building that takes place on or after the
effective date hereof shall be subject to the imposition of impact fees in the manner and amount set forth in this chapter. The methodology adopted
for the purpose of determining city streets, parks, police, and fire impact fees shall be based upon the assumptions set forth in the impact fee study
and pursuant to the following:
1. The development impact fee shall not exceed the "proportionate share" of the costs incurred or the costs that will be incurred by the city in the
provision of "system improvements" to serve new development.
2. The "proportionate share" is the cost attributable to the new development after consideration by the city of the following factors:
a. Any appropriate credit, offset or contribution of money, dedication of land, or construction of system improvements;
b. Payments reasonably anticipated to be made by or as a result of a new development in the form of user fees and debt service payments;
c. That portion of general tax and other revenues allocated by the jurisdiction to system improvements; and
d. All other available sources of funding such system improvements.
3. In determining the "proportionate share" of the cost of system improvements to be paid by the developer, the following additional factors shall be
considered:
a. The cost of existing system improvements within the service area or areas;
b. The means by which existing system improvements have been financed;
c. Existing obligation by the city to provide such services within the service area, i.e., urban regrowth areas;
d. The extent to which the new development will contribute to the cost of system improvements through taxation, assessment, or developer or
landowner contributions, or has previously contributed to the cost of system improvements through developer or landowner contributions;
e. The extent to which the new development is required to contribute to the cost of existing system improvements in the future;
f. The extent to which the new development should be credited for providing system improvements, without charge to other properties within the
service area or areas;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 145/258
g. Extraordinary costs, if any, incurred in serving the new development;
h. The time and price differential inherent in a fair comparison of fees paid at different times; and
i. The availability of other sources of funding system improvements including, but not limited to, user charges, general tax levies,
intergovernmental transfers, and special taxation. The governmental entity shall develop a plan for alternative sources of revenue.
C. Impact fees shall be required as a condition of approval of all residential and nonresidential development in the service area for which a building
permit is required and shall be payable prior to the issuance of any building permit (or installation permit in the case of a manufactured home) for a
dwelling unit or a nonresidential building. Except as otherwise provided herein, after the effective date hereof, no building permit shall be issued until
the impact fees described in this chapter have been paid, unless the development for which the permit is sought is exempted by section 9-4-8 of this
chapter or approved credits are used to cover the impact fee, as set forth in section 9-4-9 of this chapter. The fee administrator shall have the
authority to withhold a building permit, stop construction, withhold utility services or impose liens as the case may be, until the appropriate impact fee
has been collected.
D. After payment of the development impact fees or execution of an agreement for payment of development impact fees, additional development impact
fees or increases in fees may not be assessed unless the number of service units increases or the scope or schedule of the development changes.
In the event of an increase in the number of service units or schedule of the development changes, the additional development impact fees to be
imposed are limited to the amount attributable to the additional service units or change in scope of the development.
E. A fee payer required by this chapter to pay an impact fee may choose to have the amount of such impact fee determined pursuant to either the fee
schedule (whereupon such payment shall be recognized as full and complete payment of the development's proportionate share of system
improvement costs, except as provided in Idaho Code section 67-8214(3)) or subsections E through G of this section. If the fee payer chooses to
have the amount of such impact fee determined pursuant to subsections E through G of this section, such impact fee shall be subject to the
adjustment described in section 9-4-9 of this chapter, if applicable. If the project is a mix of those uses listed on the fee schedule, then the impact
fees shall be determined by adding up the impact fees that would be payable for each use as if it were a freestanding use pursuant to the fee
schedule.
F. Individual assessment of impact fees is permitted in situations where the fee payer can demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that the
established impact fee is inappropriate for the project. Written application for individual assessment shall be made to the fee administrator at any
time prior to receiving building permit(s). Late applications for individual assessment of impact fees may be considered for a period of sixty (60) days
after the receipt of a building permit only if the fee payer makes a showing that the facts supporting such application were not known or discoverable
prior to receipt of a building permit and that undue hardship would result if said application is not considered. Such independent impact fee
calculation study for the fee payer's development shall be prepared at the fee payer's cost by a qualified professional and contain studies, data and
other relevant information and be submitted to the fee administrator for review. Any such study shall be based on the same methodology and the
same level of service standards, improvements and costs used in the impact fee study, and must document the methodologies and assumptions
used. The city may hire a professional consultant to review any independent impact fee calculation study on behalf of the city, and may charge the
reasonable costs of such review to the fee payer.
G. Any independent impact fee calculation study submitted by a fee payer may be accepted, rejected or accepted with modifications by the city as the
basis for calculating impact fees. The city shall not be required to accept any study or documentation the city reasonably deems to be inaccurate or
unreliable, and shall have the authority to request that the fee payer submit additional or different documentation for consideration in connection with
review of any independent impact fee calculation. If such additional or different documentation is accepted or accepted with modifications as a more
accurate measure of the impact fees due in connection with fee payer's proposed development than the applicable impact fees set forth in the fee
schedule, then the impact fee due under this chapter shall be calculated according to such documentation.
H. The fee administrator shall render a written decision establishing the impact fees in connection with the individual assessment within thirty (30) days
of the date a complete application is submitted. The decision shall include an explanation of the calculation of the impact fees, shall specify the
system improvement(s) for which the impact fees are intended to be used, and shall include an explanation of the following factors considered:
1. Any appropriate credit, offset or contribution of money, dedication of land, or construction of system improvements;
2. Payments reasonably anticipated to be made by or as a result of a new development in the form of user fees and debt service payments;
3. That portion of general tax and other revenues allocated by the jurisdiction to system improvements;
4. All other available sources of funding such system improvements;
5. The cost of existing system improvements within the service area;
6. The means by which existing system improvements have been financed;
7. The extent to which the new development will contribute to the cost of system improvements through taxation, assessment, or developer or
landowner contributions, or has previously contributed to the cost of system improvements through developer or landowner contributions;
8. The extent to which the new development is required to contribute to the cost of existing system improvements in the future;
9. The extent to which the new development should be credited for providing system improvements, without charge to other properties within the
service area;
10. Extraordinary costs, if any, incurred in serving the new development;
11. The time and price differential inherent in a fair comparison of impact fees paid at different times; and
12. The availability of other sources of funding system improvements including, but not limited to, user charges, general tax levies,
intergovernmental transfers, and special taxation. The city shall develop a plan for alternative sources of revenue.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 146/258
I. Certification of the impact fee for a project may be applied for in the following manner:
1. Written application may be made to the fee administrator not later than sixty (60) days after development approval by the city council. Late
applications for certification of the impact fee will not be considered unless the fee payer makes a showing that the facts supporting such
application were not known or discoverable until after the time had run and that undue hardship would result if said application is not considered.
2. The fee administrator shall provide the fee payer with a written impact fee certification for the project within thirty (30) days of the date a complete
application is submitted. The certification provided by the fee administrator shall establish the impact fee for the project in question so long as
there is no material change to the project as identified in the certification application or the impact fee schedule. The certification shall include an
explanation of the calculation of the impact fees, shall specify the system improvement(s) for which the impact fees are intended to be used, and
shall include an explanation of the factors considered, which factors are identified in subsection H of this section.
J. Appeals of the fee administrator's determination of an individual assessment or certification shall be made to the city as provided further in this
chapter.
K. The city recognizes that there may be circumstances where the anticipated fiscal impacts of a proposed development are of such magnitude that the
city may be unable to accommodate the development without excessive or unscheduled public expenditures that exceed the amount of the
anticipated impact fees from such development. If the city determines that a proposed development would create such an extraordinary impact on
the city's police, fire, parks and/or streets public facilities, the city may refuse to approve the proposed development. In the alternative, the city may
calculate a pro rata share per dwelling unit, or square feet of nonresidential buildings, of the extraordinary impact and charge a reasonable
extraordinary impact fee that is greater than would ordinarily be charged.
L. If the city discovers an error in its impact fee formula that results in assessment or payment of more than a proportionate share, the city shall, at the
time of assessment on a case by case basis, adjust the impact fee to collect no more than a proportionate share or discontinue the collection of any
impact fees until the error is corrected by ordinance. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-4-6: PAYMENT OF IMPACT FEES:
A. After the effective date hereof all fee payers shall pay the impact fees as provided by this chapter to the fee administrator following application for a
building permit and prior to the issuance of any building permit for a dwelling unit, or nonresidential building.
B. All impact fees paid by a fee payer pursuant to this chapter shall be promptly deposited in the impact fee fund described in section 9-4-7 of this
chapter. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-4-7: IMPACT FEE FUNDS; REFUNDS OF IMPACT FEES PAID:
A. There is hereby established a police impact fee fund into which shall be deposited all police impact fees for the purpose of ensuring police impact
fees collected pursuant hereto are designated for the accommodation of police capital improvements reasonably necessary to serve new
development that paid the impact fee.
B. There is hereby established a fire impact fee fund into which shall be deposited all fire impact fees for the purpose of ensuring fire impact fees
collected pursuant hereto are designated for the accommodation of fire capital improvements reasonably necessary to serve new development that
paid the impact fee.
C. There is hereby established a parks impact fee fund into which shall be deposited all parks impact fees for the purpose of ensuring parks impact fees
collected pursuant hereto are designated for the accommodation of parks capital improvements reasonably necessary to serve new development
that paid the impact fee.
D. There is hereby established a streets impact fee fund into which shall be deposited all streets impact fees for the purpose of ensuring streets impact
fees collected pursuant hereto are designated for the accommodation of streets capital improvements reasonably necessary to serve new
development that paid the impact fee.
E. Each fund shall be an interest bearing account which shall be accounted for separately from other impact fee funds and from other city funds. Any
interest or other income earned on monies deposited in a fund shall be credited to such fund. Expenditures of impact fees shall be made only for the
category of system improvements for which the impact fees were collected and as identified in the capital improvements plans.
F. Except as otherwise provided herein, monies from each fund, including any accrued interest, shall be limited to the financing of acquisition,
expansion, and/or improvement of capital improvements, or for principal and interest payments on bonds or other borrowed revenues used to
acquire, expand or improve such capital improvements, necessary to serve new development. Impact fees in each fund shall be spent within eight
(8) years from the date such impact fees were collected on a first in/first out (FIFO) basis. The city may hold the impact fees longer than the
prescribed time period if the city identifies, in writing: 1) a reasonable cause why the impact fees should be held longer; and 2) an anticipated date
by which the impact fees will be expended but in no event longer than eleven (11) years from the date the impact fees were collected.
G. The city treasurer shall prepare annual reports to be provided to the advisory committee and the city council, which reports shall: 1) describe the
amount of all impact fees collected, appropriated or spent for system improvements during the preceding year, as applicable, by category of public
facility and service area; and 2) describe the percentage of tax and revenues other than impact fees collected, appropriated or spent for system
improvements during the preceding year, as applicable, by category of public facility and service area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 147/258
H. Funds shall be deemed expended when payment of such funds has been approved by the city. The fee payer or successor in interest shall be
entitled to a refund of the impact fee if: 1) service is available but never provided; 2) a building permit or permit for installation of a manufactured
home is revoked or abandoned; 3) the city, after collecting the impact fee when service is not available, has failed to appropriate and expend the
collected impact fees; or 4) the fee payer pays an impact fee under protest and a subsequent review of the impact fee paid or the completion of an
individual assessment determines that the impact fee paid exceeded the proportionate share to which the city was entitled to receive.
I. When the right to a refund exists, within ninety (90) days after the city determines that a refund is due, the city shall provide written notice of
entitlement to a refund, to the owner of record and the fee payer who paid the impact fees at the address shown on the application for development
approval, or to a successor in interest who has notified the city of a transfer of the right or entitlement to a refund and who has provided to the city a
mailing address. When the right to a refund exists, the city shall also publish the notice of entitlement to a refund within thirty (30) days after the
expiration of the eight (8) year period after the date that the impact fees were collected. Such published notice shall contain the heading "Notice Of
Entitlement To Impact Fee Refund".
J. A refund shall include interest at one-half (1/2) the legal rate provided for in section 28-22-104, Idaho Code, from the date on which the impact fee
was originally paid.
K. In order to be eligible for a refund, a fee payer, successor in interest or owner of record shall file a written application for a refund with the fee
administrator within six (6) months of the time such refund becomes payable under subsection H of this section, or within six (6) months of
publication of the notice of entitlement to a refund, whichever is later. If a successor in interest claims a refund of impact fees, the fee administrator
may require written documentation that such rights have been transferred to the claimant prior to issuing the requested refund. Refunds shall be
paid within sixty (60) days after the date on which the fee administrator determines that a sufficient proof of claim for a refund has been made.
L. Any person entitled to a refund shall have standing to sue for a refund under the provisions of this chapter if there has not been a timely payment of a
refund as provided herein. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-4-8: EXEMPTIONS FROM IMPACT FEES:
A. The following types of land development shall be exempted from payment of the impact fees imposed by this chapter upon approval by the city
council:
1. Rebuilding the same amount of square feet of a dwelling unit or nonresidential structure that was destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, provided
that the structure is rebuilt and ready for occupancy within two (2) years of its destruction.
2. Construction of an unoccupied, detached accessory structure, or addition of uses related to a dwelling unit unless the city determines that the use
creates a significant impact on the capacity of system improvements.
3. Remodeling or repairing a dwelling unit or a nonresidential structure.
4. Replacing a dwelling unit with another dwelling unit or dwelling units on the same lot.
5. Placing a temporary construction trailer or office on a lot.
6. Constructing an addition on a residential structure which does not increase the number of service units.
7. Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses, such as tennis courts or clubhouse, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the
use creates a significant impact on the capacity of system improvements.
8. Construction of a dwelling unit on a lot in a subdivision, which subdivision plat was approved and recorded prior to January 1, 2000.
9. Redevelopment of a mobile home park or a manufactured home park into a residential subdivision.
10. Undeveloped lots annexed into the city prior to January 1, 2000, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the use would create a significant
impact on the capacity of system improvements.
B. An impact fee will be assessed for installation of a modular building, manufactured home or recreational vehicle unless the fee payer can
demonstrate by documentation such as utility bills and tax records, either: 1) that a modular building, manufactured home or recreational vehicle was
legally in place on the lot or space prior to the effective date hereof; or 2) that an impact fee has been paid previously for the installation of a modular
building, manufactured home or recreational vehicle on that same lot or space. Lawful storage of a recreational vehicle shall not be deemed
installation for purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-4-9: CREDITS; REIMBURSEMENTS:
A. No fee payer shall be required to construct, fund or contribute any capital improvement to meet the same need for police, fire, parks and streets
capital improvements for which an impact fee is imposed. All system improvements constructed, funded or contributed over and above the
proportionate share of system improvement costs, including such system improvements paid for pursuant to a local improvement district, shall result
in either a credit on future impact fees or reimbursement (at the fee payer's option) for such excess construction, funding or contribution to be paid
from impact fees paid by future development that benefits from such system improvements constructed, funded or contributed by the fee payer.
However, no credit or reimbursement shall be provided for: 1) project improvements; 2) any construction, funding or contribution not agreed to in
writing by the city prior to commencement of such construction, funding or contribution; and 3) any construction, funding or contribution of a type of
capital improvement not included in the calculation of the applicable impact fee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 148/258
B. In the calculation of impact fees for a project pursuant to subsections 9-4-5E through G of this chapter, credit shall be given for the present value of
all tax and user fee revenue generated by the fee payer within the service area and used by the city for system improvements of the category for
which the impact fee is being collected. If the amount of such credit exceeds the impact fee for a project, the fee payer shall receive a credit on
future impact fees. The credit may be applied by the fee payer as an offset against future impact fees only in the service area where the credit was
generated.
C. In the calculation of impact fees for a project, credit or reimbursement (at the fee payer's option) shall be given for the present value of any
construction of system improvements or contribution of land or money required by the city from the developer for system improvements of the
category for which the impact fee is being collected, including system improvements paid for through local improvement district assessments.
D. If credit or reimbursement is due to the fee payer, the city and fee payer shall enter into a written agreement, negotiated in good faith, prior to the
construction, funding or contribution. The written agreement shall include, without limitation: a description of the construction, funding or contribution
of system improvements including, in the case of real property, a legal description of the real property; description as to how the system
improvements are to be valued; the amount of the credit or the amount, time and form of reimbursement; instructions as to how the capital
improvements should be provided to the city to ensure full transfer of ownership; and the circumstances under which the credit or reimbursement is
deemed effective. To assist in such reimbursement, the city shall continue to collect impact fees from other developers whose proposed
developments will benefit from such construction, funding or contribution, and will promptly transfer such funds to the fee payer. If a successor in
interest claims a reimbursement or credit, the fee administrator may require written documentation that such rights have been conveyed to the
claimant prior to issuing the requested reimbursement or credit.
E. Approved credits may be used to reduce the amount of impact fees of the category for which the impact fee is being collected in connection with any
new development until the amount of the credit is exhausted. Each time a request to use approved credits is presented to the city, the city shall
reduce the amount of the applicable impact fee otherwise due from the fee payer and shall note in the city records the amount of credit remaining, if
any. Upon request of the fee payer, the city shall issue a letter stating the amount of credit available. If the credit has not been exhausted within eight
(8) years of the date of issuance of the first building permit for which an impact fee was due and payable, or within such other time period as may be
designated in writing by the city, such credit shall lapse, unless a refund of the remaining credit is applied for as set forth in subsection 9-4-7K of this
chapter.
F. Approved credits or reimbursement shall only be used to reduce the amount of the impact fee of the category for which the impact fee is otherwise
due, and shall not be paid to the fee payer in cash or in credits against any other monies due from the fee payer to the city.
G. Credit for land dedications shall, at the fee payer's option, be valued at: 1) one hundred percent (100%) of the most recent assessed value for such
land as shown in the records of the Elmore County assessor; or 2) that fair market value established by a private appraiser reasonably acceptable to
the city in an appraisal paid for by the fee payer. Credit for contribution or construction of system improvements shall be valued by the city based on
complete engineering drawings, specifications, and construction cost estimates submitted by the fee payer to the city, which estimates shall be
revised as actual costs become available. The city shall determine the amount of credit due based on the information submitted, or, if the city
determines that such information is inaccurate or unreliable, then on alternative engineering or construction costs reasonably acceptable to the city
as a more accurate measure of the value of the offered system improvements to the city.
H. Approved credits for land dedications shall become effective when the land has been conveyed to the city in a form reasonably acceptable to the city
at no cost to the city, and has been accepted by the city. Approved credits for contribution or construction of system improvements shall generally
become effective when: 1) all required construction has been completed and has been accepted by the city; and 2) all design, construction,
inspection, testing, bonding, and acceptance procedures have been completed in compliance with all applicable requirements of the city. Approved
credits for the construction of system improvements may become effective at an earlier date if the fee payer posts security in the form of a
performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit or escrow agreement in the amount and under terms reasonably acceptable to the city.
I. Credit may only be transferred by a fee payer that has received credit to such fee payer's successor in interest. The credit may be used only to offset
impact fees for the same category for which the credit was issued. Credits shall be transferred by any written instrument clearly identifying which
credits are being transferred, the dollar amount of the credit being transferred, and the system improvements for which the credit was issued. The
instrument of transfer shall be signed by both the transferor and transferee, and a copy of the document shall be delivered to the fee administrator
for documentation of the transfer before the transfer shall be deemed effective. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-4-10: APPEALS:
The decisions of the fee administrator may be appealed as provided below:
A. Any fee payer, who is or may be obligated to pay an impact fee, may appeal a decision made by the fee administrator in applying this chapter to the
city council's designee. Such decisions that may be appealed include:
1. The applicability of an impact fee to the development.
2. The amount of an impact fee to be paid for the development.
3. The availability, amount or application of any credit.
4. The amount of any refund, reimbursement or credit.
5. Any discretionary action or inaction by or on behalf of the city.
A fee payer may pay an impact fee under protest in order to obtain a development approval or building permit(s) and, by paying such impact fee,
shall not be estopped from exercising the right of appeal provided herein, nor shall the fee payer be estopped from receiving a refund of any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 149/258
amount deemed to have been illegally collected. Upon final disposition of an appeal, the impact fee shall be adjusted in accordance with the
decision rendered and, if necessary, a refund paid.
B. In order to pursue an appeal, the fee payer shall file a written notice of appeal with the city council's designee within fifteen (15) days after the date of
the decision being appealed, or the date on which the fee payer submitted a payment of impact fees under protest, whichever is later. Such written
application shall include a statement describing why the appellant believes that the decision was in error, together with copies of any documents that
the appellant believes supports the claim.
C. The city council's designee shall notify the fee payer of the hearing date on the appeal, which notice shall be given no less than fifteen (15) days prior
to the date of the hearing, and shall hear the appeal within thirty (30) days after receipt of a written notice of appeal. The appellant shall have a right
to be present and to present evidence in support of the appeal. The fee administrator who made the decision under appeal shall likewise have the
right to be present and to present evidence in support of the decision. The burden of proof in any such hearing shall be on the fee payer to
demonstrate that the amount of the impact fee, credit, reimbursement or refund was not properly calculated by the city.
D. The criteria to be used by the city council's designee shall be whether: 1) the decision or interpretation made by the fee administrator; or 2) the
alternative decision or interpretation offered by the appellant, more accurately reflects the intent of this chapter that new development in the city pay
its proportionate share of the costs of system improvements for public facilities necessary to serve new development. The city council's designee
may affirm, reject or revise the decision of the fee administrator, providing written findings of fact and conclusions, within fifteen (15) days after
hearing the appeal. The city council's designee shall modify the amount of the impact fee, credit, refund or reimbursement only if there is substantial
evidence in the record that the fee administrator erred, based upon the methodologies contained in the impact fee study, this chapter and/or the
capital improvements plans. The decision of the city council's designee shall be final.
E. Upon voluntary agreement by the fee payer and the city, the fee payer and the city may enter into mediation with a qualified independent party to
address a disagreement related to the impact fee for proposed development. Costs for the independent mediation service shall be shared equally by
the fee payer and the city. Mediation may take place at any time during an appeals process and participation in mediation does not preclude the fee
payer from pursuing other remedies. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-4-11: IMPACT FEE ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
A. The city has established an advisory committee. The advisory committee shall continue to be composed of not fewer than five (5) members
appointed by the city council. Two (2) or more members of the advisory committee shall be active in the business of development, building or real
estate. An existing planning and zoning commission may serve as the advisory committee if the commission includes two (2) or more members who
are active in the business of development, building or real estate; otherwise two (2) members who are not employees or officials of the city shall be
appointed to the advisory committee. The advisory committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city council and is established to:
1. Assist the city in adopting land use assumptions;
2. Review the capital improvements plans, and proposed amendments, and file written comments;
3. Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements plans;
4. File periodic reports, at least annually, with respect to the capital improvements plans and report to the city any perceived inequities in
implementing the capital improvements plans or imposing the impact fees; and
5. Advise the city of the need to update or revise land use assumptions, capital improvements plans and impact fees.
B. The city shall make available to the advisory committee, upon request, all financial and accounting information, professional reports in relation to
other development and implementation of land use assumptions, the capital improvements plans and periodic updates of the capital improvements
plans. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-4-12: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
A. As used in this chapter, masculine, feminine or neuter gender and the singular or plural number shall each be deemed to include the others wherever
and whenever the context so dictates; the word shall, will or must is always mandatory; the word may is permissive; and the word should indicates
that which is recommended, but not required.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to create any additional right to develop real property or diminish the power of the city in regulating the
orderly development of real property.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall limit or modify the rights of any person to complete any development for which a lawful building permit was issued prior
to the effective date hereof.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from requiring a developer to construct reasonable project improvements in conjunction with a project.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the ability of the city to enter into intergovernmental agreements as provided in section 67-8204A, Idaho Code.
F. Nothing in this chapter shall obligate the city to approve any development request that may reasonably be expected to reduce levels of service below
minimum acceptable levels established in the development impact fee study.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 150/258
G. Nothing in this chapter shall obligate the city to approve development which results in extraordinary impact.
H. Notwithstanding any agreement by the fee payer to pay the proportionate share of system improvement costs documented by the supplemental
study, nothing in this chapter shall obligate the city to approve development that results in an extraordinary impact.
I. Nothing in this chapter shall work to limit the use by the city of the power of eminent domain or supersede or conflict with requirements or procedures
authorized in the Idaho Code for local improvement districts or general obligation bond issues.
J. A development impact fee shall not exceed a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements determined in accordance with section 67-
8207, Idaho Code. Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs.
K. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent or prohibit private agreements between developers, the city, the Idaho transportation
department, and/or other governmental entities in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements or providing for credits or
reimbursements for system improvement costs incurred by a developer or fee payer, including interproject transfers of credits, or providing for
reimbursement for project improvements that are used or shared by more than one development project. If it can be shown that a proposed
development has a direct impact on a public facility under the jurisdiction of the Idaho transportation department, then the agreement shall include a
provision for the allocation of development impact fees collected from the developer or fee payer for the improvement of the public facility by the
Idaho transportation department.
L. Nothing in this chapter shall restrict or diminish the power of the city: 1) to impose reasonable conditions on the annexation of any property to the city
in accordance with Idaho Code, including conditions for recovery of project or system improvement costs required as a result of such voluntary
annexation, or 2) to negotiate and execute development agreements that may impose additional conditions on development, including the recovery
of project or system improvement costs, either in connection with a proposed annexation or in connection with any other development within the city.
M. The impact fees described in this chapter, and the administrative procedures of this chapter shall be reviewed at least once every five (5) years to
ensure that: 1) the demand and cost assumptions and other assumptions underlying such impact fees are still valid; 2) the resulting impact fees do
not exceed the actual costs of providing police, fire, parks and/or streets system improvements required to serve new development; 3) the monies
collected in any impact fee fund have been and are expected to be spent for system improvements of the type for which such impact fees were paid;
and 4) such system improvements will benefit those developments for which the impact fees were paid.
N. Violation of this chapter shall be subject to those remedies provided in this code. Knowingly furnishing false information to any official of the city
charged with the administration of this chapter on any matter relating to the administration of this chapter including, without limitation, the furnishing
of false information regarding the expected size or use of a proposed development, shall be a violation of this chapter.
O. The captions used in this chapter are for convenience only and shall not affect the interpretation of any portion of the text of this chapter.
P. If any paragraph, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be invalid, inconsistent with the provisions
of the Idaho development impact fee act, section 67-8201 et seq., Idaho Code, unconstitutional and/or unenforceable, such provisions shall be
deemed to be separate, distinct and independent and the remaining provisions of this chapter shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-
2015)
Chapter 5
DEVELOPMENT AND LATECOMER'S AGREEMENTS
9-5-1: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a procedure by which the rezoning of certain property may be conditioned upon the developer or
owner of the property making certain written commitments concerning the use, development or annexation of a property. The use of the written
commitments provided for in this chapter might allow a specific project, utility connection or use of real property in an area which may not be
appropriate for all uses allowed in that particular zone. The written commitments concerning the development or use of the property will offset
identified problems to the extent that the proposed rezoning may then be acceptable. The use of the procedures provided in this chapter is
discretionary with the city and in agreement with the comprehensive plan.
B. Criteria For Written Commitments: The development agreement and the written commitments provided for in this chapter shall be accepted as
conditions attached to the rezoning of the property if they meet the following criteria: 1) the rezoning itself must give rise to the need for the
condition; 2) such conditions shall have a reasonable relation to the rezoning; 3) all such conditions shall be in conformity with the comprehensive
plan; 4) such conditions shall be capable of being readily and effectively enforced by the city at the time of development of the property and
thereafter; 5) such conditions shall be deemed necessary and sufficient to offset identified problems caused by the rezoning in a manner not
available by traditional methods.
C. Application: Any person submitting a written request or application to the city for the rezoning of a parcel of property may, at his or her option, submit
with the application a proposed development agreement for the property, including a list of commitments concerning the development and use of the
property. The commission or the city council, in considering a request to rezone property, may suggest to the owner or developer of the property that
the application or request to rezone the property should be accompanied by a development agreement with commitments for the development of the
property. The proposed development agreement and the commitments shall be considered a part of the application to rezone the property and a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 151/258
summary of the proposed agreement and commitments shall be included in any notices required for consideration of the rezoning application, either
before the commission or the city council.
D. Development Agreements And Commitments: Development agreements and commitments shall be signed by all of the owners of the property,
recorded at the county recorder's office and shall run with the land. If the proposed developer of the property is a contract purchaser, such purchaser
shall also be made a party to the agreement and shall sign the same. The development agreement shall include the following:
1. The specific proposed land use for the property.
2. The development plan for the property, including the location of all structures, parking lots, landscaping, utilities and all other improvements.
3. The proposed use of all structures.
4. The date construction will commence, and, if construction is proposed in phases, the date construction will commence for each phase.
5. The date construction will be completed, and, if construction is proposed in phases, the date each phase shall be completed and the respective
uses commenced.
6. A commitment for future annexation, hookup to city services, placement of sidewalk, curb and gutter or street.
7. Commitments concerning the future use of the property which will be binding on all future owners.
8. Any other matter required by the city that is agreed to by the owner or developer of the property.
9. A provision that, upon the failure of the owner, each subsequent owner or any other person acquiring an interest in the parcel to comply with the
conditions and commitments in the development agreement, the agreement may be terminated and the zoning designation upon which the use is
based reversed or, if applicable, the city may contract for the work and bill the property owner or place the amount on the tax rolls for collection. A
written commitment shall be deemed written consent to rezone the property upon the failure of conditions imposed by the commitment in
accordance with provisions of this chapter.
Development agreements and commitments shall be properly executed and acknowledged and shall be recorded in the office of the county
recorder of Elmore County, Idaho, and shall become an encumbrance upon the real property.
E. Approval Of Development Agreement And Commitments: The city has not obligated itself to recommend or adopt a proposed zoning change,
development agreement or commitment by the adoption of this chapter. The approval and acceptance of a development agreement and
commitments shall be at the sole discretion of the city. The city council, may, by ordinance adopted or amended in accordance with the notice and
hearing provisions provided under section 67-6509, Idaho Code, require or permit as a condition of rezoning that an owner or developer make a
written commitment concerning the use or development of the subject parcel. The governing board shall adopt ordinance provisions governing the
creation, form, recording, modification, enforcement and termination of conditional commitments. Such commitments shall be recorded in the office
of the county recorder and shall take effect upon the adoption of the amendment to the zoning ordinance. Unless modified or terminated by the
governing board after a public hearing, a commitment is binding on the owner of the parcel, each subsequent owner, and each other person
acquiring an interest in the parcel.
F. Compliance With Agreement And Commitments: Unless modified or terminated by the city council as provided in this chapter, a development
agreement and commitments are binding on the owner of the parcel, each subsequent owner and any other person acquiring an interest in the
parcel. A development agreement or commitment is binding on the owner of the parcel even if it is unrecorded; however, an unrecorded commitment
is binding on a subsequent owner or other person acquiring an interest in the parcel only if that subsequent owner or other person has actual notice
of the agreement or commitment.
G. Modification Of Agreement And Commitments: A development agreement and commitments may be modified only with the permission of the city
council. Any modification must comply with this section.
H. Termination Of Agreement And Commitments: Upon a preliminary finding by either the commission or the city council that the owner, subsequent
owner or other person acquiring an interest in the parcel of property has failed to comply with the conditions in the development agreement or
commitments, a hearing shall be held by the commission after notice pursuant to Idaho Code. The commission shall then make a recommendation
to the city council. The city council shall then hold its own hearing after notice pursuant to Idaho Code.
The city shall: 1) find that the owner or developer is in compliance with the development agreement and commitments; or 2) find that the owner or
developer is not in compliance with the development agreement and commitments, and after the notice and hearing requirements of this section for
modification have been met, modify the development agreement and commitments; or 3) find that the owner is not in compliance with the
development agreement and commitments and terminate the agreement and commitments.
If the city council finds that the owner or developer, subsequent owner or developer, or other person acquiring an interest in the parcel, has failed to
comply with the development agreement or commitments, and continues to fail to do so after sixty (60) days' notice by the city to comply, then the
development agreement and commitments shall be terminated and the zoning designation for the property shall revert to the prior zoning
classification. All uses of the real property that are inconsistent with the initial zoning classification shall cease and shall not be considered a
preexisting use.
I. Enforcement: Development agreements and commitments may be enforced by the city through any means deemed to be appropriate, including, but
not limited to, specific performance, injunctive relief, monetary damages, criminal penalties and/or termination as provided herein. These
enforcement options shall be considered supplemental to and not exclusive of any other remedies that may be available to the city. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-
2015)
9-5-2: LATECOMER'S AGREEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 152/258
A. Definitions. As used in this title, unless the context otherwise requires:
DEVELOPER: The legal or equitable owner of property who constructs and dedicates public improvements to the city.
OWNER: The person in whom the recorded fee title is vested, although subject to lien or encumbrance.
PROPERTY: All land, whether platted or unplatted, regardless of improvements thereon and regardless of lot or land lines.
B. Type Of Improvements Subject To Reimbursement: A developer who constructs and dedicates to the city a street, sidewalk, water main, sewer main,
bicycle trail, bridge, storm drainage facility, traffic signal or other public improvement may apply to the city for the establishment of reimbursement in
order to be reimbursed for a portion of the cost of such public improvement from the owners of other property that is specially benefited by the
improvements.
C. Property Eligible For Inclusion:
1. Any property is eligible for inclusion in the reimbursement calculation if it has been specially benefited by a street, sidewalk, bicycle trail, storm
drainage facility, bridge, water main, sewer main, traffic signal, or other public improvement constructed by a developer and dedicated to the city.
2. Property located outside the city limits may be included in the reimbursement calculation upon the application by the developer. No
reimbursement, however, may be collected from such property until it has been annexed to the city, which must occur prior to the last date on
which reimbursement may be collected.
D. Basis For Reimbursement Determination:
Reimbursement amount = actual construction cost x (total service area (acres) - total development area (acres))
total service area (acres)
1. The total service area consists of all properties that are specifically and specially benefited.
2. The total development area shall include all area within the development and/or subdivision boundary including, but not limited to, road right of
way, open area, common area or other jointly owned or utilized property.
3. The actual construction cost is the reasonable cost of constructing the improvement, together with any acquisition cost for any easements, or
rights of way upon which any such improvements are constructed, and together with any incidental costs, but not including the cost of any part or
portion that solely benefits the development. Engineering costs, incurred by the developer, not to exceed ten percent (10%) of construction costs
and any application or hearing fees, may be included for determining the cost. The determination of whether a cost is reasonable shall be made
by the city's engineer. Such determination is at the sole discretion of the city's engineer.
4. Except as hereinafter limited, the term special benefit means any benefit conferred upon property that is greater than or different from that
conferred upon properties in the city as a whole by an improvement. Among the facts to be considered in determining the existence of a special
benefit are:
a. Increased market value;
b. Improvement in safety or convenience of access;
c. Improved drainage;
d. Alleviation of health or sanitation hazards;
e. Adaptability of the property to a superior or more profitable use;
f. Improved availability of public water or sewer services to the property; and
g. In the case of undeveloped property, the installation of an improvement which would otherwise be required for development of the property.
5. When a developer extends an improvement, such as a water or sewer main, in order to make lateral connection to the developer's property, the
preexisting portion of the improvement shall not be deemed to specially benefit that portion of the property served by the extension.
E. Reimbursement Terms:
1. To qualify for reimbursement, the developer shall submit an application, prior to construction, which details the infrastructure which is eligible for
reimbursement, the total dollar amount of costs eligible for reimbursement and the properties subject to the payment of such reimbursement. If an
application is submitted after construction has commenced, the acceptance of the application shall be at the sole discretion of the city.
2. After the application is approved by the city and construction is completed, the developer shall then execute a reimbursement agreement with the
city. The final determination as to the amount of costs eligible for reimbursement and the properties subject to payment of such reimbursement is
at the sole discretion of the city engineer. In the event the developer incurs additional costs after executing a reimbursement agreement, the city
may amend the reimbursement agreement at its discretion.
3. Eligibility for reimbursement shall terminate no more than ten (10) years from the date of the letter setting forth the amount of eligible
reimbursement unless an alternate time frame is provided in the reimbursement agreement. Any property which is platted or connected to the
improvement thereafter shall not be subject to payment of the reimbursement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 153/258
4. The reimbursement agreement shall be recorded with the county recorder and shall run with the land and shall bind all subsequent purchasers of
the land.
F. Collection Of Reimbursement:
1. All reimbursement fees shall be collected by the city at the time of preliminary plat or final plat application, which may be directed by resolution of
the council. Reimbursement fees may be further subdivided for collection purposes on an individual basis as follows:
a. For commercial and/or industrial developments the fees shall be based upon the commercial lot area plus a percentage of any right of way
and/or common area as applicable.
b. For residential developments the fees shall be based upon a per equivalent single-family dwelling basis based upon the total fee established on
the gross area of the subdivision divided by the number of equivalent single-family dwellings.
2. The city, at its sole discretion, may defer collection of the reimbursement fee to the time of application of a building permit. Such deferral may toll
the time period of eligibility for reimbursement over the term of the agreement.
3. The city specifically will not guarantee collection of the reimbursement fee.
4. In the event that any reimbursement fee becomes due and remains uncollected, the city may execute an assignment of the city's right to collect
any such unpaid reimbursement fee to the developer granted reimbursement.
5. The city will agree to notify the developer granted reimbursement when the benefited property is platted, a building permit is issued, or the
property connects to the improvement. The developer shall meet with the city annually to review the status and an accounting of the
reimbursement agreement.
6. The developer granted reimbursement agrees to indemnify the city for, and hold the city harmless from, any suit or action that is or may be
brought against the city as a result of the execution of the reimbursement agreement, and the determination and/or collection of the
reimbursement fee.
7. When the reimbursement fee is collected, the city will pay over the reimbursement fee after first deducting therefrom a collection fee. The amount
of the collection fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.
8. It shall be the responsibility of the developer granted reimbursement to keep the city apprised of the developer's current address. In the event of
the developer's death, it shall be the developer's personal representative's responsibility to notify the city of the name and address of the person to
receive future reimbursements. In the case of a corporate recipient, a successor shall be designated prior to dissolution.
9. Failure of the developer granted reimbursement to comply with any of the provisions of the reimbursement agreement shall constitute
abandonment of all rights of reimbursement and shall be grounds for termination of the reimbursement agreement and refund of any
reimbursement fees received by the city on behalf of the developer after the abandonment.
10. A developer is prohibited from collecting reimbursement in an amount greater than the eligibility amount set forth in the reimbursement
agreement.
G. Contracts:
1. In lieu of the procedure set forth herein, a developer may contract with the owners of property for reimbursement for the construction of public
improvements otherwise eligible for reimbursement under this title. At the request of the parties, the city will collect the reimbursement at the time
of connection, platting or as otherwise provided in the contract. The city shall be entitled to a collection fee as set forth above.
2. In the event that a developer contracts with the owner of a portion of the property that would otherwise be subject to a reimbursement fee, such
property may be excluded from further reimbursement fees; provided, however, that no property remaining within the service area shall be
assessed a reimbursement fee in an amount proportionally greater than that provided in such contract.
H. Appeals: The developer may appeal any decision or determination by city staff and/or the city engineer, in regard to this title, to the city council. An
appeal shall be initiated by submitting a written request to the city clerk setting forth the basis for the appeal within ten (10) business days of the
decision or determination being appealed. The city council shall hold a hearing on the matter at the next available city council meeting. (Ord. 1628,
1-12-2015)
Chapter 6
PROCEDURES
9-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the procedural requirements for comprehensive plan amendments, zoning text amendments, zoning map
amendments, conditional use review and approval, annexation, certificates of occupancy, zoning permits, letters of compliance, variances, public
hearings, subdivisions, daycare, appeals and fees. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-6-2: AMENDMENT OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
A. Amendments: As per Idaho Code, the commission may recommend amendments to the plan to the Council not more frequently than every six (6)
months to correct errors in the original plan or to recognize substantial changes in the actual conditions in the area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 154/258
B. Application Required: Any person seeking an amendment of the comprehensive plan shall file an application with the Development Services
Department in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-6-3: AMENDMENT OF ZONING ORDINANCE (REZONES):
This title may be amended whenever the Council deems that amendment is required for the public convenience, necessity, general welfare of the
public, or good zoning practices. Any amendment to this title shall be enacted pursuant to this section. The amendment of this title or the reclassification
of zoning may be instituted by the Planning and Zoning Commission, City Council or by one or more property owners or holders of valid options to
purchase property. The procedures set forth in this section shall apply to any measure to change district boundaries, establish or disestablish districts,
to change district regulations, to add, repeal or amend district regulations and to add, repeal or amend any other provisions of this section or the whole
of this title.
A. General Standards Applicable To Zoning Amendments/Rezone:
1. The commission and Council shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each proposal in terms of the following standards and shall
find adequate evidence answering the following questions about the proposed amendment/rezone:
a. Will the new zoning be harmonious with and in accordance with the comprehensive plan and, if not, has there been an application for a
comprehensive plan amendment;
b. Is the area included in the zoning amendment intended to be rezoned in the future;
c. Has there been a change in the area or adjacent areas which may dictate that the area should be rezoned;
d. Will the proposed uses be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing
or intended character of the general vicinity and that such use will not change the essential character of the same area;
e. Will the proposed uses not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses;
f. Will the area be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage
structures, refuse disposal, water, sewer or that the person responsible for the establishment of the proposed zoning amendment shall be able
to provide adequately any of such services;
g. Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community;
h. Will the proposed uses not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any
persons, property or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors;
i. Will the area have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding
public streets;
j. Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural or scenic feature of major importance; and
k. Is the proposed zoning amendment in the best interest of the city?
B. Application Required: Applications for amendments to the comprehensive plan/map, zoning ordinance or the official zoning map as adopted in or by
this title shall contain at least the following information:
1. Name, address and phone number of applicant;
2. Notarized request for zoning amendment from titled owner, successor of said owner, or valid title option holder or contract purchaser with consent
from the titled owner if not requested by the titled owner;
3. Legal description of property;
4. Legal description of all adjoining rights of way, railroads, roadways, highways and easements the full length of the property;
5. Present land use;
6. Proposed land use;
7. Present zoning district;
8. Proposed zoning district;
9. Characteristics of subject property which make the zoning amendment/change desirable;
10. Necessity or desirability of development pertaining to the zoning amendment and its harmony with adjacent development;
11. A vicinity map at a scale of one inch equals three hundred feet (1" = 300') showing property lines, thoroughfares, existing and proposed zoning
and such other items as the development services department may require;
12. A list of the mailing addresses of all property owners, from authentic tax records of Elmore County, who are within three hundred feet (300') of
the external boundaries of the land being considered, and all property owners included within the property being considered;
13. A statement of how the proposed zoning amendment/change relates to the Mountain Home comprehensive plan; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 155/258
14. A fee as established by the council.
C. Public Hearing: The commission shall advertise, provide notice and conduct a public hearing in accordance with Idaho Code and this title for each
application to amend this title or to reclassify a zoning district. Zoning amendments may consist of text and/or map revisions.
1. Zoning ordinance text amendment: Amendments to this title shall comply with title 67, chapter 65 of the Idaho Code.
2. Zoning map amendment: Amendments to this title shall comply with title 67, chapter 65 of the Idaho Code.
3. Upon granting or denying an application to amend the zoning ordinance, the council shall specify:
a. The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
b. The reasons for approval or denial; and
c. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to reverse the decision.
4. In the event the council shall approve an amendment, such amendment shall thereafter be made a part of the zoning ordinance upon the
preparation and passage of an ordinance. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-6-4: ANNEXATION:
The city is authorized to annex lands into its corporate boundary pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-222.
The corporate boundary of the city may be expanded whenever the council deems it to be for the public convenience, necessity, or for the general
welfare of the city. A request for the annexation of property into the city may be initiated by the city council, the commission or by one or more property
owners or holders of valid options to purchase the property. When the application for annexation is initiated by the property owner, the commission may
expand or modify the annexation request.
Any property to be annexed to the city, upon annexation, shall be zoned in accordance with the comprehensive plan. The commission and the city
council shall each follow the notice and hearing procedures as required. Annexation requests which are not in compliance with the comprehensive plan
shall require amendment to the comprehensive plan.
A. Annexation Agreements: If property is annexed and zoned, the city may require, as a condition of the zoning, that an owner or developer make a
written commitment, i.e., development agreement, concerning the use or development of the subject property. If an agreement is required or
permitted, it shall be recorded in the office of the Elmore County recorder and shall take effect upon the adoption of the ordinance annexing and
zoning the property, or prior to completion of the annexation, if agreed to by the owner of the parcel. Unless the commitment is modified or
terminated by the city council, the commitment shall be binding on the owner of the parcel, each subsequent owner, and each other person acquiring
an interest in the property.
B. Adoption: The city council is hereby authorized to adopt, by resolution, rules governing the creation, form, recording, modification, enforcement and
termination of commitments.
C. Application Required: Every person seeking annexation into the city shall file, with the development services department and the commission, an
application as prescribed herein and shall include any other information deemed appropriate by the code official.
1. The commission shall hold at least one public hearing for each annexation and zoning request as prescribed by Idaho Code and this chapter,
public hearings.
2. The commission shall file its recommendation on each annexation application with the city clerk as prescribed in this chapter. The commission's
recommendation on annexation applications shall be in accordance with the following policies:
a. That the annexation shall incorporate the city sewer planning area.
b. Be consistent with existing area of impact agreements.
c. Attempt to balance costs of services with anticipated revenues.
d. Promote other goals of population balance, contiguous development and prevention of costs due to leapfrog development.
e. Promote to keep city limit boundaries that are squared off and not irregular in shape.
3. The city council's decision may be appealed pursuant to the administrative procedures act and Idaho Code section 50-222. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-
2015)
9-6-5: APPEALS OF ACTION OF BUILDING OFFICIAL AND COUNCIL:
A. Appeal Of Zoning Administrator Or Building Official: Any final decision by the zoning administrator or building official may be appealed to the city
council. Within fourteen (14) calendar days following the zoning administrator's or building official's written decision the appealing party shall file a
written notice of appeal with the city clerk before five o'clock (5:00) P.M. or close of business, whichever occurs later, specifically identifying which
requirements are appealed to the city council including all reasons, factual and legal, why the decision of the zoning administrator or building official
should be overturned or modified.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 156/258
1. Action By The City Council: Within twenty five (25) calendar days from receipt of the written notice of appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall set a
hearing date for the appeal to be heard by the City Council. The Zoning Administrator and the City Attorney shall provide the appellant and the
City Council with a written response to the notice of appeal, including any other documents filed by the appellant, at least three (3) calendar days
prior to the appeal hearing. After hearing the appeal, the City Council may approve, approve with supplementary conditions, or deny the appeal as
presented. Within fourteen (14) calendar days after a written decision has been rendered by the City Council, the Zoning Administrator shall
provide the appellant with written notice of the decision.
B. Appeals Of The City Council: Any aggrieved person may appeal the action of City Council concerning the administration of this title. Within twenty
eight (28) days after notice of the Council action has been given to the applicant and after all remedies have been exhausted under this title an
aggrieved person may seek judicial review of the Council's action under provisions provided by Idaho Code, including, but not limited to, Idaho Code
section 67-6535. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-6-6: APPLICATIONS:
All applications required by this zoning ordinance (conditional use permits, variances and other zoning approvals) shall be filed with the Development
Services Department. Applications may be made by any owner or person showing a vested interest in the property.
A. Modification Or Amendment Of Application In Process:
1. If public notice of hearing has not been mailed or published, the applicant may make such changes as the applicant deems appropriate. The
original schedule of hearings, however, may not be capable of being met.
2. If notice of hearing has been mailed or published and the applicant desires to amend, modify, or alter the application or any of the included
designs, improvements, drawings, specifications, etc., the applicant shall first discuss the change with the Development Services Department. If,
as determined by the Code official, changes are not substantial, the Code official may allow the changes to be made without requiring that the
application be refiled and renoticed. If the application does not need to be refiled or renoticed, no additional filing fees shall be required. If the
application is required to be refiled or renoticed, additional fees shall be required.
B. Modification Or Amendment Of Approved Application Or Use: All applications for amendment, alteration or modification of an approved application or
use shall be treated as an initial application and must be processed in the same fashion and under the same procedures and fees as an initial
application.
C. Resubmittal Of Application: No application for a zone reclassification of any property which has been denied by the Council shall be resubmitted in
either substantially the same format with reference to substantially the same premises for the same purposes within a period of one year from the
date of such final action unless there is an amendment in the comprehensive plan which resulted from a change in conditions as applying to the
specific property under consideration. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-6-7: LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS:
A. Purpose: The regulations of this chapter allow for the adjustment of parcel lines or platted lot lines between existing legal, or nonconforming
properties. A property boundary adjustment does not vacate the platted lot lines of a recorded subdivision.
B. Applicability: These rules and regulations apply to existing lots and parcels in the City of Mountain Home.
C. Process:
1. Application: An application and fees, as set forth in this section and this Code, shall be submitted to the building official or the City Planner on
forms provided by the Development Services Department.
2. Tentative Approval Requirements: Upon tentative approval of the application by the building official or the City Planner subject to any applicable
conditions of approval and the requirements and regulations of this section, the applicant or owner shall have one year to complete the following
tasks:
a. Cause the property to be surveyed and a record of survey recorded;
b. Execute and record the necessary deeds to accomplish the property boundary adjustments as approved;
c. Verify taxes have been paid for both properties from the County Treasurer; and
d. Provide copies of the recorded record of survey, recorded deeds, and the new tax parcel numbers to the building official or the City Planner.
D. Issuance Of Approval Letter: Upon determination by the building official or the City Planner that the final property boundary adjustment is in
conformance with this section, the building official or the City Planner shall issue a letter stating the property boundary adjustment has received final
approval.
E. Standards:
1. A property boundary adjustment shall not reduce the size below the minimum dimensional standards for that zone.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 157/258
2. If one or more of the properties is nonconforming as to the minimum dimensional standards for that zone in which it is in, the property boundary
adjustment shall not increase any nonconformity.
3. A property boundary adjustment shall not increase the original number of properties.
4. A property boundary adjustment shall not change or move any public streets, private roads, easements, or publicly dedicated areas in any
manner.
5. The property boundary adjustment shall not constitute a relocation of a property. For the purpose of this chapter, the "relocation of a property"
shall be defined as relocating any property line greater than sixty percent (60%) of the property's width or length whichever is less restrictive as
recorded or documented prior to the property boundary adjustment. Property line adjustments greater than sixty percent (60%) of the property
width or length are only allowed to make a nonconforming parcel conforming to dimensional standards for the zone they are in. Subsequent
property boundary adjustment requests shall be held to these standards as originally recorded or documented prior to the first property boundary
adjustment.
6. For platted lots, the property boundary adjustment shall be in substantial conformance with the recorded plat.
F. Required Findings:
1. In order to approve the application, the building official or the City Planner shall find that the proposed property boundary adjustment complies
with the following standards:
a. The property boundary adjustment does not reduce the property size below the minimum dimensional standard for the zone that it is in;
b. The property boundary adjustment does not further increase the nonconformity of any nonconforming property;
c. The property boundary adjustment does not diminish the minimum dimensional standards for the zone that it is in;
d. The property boundary adjustment did not change or move any public streets, private roads, easements, or publicly dedicated areas in any
manner unless approved by the applicable department;
e. The property boundary adjustment did not constitute a relocation of a property; and
f. For platted lots, the property boundary adjustment was in substantial conformance with the recorded plat, in terms of plan notes, setbacks,
minimum lot size, easements, or any other specific plat requirements. (Ord. 1673, 11-26-2018)
9-6-8: MINOR DIVISION OF LANDS:
A. Purpose: The rules and regulations of this section and chapter shall allow for the one-time division of a parcel into four (4) separate parcels without
being subject to the subdivision regulations as set forth in this Code.
B. Applicability: These rules and regulations apply to existing lots and parcels in the City of Mountain Home.
C. Regulations: These regulations shall apply to:
1. The parcels or lot being divided must be a legal lot of record, recorded at the Elmore County Recorder's Office and the boundaries of which shall
not have changed except for one or more of the following:
a. The parcel of record was reduced by a governmental action as specified in this Code; or
b. The parcel of record was reduced by conveyance of property to a public utility for the purpose of constructing a public utility or infrastructure
facility; or
c. The parcel of record received approval for a property boundary adjustment as specified in this Code, and where the parcel of record met both of
the following standards:
(1) The parcel of record had sufficient acreage to accomplish the division prior to completion of the property boundary adjustment; and
(2) The property boundary adjustment did not diminish the size of the parcel of record such that it no longer has sufficient acreage to accomplish
the division.
D. Process:
1. Application: An application and fees, as set forth in this Code, shall be submitted to the building official or the City Planner on forms provided by
the Development Services Department.
2. Required Findings: The building official or the City Planner shall make the following findings in order to approve, or approve with conditions, the
minor land division:
a. The parcel or lot being divided must be a legal lot of record, recorded at the Elmore County Recorder's Office.
b. The proposed minor land division complies with the standards set forth in this Code and subsection E of this section.
3. Tentative Approval Requirements: Upon tentative approval of the application by the building official or the City Planner subject to any applicable
conditions of approval and the regulations of this Code, the applicant/owner shall have one year to complete the following tasks:
a. Record with the County Recorder a record of survey; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 158/258
b. Execute and record the necessary deeds to convey the minor land division; and
c. Verification from the County Treasurer that all taxes have been paid; and
d. Provide copies of the recorded record of survey, recorded deeds, and the new tax parcel numbers to the building official or the City Planner.
4. Final Approval Requirements: Upon determination by the building official or the City Planner that a division is in conformance with the
requirements outlined in the tentative approval letter and that all requirements and conditions were satisfied prior to the one year expiration date,
then the building official or the City Planner shall issue a letter stating that the minor land division has received final approval.
E. Standards:
1. The proposed division shall result in no more than four (4) parcels that comply with the design and dimensional standards of this Code, except
when the parcel of record has been diminished by governmental action. As a result of governmental action, the building official or the City Planner
may approve a reduced property size on one of the resulting parcels, subject to other regulations of this Code rendering the property as a legal
non-conforming property.
2. The proposed division is not a "subdivision" as defined in this Code.
3. If public improvements are required, all such improvements shall be completed prior to the building official or the City Planner issuing final
approval.
F. Required Findings:
1. Required Findings: In order to grant a minor division of property, the building official or the City Planner shall make the following findings:
a. The division created no more than four (4) parcels; and
b. The parcel or lot being divided must be a legal lot of record, recorded at the Elmore County Recorder's Office, and was of record in the County
Recorder's Office; and
c. The boundaries of the parcel or lot being divided have not changed except as specified in this Code; and
d. That if the property was reduced by the governmental actions that the property was in compliance with the minimum property size requirements
of the applicable zoning district, overlay district and/or this Code prior to the decrease in property size; and the decrease in property size was
caused by acquisition through prescription, or other means as defined by this Code; and
e. The subject property for which a requested minor land division is being made is not a platted lot within a subdivision.
f. The four (4) resulting parcels shall have required frontage to an approved City street. (Ord. 1674, 11-26-2018)
9-6-9: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
See chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-6-10: PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURE:
A. Applications: All applications shall be to the Development Services Department and must be in accordance with or not in conflict with the
comprehensive plan. The Development Services Department shall research the request and information from all interested agencies. Within thirty
(30) days the Development Services Department shall complete findings of fact and present the information to the commission.
B. Public Hearing: The commission, prior to making a recommendation to the Council, shall conduct at least one public hearing in which interested
persons shall have an opportunity to be heard.
C. Notice Of Hearing:
1. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper or paper
of general circulation within the jurisdiction.
2. Fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, written notice of time, place and purpose of hearing shall be mailed to property owners and residents within
three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land being considered and any additional area that may be impacted by the proposed
change as determined by the Administrator of the Development Services Department.
3. Fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, written notice of time, place and purpose of hearing shall be mailed to all political subdivisions and any
additional property owners that may be impacted by the proposed change, as determined by the commission.
4. When notice is required to two hundred (200) or more property owners or residents, in lieu of the mail notification, three (3) notices in the official
newspaper or paper of general circulation is sufficient; provided that the third notice appears ten (10) days prior to the public hearing following the
commission's hearing. If the commission makes a material change from what was presented at the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall
be provided before the commission forwards the amendment with its recommendation to the council.
5. Fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, the owner of the property shall post a notice of hearing on the property as provided in subsection D of this
section, stating the time, place and purpose of the hearing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 159/258
D. Posting Of Property:
1. Sign Specifications: The sign(s) shall consist of four foot by four foot (4' x 4') plywood or other hard surface on two (2) 4-inch by 4-inch posts, or
attached to another approved support in such a manner that it is perpendicular to the roadway along which the sign is posted and the bottom of
the sign shall be at least three feet (3') above the ground.
2. Lettering And Content: Centered at the top of the four foot by four foot (4' x 4') sign shall be "CITY OF MOUNTAIN HOME PUBLIC HEARING
NOTICE" in six inch (6") letters. In addition, each sign will inform the public on the nature of the hearing, the date, time and address of the hearing
location, a summary of the proposal to be considered, a city contact phone number, the location of the development and the name of the
applicant, and if applicable, the proposed development. Each sign shall be white with black lettering, and made of weather resistant material. The
sign shall be in substantial compliance with the following:
CITY OF MOUNTAIN HOME
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE
Mountain Home Planning and Zoning Commission
Will hold a public hearing on
(DATE) at 6:00 p.m. at
City Hall 160 South 3rd East
PURPOSE:
PROPERTY LOCATION:
APPLICATION:
Contact the City Planner at 580-2091 with any questions.
3. Sign Placement: The sign shall be posted on the land being considered along each roadway that is adjacent to the subject property boundaries.
The sign(s) shall be located on the property, outside of the public right of way. If the sign cannot be placed on the property and still be clearly
visible, the sign may be placed within the right of way if the applicant can obtain consent of the owner of the right of way.
4. Proof Of Posting: The applicant shall submit a notarized statement and a photograph of the posting to the city's development services department
no later than fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing attesting to where and when the sign(s) was posted. Unless the certificate is received by
such date, the hearing will be continued until the next regular planning and zoning commission meeting.
5. Sign Removal: The sign(s) shall be removed no later than three (3) days after the public hearing for which the sign had been posted.
E. Recommendation By Commission: Within a reasonable time from the receipt of the application and hearing, the commission shall transmit its
recommendation to the council. The commission may recommend that the application be granted as requested, or it may recommend a modification
of the application requested, or it may recommend that the application be denied. The commission shall ensure that any favorable recommendations
for the application are in accordance with the comprehensive plan and established goals and objectives thereof and shall make their decision based
on findings of fact and conclusions of law.
F. Council Action: No action, including and giving the publication of notice of hearing, shall be taken by the council until the commission has made its
recommendation to the council. The council, prior to adopting, revising or rejecting the application as recommended by the commission, may
conduct at least one public hearing, unless otherwise determined herein, using the same notice and hearing procedures as the commission.
Following the council hearing, if the council makes a material change from what was presented at the public hearing, further notice and hearing shall
be provided before the council approves the application. After holding the said hearing, the council shall approve, approve with conditions or deny
the application. If the council finds that it does not have sufficient information to make a decision, it may continue the matter from meeting to
meeting.
Upon approval or denial of an application, the council shall specify:
1. The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
2. The reasons for approval or denial; and
3. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to reverse the decision.
In the event the council shall approve an amendment, annexation, etc., such amendment, etc., shall thereafter be made a part of the zoning
ordinance upon the preparation and passage of an ordinance. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-6-11: REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS:
A. Purpose: It is the policy of the city of Mountain Home, Idaho (hereafter "the city"), pursuant to the federal fair housing amendments act of 1988
(hereafter "fair housing laws"), to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and procedures to
ensure equal access to housing and facilitate the development of housing for individuals with disabilities. This title establishes a procedure for
making requests for reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures of the jurisdiction to
comply fully with the intent and purpose of fair housing laws.
B. Applicability: A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any individual with a disability, his or her representative, or a developer or
provider of housing for individuals with disabilities, when the application of a land use, zoning or building regulation, policy, practice or procedure
acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 160/258
C. Notice To The Public Of Availability Of Accommodation Process: Notice of the availability of reasonable accommodation shall be prominently
displayed at public information counters in the planning and zoning and building departments, advising the public of the availability of the procedure
for eligible individuals. Forms for requesting reasonable accommodation shall be available to the public in the planning and zoning and building
departments.
D. Requesting Reasonable Accommodation:
1. In order to make housing available to an individual with a disability, any eligible person as defined in subsection B of this section may request a
reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures.
2. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be in writing and provide the following information:
a. Name and address of the individual(s) requesting reasonable accommodation;
b. Name and address of the property owner(s);
c. Address of the property for which accommodation is requested;
d. Description of the requested accommodation and the regulation(s), policy or procedure for which accommodation is sought; and
e. Reason that the requested accommodation may be necessary for the individual(s) with the disability to use and enjoy the dwelling.
3. Any information identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and
shall not be made available for public inspection.
4. A request for reasonable accommodation in regulations, policies, practices and procedures may be filed at any time that the accommodation may
be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. A reasonable accommodation does not affect an individual's obligations to comply with other
applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation.
5. If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation, the city will provide assistance to ensure that the process
is accessible.
E. Processing Request:
1. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by both the city planner and the building official (hereafter "the reviewing authority")
using the criteria set forth in subsection F of this section.
2. The reviewing authority shall issue a written recommendation on a request for reasonable accommodation within thirty (30) days of the date of the
application and may either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with the required
findings set forth in subsection F of this section.
3. If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the reviewing authority may request further information from
the applicant consistent with fair housing laws, specifying in detail the information that is required. In the event that a request for additional
information is made, the thirty (30) day period to issue a decision is stayed until the applicant responds to the request.
F. Required Findings: The written decision to grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall be consistent with
fair housing laws and based on the following factors:
1. Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation, will be used by an individual with disabilities protected
under fair housing laws;
2. Whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make housing available to an individual with disabilities protected under the fair housing
laws;
3. Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the jurisdiction; and
4. Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the city's land use and zoning or building program.
G. Written Decision On The Request For Reasonable Accommodation:
1. The written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation shall explain in detail the basis of the decision, including the reviewing
authority's findings on the criteria set forth in subsection F of this section. All written decisions shall give notice of the applicant's right to appeal
and to request reasonable accommodation in the appeals process as set forth below. The notice of decision shall be sent to the applicant by
certified mail.
2. The written decision of the reviewing authority shall be final unless an applicant appeals it to the Mountain Home city council.
3. If the reviewing authority fails to render a written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation within the thirty (30) day time period
allotted by subsection E of this section, the request shall be deemed granted.
4. While a request for reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws and regulations otherwise applicable to the property that is the subject of the
request shall remain in full force and effect.
H. Appeals: See section 9-6-5 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 161/258
I. Fee: A onetime fee, as established by the council, shall be charged at the time of application for a request for reasonable accommodation. (Ord. 1628,
1-12-2015)
9-6-12: STAY OF PROCEEDINGS:
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action taken unless the administrator certifies to the council (after notice of appeal is filed) that by
reason of facts stated in the application, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the council or by a court based upon an application, with notice showing due cause.
A. Notification Of Applicant: Within ten (10) days after a decision has been rendered by the council, the development services department shall
communicate to the aggrieved applicant of the council's decision relative to the appeal.
B. Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards (Appeals): In granting an appeal, the council may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in
conformity with this title. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the appeal is granted, shall be
deemed a violation of this title. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-6-13: VACATIONS:
A. Application Procedure: As per Idaho Code, any property owner desiring to vacate a subdivision or portion thereof, or a lot, public right of way or
easement within an existing subdivision, or any public right of way, any of which is situated within one mile of the boundaries of an incorporated city,
shall complete and file a petition for vacation with the development services department or other necessary entities, i.e., highway district and/or
county. Such petition shall set forth the particular reasons for the request to vacate, contain a legal description of the platted area or property to be
vacated, and the names and addresses of any persons affected thereby. The petitioner shall include the names and addresses of all property
owners within three hundred feet (300') of the boundaries of the area described in the petition. Vacation petitions within one mile of the city limits
must be filed with city and county.
B. Administrative Action: Upon receipt of the completed petition and any other information required, the development services department shall affix the
date of receipt thereon. The department shall then place said petition on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the commission. The department
shall also present the petition to those agencies that may be affected by the action for their comments.
C. Recommendation By Commission: Within thirty (30) days from the receipt of the proposed request for vacation, the commission shall review the
petition along with all agencies' responses and make a determination of findings of fact and conclusions, after which they shall transmit their
recommendation to the council. The commission may recommend that the vacation be granted as requested, or it may recommend a modification of
the vacation requested, or it may recommend that the request for vacation be denied. The commission shall ensure that any favorable
recommendations for vacations are in accordance with the comprehensive plan and established goals and objectives thereof.
Upon recommending to grant or deny an application for a vacation, the commission shall specify:
1. The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application.
2. The reasons for approval or denial; and
3. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to reverse the decision.
D. Action By Council: Within thirty (30) days from the receipt of the petition and the commission's recommendation, the council shall proceed as
required by Idaho Code, title 50, chapter 13. After any required hearings, the council shall make a determination of findings of fact and conclusions
and shall approve, approve with conditions, table or deny the application with supportive reasons. The council shall ensure that any approval or
approval with conditions shall be in accord with this title and the Mountain Home comprehensive plan.
1. The council shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the recommendation of the commission's report by a majority vote.
2. Upon granting or denying an application for vacation, the council shall specify:
a. The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
b. The reasons for approval or denial; and
c. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to reverse the decision.
E. Appeal Of Council Action: See section 9-6-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-6-14: VARIANCES:
The council may authorize in specific cases a variance from the terms of this title or from the subdivision and development ordinances which will not be
contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title would result in undue hardship.
Unless otherwise provided herein, no nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same district and no permitted or
nonconforming use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for issuance of a variance. Variances shall be granted
only where strict application of the provisions of this title would result in undue hardship because of characteristics of the site and must not conflict with
public interest1. The application shall be submitted to the commission which shall make a recommendation to the city council. A variance deals only with
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 162/258
bulk and coverage regulations, it does not apply to land uses. A use that is not allowed in a district would require a conditional use permit if applicable
according to the land use chart.
A. Procedures For Variance: Notice requirements for variance applications need not be published in the newspaper, but must be provided only to
owners of property which adjoin a building site. The adjoining property owners may acknowledge notification of the applicant's intent by signing
his/her application. If all adjoining property owners are unable/unwilling to sign the application, written notification must be given of the hearing with
adequate time for response.
B. Application And Standards For Variances: As per Idaho Code, a variance from the terms of this title shall not be granted by the council unless and
until a written application for a variance is submitted to the development services department, the commission and city council containing, where
applicable:
1. Name, address and phone number of applicant/owner.
2. Proof of ownership or valid option on the property or a contract interest therein with consent of the titled owner.
3. Present use of subject property.
4. What is intended to be done on or with the property.
5. The district (zone) that pertains to the subject property and the standards and codes which apply.
6. Vicinity map at a scale of one inch equals three hundred feet (1" = 300'), showing property lines, existing streets, proposed zoning district and
such other items as may be required.
7. Site plan and/or any building plans which may be pertinent to any proposed construction.
8. A list of the mailing addresses of all owners of adjoining properties which are contiguous to the applicant's property being considered.
9. The specific requirements of this title that must be reduced to permit the proposed structure.
10. Statement that special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land involved and which are not applicable to other lands in
the same district and would therefore prevent compliance and establish undue hardship for the owner.
11. Statement that special conditions or circumstances exist that were not a result of the applicant's action.
12. Statement that granting the variance requested shall not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this title to other lands,
structures or buildings in the same district under the same circumstances.
13. A fee established by the council.
C. Determination Of Findings/Commission And Council: A variance shall not be granted unless the commission and the city council each make specific
findings of fact based directly on the particular evidence presented to it, which supports conclusions that the above mentioned standards and
conditions have been met by the applicant and unless all of the following exist:
1. That strict compliance with the requirements of this title would result in undue hardship to the owner, subdivider or developer because of unusual
topography, the nature or condition of adjacent development, other physical conditions or other conditions that make strict compliance with this
title unreasonable under the circumstances, or that the conditions and requirements of this title will result in inhibiting the achievements or the
objectives of this title.
2. That the granting of the specified variance will not be detrimental to the public's welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which the
property is situated.
3. That such variance will not have the effect of altering the interest and purpose of this title and the Mountain Home comprehensive plan.
D. Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards: In granting any appeal or variance, the commission and/or council may prescribe appropriate conditions
and safeguards in conformity with this title. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the appeal or
variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this title.
E. Recommendation By Commission: Upon making the determination of findings of fact and conclusions, the commission shall transmit its
recommendation to the council within a reasonable time frame.
1. The commission may recommend that the variance be granted as requested, or it may recommend a modification of the variance requested, or it
may recommend that the variance be denied.
2. Upon recommending to grant or deny an application for a variance, the commission shall specify:
a. The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
b. The reasons for approval or denial; and
c. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to reverse the decision.
F. Action By Council: Within a reasonable time frame from the receipt of the commission's recommendation and upon making a determination of
findings of fact and conclusions of law, the council shall make a ruling.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 163/258
1. The council shall, by a majority vote, approve, approve with conditions, table or deny the recommendation of the commission's report with
supportive reasons. The council shall ensure that any approval or approval with conditions shall be in accord with this title.
2. Upon granting or denying an application to vary from the standards of the zoning ordinance, the council shall specify:
a. The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
b. The reasons for approval or denial; and
c. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to reverse the decision. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-6-15: ZONING PERMITS:
When necessary, zoning permits may be issued by the code official to assure that the structure or use is a permitted use in a zoning district and that it
meets the proper requirements with regard to setbacks, etc. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
Chapter 7
LAND USE CONTROL
9-7-1: PURPOSE:
The intent of this chapter is to indicate which land uses may locate in each zoning district and under what requirements. A further distinction is made for
land uses which are prohibited but may be permitted as allowed in the use chart of this chapter in given zoning districts only upon obtaining a
conditional use permit. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-7-2: LAND USE REGULATIONS:
No land or building in any zoning district shall be used or occupied in any manner creating dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable
conditions which could adversely affect the surrounding areas or adjoining premises unless expressly provided for in this title.
A. A building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied; and a building, or part thereof, or other structure shall be converted, erected, razed,
moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered, only in conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located,
unless otherwise provided for herein.
B. The land within the city limits is divided into the following land use categories/zoning districts: residential/R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4; R/limited office;
commercial/C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-4; industrial/I-1 and I-2. When several combined land uses exist, or are proposed, the most intensive land use shall
be considered as the primary activity.
C. When a use is not listed as a permitted use, such use shall be expressly prohibited.
D. Development within the area of impact shall require an agreement for annexation which may require agreement for utility hookups, etc., when city
boundary or municipal facilities are within three hundred feet (300') of the development. Said development agreement shall be recorded at the
Elmore County recorder's office and shall run with the land.
E. An area indicated on the official zoning map used as a public park or recreation area, public utility area, cemetery, public school site or semipublic
open space, shall not be used for any other purpose, and when the use of this area is an abandoned use as determined by city council, it shall
automatically be zoned the same as the zone in which it is located. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-7-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL LAND USES:
A. Right Of Way Acquisition: In order to provide right of way acquisition, no building or permanent structure shall be placed closer than sixty feet (60') to
any section line or quarter section line without approval of the city engineer and/or the board of commission of the highway district having jurisdiction
unless provided for otherwise in this title with the intent to provide area for future roadways.
B. Easements: No building or permanent structure shall be placed within any public easement.
C. Guesthouse: In residential zones, a guesthouse or guestrooms (without 220V connection) may be constructed within an accessory building to be
used for guests. Provided, that such facilities are used for the temporary housing of guests of the occupants of the main structure and not for
permanent occupancy by others or for monetary gain.
D. Lot Splits/Combined Lots: Any lot legally platted prior to the adoption of this title shall be a buildable lot.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 164/258
No lot shall hereafter be divided into two (2) or more lots unless all lots resulting from the division shall conform to all the applicable regulations of the
district in which the property is located. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-7-4: LAND USE CHART:
Legend: P - Permitted use C - Conditional PA - Permitted accessory
Agricultural:
Agricultural uses1 (as regulated by this title) C C
Auction/livestock C
Dairy (not permitted)
Farm products and warehousing P P P
Farm products/seasonal sales (license required) P P P P
Slaughter/meatpacking
Stables/riding C C
Stockyard/feedlot (not allowed)
Commercial:
Abstract and title company C C P P P
Accountants C C P P P P P P C
Adjusters C C P P P P P P C
Administrative offices C C P P P P C
Advertising agency P P P
Air cleaning equipment P P P P
Air condition/refrigeration/heating sales and repairs C P P P P P
Alarm systems P P P P C
Aligning service C P P P P
Aluminum siding and roofing contractor and sales C P P P
Amusement center/indoors (see Recreation facilities)
Animal grooming C C C C P P P P
Animal hospital/clinic/kennel, large C C C
Animal hospital/clinic/kennel, small P P P P C
Animals/small or domestic2 PA
PA
PA
PA
PA PA
PA
PA
PA
PA
PA
Answering service C C P P P P P P C
Antiques (with miscellaneous retail) C P P P P
Appliance stores/repair C P P P P P
Appraiser C C P P P P P P
Architects C C P P P P P P
Art galleries and supplies P P P P P P
Attorneys C P P P P P P
Auction houses P P P C
Auctions/miscellaneous C P P C C
Audio visual sales and repair P P P P P
Land Use
Zoning District
R-
1
R-
2
R-
3
R-
4
LO/R
C-
1
C-
2
C-
3
C-
4
I-1
I-2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 165/258
Audiologist C C P P P P P C
Auto body shop P P P P
Automobile and light truck dealer with repair (new or used) C C P P P P
Automobile and light truck repair C C P P P P
Automobile parts P P P P P P
Bakeries (retail/product sold on site) C P P P P
Bakeries (wholesale) P P P C
Banks and savings and loans C C P P P P C
Barber and beauty shop/1 chair (see section 9-9-16 of this title)
Barber and beauty shops C C P P P P P P
Bars, taverns, clubs P P P P
Bed and breakfast/boarding house C C C P P P P
Bicycle dealers and repair C P P P P
Billiard and pool rooms P P P P
Blacksmith shops C C P
Boat dealer sales and service C P P P P
Bookstore with miscellaneous retail C C P P P P
Bowling alley P P C
Bridal shop C P P P C
Broadcasting tower for radio/TV C C C P
Building supply C P P P
Bus company (charter or rental) C P P P
Bus terminal C P P P
Business office equipment/sales and repair P P P P C
Call center C P P C
Car washes C P P P P C
Caretaker's/watchman sleeping quarters PA
PA
PA
PA
Carpet sales P P P P
Casino/gaming facility C C
Catalog stores P P P C
Catering service C C C C P P P P
Children's shops, clothing, furniture, toys P P P
Chiropractors C C P P P P P
Church supplies/retail sales P P P P C
Classes/piano, dance, ceramics, craft (more than 5) C C P P P P P C
Clinic/medical (human) C C P P P P P P
Clothing stores/new and used P P P P C
Communication tower/radio/TV (see Broadcasting tower)
Convenience stores C P P P P P C
Copying and duplicating service (no retail sales) C P P P C
Dance supplies/retail P P P P C
Delicatessen P P P P P
Land Use
Zoning District
R-
1
R-
2
R-
3
R-
4
LO/R
C-
1
C-
2
C-
3
C-
4
I-1
I-2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 166/258
Dental lab C P P P P P
Dentists and orthodontists C C P P P P P C
Department store P P P C C
Drive-up windows C C C C C C
Drugstores/retail and prescriptions C P P P C
Dry cleaners C P P P P C
Electrical supply and repair P P P P P
Employment agencies office C P P P C
Engineers (office) C C P P P P P P P
Engravers P P P P
Entertainment facilities (see Recreation facilities)
Equipment dealer/sales or rental - heavy truck (over 1 ton), farm with repair P P P
Equipment rental (small/
miscellaneous)
P P P P P
Equipment storage/contractor, public agencies P P P
Exercise facility/gym C P P P P P
Fabric shop P P P P
Flea market (indoor) P P P
Flea market (open air) P P P
Florist greenhouses C P P P
Florist shop P P P P
Food/grocery stores and supermarkets C C P P C C
Food processing C P
Frame shop C C P P P
Fuel station C C P P P P
Fuel station with convenience store C P C P P P P
Fuel station with repair garage C C P P P P
Furniture and appliance (new or used) P P P P
Furniture refinishing/upholstering P P P P P
Garages (parking) C P P P P P
Garages (storage) P P P
Garden shop/supplies C P P P P
Gift shop P P P P P
Glass company (auto, plate, window) C P P P C
Hardware store C P P P P P
Health food store P P P P P P
Heating and air conditioning P P P P P
Helicopter/air ambulance landing pad C C C C C C P P P
Helicopter service (permitted at city airport) C C
Hobby shops/crafts P P P P
Hospital C C C C C C P P C
Hotel/motel P P P P
Ice cream shop P P P P P P
Land Use
Zoning District
R-
1
R-
2
R-
3
R-
4
LO/R
C-
1
C-
2
C-
3
C-
4
I-1
I-2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 167/258
Insurance agency C C P P P C
Interior decorators with retail P P P P P P
Irrigation equipment and sprinklers P P P
Janitorial services (office) P P P P
Janitorial supply and equipment P P P P P
Jewelry store P P P
Kennels/animal boarding C P P
Laboratory C P P P P
Laundry and cleaners (commercial) C P P P P P
Laundry and cleaners (self-service) C P P P C C
Liquor store P P P P C
Lockers/food P P P P
Lumberyards (see Building supply)
Machine shop C P P
Machine shop/auto C C P P P
Manufactured home/trailer/RV sales P P P
Meat market (no processing) P P P P P
Mortuary C C C C P P
Motorcycle sales and repairs C P P P P
Muffler and exhaust systems C C P P P
Music stores (instrument and record) P P P
Newspaper office P P P P C
Office, miscellaneous P P P P P P C
Ophthalmologist C C P P P P P C
Optician/retail sales P P P P P C
Optometrist C C P P P P P C
Outdoor display/sales (see sections 9-9-20 and 9-9-26 of this title)
PUD/planned unit development C C C C C C C C C C C
Paint store/miscellaneous retail P P P P P
Park/commercial P P P C
Park/playground private P P P P C C C C C C
Park/public P P P P C C C C C C
Parking lot (public or commercial) C C P P P P P
Pawnshop/secondhand (license required) P P P P
Pet store and supplies/grooming small animals P P P P P P
Pharmacy (prescriptions only) C C C C P P P P
Photographer's studio P P P P
Physical therapist C C P P P P P C
Physicians C C P P P P P C
Plumbing supplies and sales (enclosed) P P P P P
Plumbing supplies/open storage P P P
Podiatrist C C P P P P P C
Land Use
Zoning District
R-
1
R-
2
R-
3
R-
4
LO/R
C-
1
C-
2
C-
3
C-
4
I-1
I-2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 168/258
Pond(s), settling, etc., as connected to a specific business C C
Pond(s), storm drainage (see stormwater ordinance)
Power tools, machinery/sales and repairs C P P P P
Print shop (small) P P P P P P
RV park, overnighters C C P P
Radio, television sales and repairs P P P P
Radio, television station (see Broadcasting tower)
Real estate sales office/on site PA
PA
PA
PA
PA PA
PA
PA
PA
PA
PA
Realtors P P P P P P P
Recycling centers (indoors) C C P P P
Recycling centers (outside) C C C
Rental service/large equipment (outside) P P P
Rental service/miscellaneous P P P P P
Restaurant/fast food/drive-in C C C C C
Restaurant with dining room P P P P C
Retail store (miscellaneous) C P P P P
Rifle/pistol range C C C
Rock shop (enclosed) no rock crushing P P P
Roofing sales or contractor shop P P P
School/art, dance (see Classes)
School/trade or industrial P P P P C
Secondhand or salvage goods sales (may require license) (see Pawnshop)
Sexually oriented businesses P P
Shoe repair and sales P P P P P
Shopping centers P P P P C
Sign shop P P P P P
Snowmobile dealer and repair C C P P P P
Spa/health and wellness center P P P P P P
Sporting goods store P P P P C
Stone, marble, granite, rock grinding/cutting C P P
Storage/auto, boat, RV, bus/truck, farm equipment, etc., on open lots C P P
Storage buildings/large (see Warehouse)
Storage units/mini P P P
Tannery C
Taxi service C C P P P P P
Taxidermy P P P P P
Temporary outdoor sales (see subsection 9-9-26D6 of this title)
Tire shop/sales P P P P
Tool and die shops P P P
Trucking/transit terminal with repair C P P
Upholstering shops P P P P P
Vegetable/produce stands (seasonal/outside) license required P P P P P
Land Use
Zoning District
R-
1
R-
2
R-
3
R-
4
LO/R
C-
1
C-
2
C-
3
C-
4
I-1
I-2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 169/258
Vending cart P P P P P P
Veterinary service/hospital, large animal (see Animal hospital)
Veterinary service/hospital, small animal (see Animal hospital)
Warehouse/storage C P P P
Wholesale establishment/
distribution
C P P P
Wind energy system (small) C C C C C C C C C C C
Yard sales/garage PA
PA
PA
PA
PA PA
PA
PA
PA
PA
PA
Zoo/petting zoo (permanent) C C C C
Industrial:
Acoustical contractors and materials C P P P P
Aircraft charter, rental and lease office only P P P P P
Aircraft landing field C C
Aircraft/parts and sales P P P
Asphalt mix and equipment C C
Automobile wrecking and salvage C C
Batching equipment C
Bulk storage/acid or alkali, chemical, creosote, fertilizer, fireworks, gas, flammable or
combustible petroleum products
C C
Cabinet shop/manufacturing C P P
Cement plants and gravel (no pit) C C
Chemical storage and manufacture C C
Composting C C
Concrete block and shapes/
manufacturing or sales
C C P
Contractor's shop and yard C P P
Energy production facility C P
Fuel/bulk storage/distribution (flammable) P P P
Gravel, cement, sand C P
Hazardous/toxic materials facility C C
Incinerators (not permitted)
Junkyard P
Manufacturing/light/not offensive by reason of emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas,
light, noise, electrical. Compatible with adjoining uses
C P P
Manufacturing/outside storage P P
Mining/dredging, loading, processing C
Planing mill/sawmill C
Power plant (see Energy production facility)
Public utility transmission facility, i.e., power/water lines P P P P P P P P P P P
Public utility yard/structures/service facility (see section 9-9-22 of this title)
Salvage/wrecking yard C C
Sanitary landfill (not permitted)
Sheet metal fabrication shop C P P
Land Use
Zoning District
R-
1
R-
2
R-
3
R-
4
LO/R
C-
1
C-
2
C-
3
C-
4
I-1
I-2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 170/258
Smokestack C
Well drilling company and equipment storage P P
Public/semipublic/assembly/religious:
Amphitheater (outdoor) C C C
Auditoriums (public/private) C C C C C C C P P P
Cemetery C C C C C C C
Churches/religious facilities C C C P P P P P P
Clubs and lodges/no liquor/non-profit C C C P P P P P P
Clubs and lodges with liquor (see Bars, taverns, clubs)
Daycare/child or adult C C C C C P P P P C
Golf course C C C C C C C C C C C
Government building/industrial character C P P
Government office/nonindustrial character P P P P
House church (provide adequate parking) C C C P P P P P P
Jail/detention facility C P P
Outdoor assembly C C C C C P P P P P C
Public buildings/uses C C P P P P C
Recreation facilities/enclosed C C P P C C
Recreation facilities/outside P P P C C
Recreation facilities/public C C C C C C C C C C C
School/preschool/public, private, parochial and accessory C C C C C C P P P C C
Senior citizen center C C C C C P P P P C
Theaters (inside) P P P C
Theaters (outside) C P
Welfare/charitable institutions (nongovernment) P P P C
Youth center P P P P C
Residential:
Apartments (see Dwellings)
Dwelling/conversions C C C C C P P
Dwellings/commercial3 (mixed use/single unit) P P P P
Dwellings, duplex and attached single-family P P P P P P P
Dwellings, multiple with more than 4 units4 C C C C C C
Dwellings, multiple with 3 - 4 units and townhouses C P P P P P P
Dwellings, single-family5 P P P P P P P C C
Garage/carport (residential) PA
PA
PA
PA
PA PA
PA
PA
PA
Group care facility C C C P P P
Group home/no more than 8 C C C C P P P P P P
Halfway house P P P P C C C P P P
Handicapped residence P P P P P P P C C
Manufactured comm. units (individual lots/temporary) C C C
Manufactured home park P P P P C C
Land Use
Zoning District
R-
1
R-
2
R-
3
R-
4
LO/R
C-
1
C-
2
C-
3
C-
4
I-1
I-2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 171/258
Manufactured home subdivision P P P P C C C
Manufactured homes (class A/individual lots) P6
P6
P6
P6
P6 P6
P6
Nursing home/retirement home C P C C C P P P
Other:
Accessory buildings to principal use PA
PA
PA
PA
PA PA
PA
PA
PA
PA
PA
Temporary structures (see section 9-9-26 of this title)
Notes:
1. Agriculture use, excluding commercial feedlots, dairies, commercial poultry and poultry products production, pig farms and similar agriculture related
uses.
2. Under no condition shall the keeping of animals create a nuisance element for adjoining property owners.
3. Mixed use/residential and commercial in a commercial zone shall be under 1 structure.
4. More than 4 units requires planning and zoning review/council approval.
5. An existing single-family residence that is destroyed by fire may be rebuilt to required codes.
6. A manufactured home shall have its own lot in accordance with the R-4 lot specifications.
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015; amd. Ord. 1643, 2-8-2016)
9-7-5: ZONING BOUNDARIES/MAPS:
The general intent is to implement certain goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan which are best addressed through zoning approaches.
A. Regulations: The regulations for each district set forth by this chapter shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure or land. These requirements shall be held to be the minimum for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare of the general
public.
B. Interpretation Of District Boundaries: Whenever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any district shown on any zoning map made a part
hereof, the following rules shall apply:
1. All streets, alleys and railroad rights of way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property
immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets or railroad rights of way. Where the centerline of a street or alley serves as a district boundary, the
zoning of such street or alley to the centerline, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting
property.
2. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.
Should any uncertainty remain, the location or meaning shall be determined by the development services department. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-7-6: ZONING DISTRICTS:
The incorporated area of the city shall be divided into the following zoning districts whose boundaries are shown on the official city zoning map. In
addition, the specific purpose of each zoning district shall be as stated herein. (See section 9-7-4, "Land Use Chart", of this chapter, for all zoning
districts.)
A. R-1 zone/residential zone (very low density residential/17,000 square foot minimum lot): The intent of this district is to provide a very low density
environment for single-family households free from encroachment of commercial and industrial activities.
1. Uses Allowed: See uses allowed by right and by conditional use in section 9-7-4 of this chapter.
2. Development Requirements: See bulk/coverage chart, section 9-7-8 of this chapter.
B. R-2 zone/residential zone (low density residential/9,000 square foot minimum lot): The intent of this district is to provide a low density residential
environment with a mix of both single-family households and attached single-family dwellings that are free from encroachment by commercial and
industrial activities.
1. Uses Allowed: See uses allowed by right and by conditional use in section 9-7-4 of this chapter.
2. Development Requirements: See bulk/coverage chart, section 9-7-8 of this chapter.
3. Percentage Of Single-Family Attached: Unless development is through a planned unit development (PUD) no more than ten percent (10%) may
be single-family attached.
Land Use
Zoning District
R-
1
R-
2
R-
3
R-
4
LO/R
C-
1
C-
2
C-
3
C-
4
I-1
I-2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 172/258
C. R-3 zone/residential zone (medium density residential/6,500 square foot minimum lot): The intent of this district is to provide a medium density
residential environment with a mix of both single-family households and duplex dwellings free from encroachment of commercial and industrial
activities. Single-family attached and townhouse dwelling units may be permitted through a planned unit development. Triplex and fourplex dwellings
may be permitted by conditional use if all code requirements are met.
1. Uses Allowed: See uses allowed by right and by conditional use in section 9-7-4 of this chapter.
2. Development Requirements: See bulk/coverage chart, section 9-7-8 of this chapter.
3. Duplex Units; Single-Family Attached, And Townhouse Dwelling Units:
a. Each duplex, single-family attached, and townhouse dwelling unit shall have a total ground floor area of not less than eight hundred (800)
square feet per unit.
b. The minimum lot size for each duplex unit shall be the minimum lot size shown in the bulk/coverage chart, section 9-7-8 of this chapter.
c. Duplex, single-family attached, and townhouse dwelling units located on corner lots shall have entrances to each unit on opposing streets.
d. Unless development is through a planned unit development (PUD), no more than ten percent (10%) may be duplex, single-family attached, or
townhouse dwelling units.
4. Multiple Units:
a. More than a duplex requires a conditional use permit.
D. R-4 zone/residential (single-family/5,000 square feet) and high density dwellings: The intent of this district is to provide an environment with a mix of
single-family households, multiple dwellings and cluster developments.
1. Uses Allowed: See uses allowed by right and by conditional use in section 9-7-4 of this chapter.
2. Development Requirements: See bulk/coverage chart, section 9-7-8 of this chapter.
3. Duplex Units:
a. Each duplex housing unit shall have a total ground floor area of not less than eight hundred (800) square feet per unit.
b. The minimum lot size for each duplex unit shall be the minimum lot size shown in the bulk/coverage chart, section 9-7-8 of this chapter.
c. Duplex units located on corner lots shall have entrances to each unit on opposing streets.
d. Unless development is through a planned unit development (PUD), no more than ten percent (10%) may be multiple dwelling units or a duplex.
4. Multiple Units:
a. A structure on one lot or parcel which contains more than four (4) dwelling units shall require a conditional use permit.
5. Multiple Structures: Multiple structures on one lot or parcel, under single ownership, shall be developed as a PUD and require a conditional use
permit.
6. Density: Unless otherwise provided herein, the density for attached single-family, townhouse and multiple dwelling units shall be as follows:
a. Attached single-family and townhouse dwelling units (two- to four-plex dwelling units): The maximum density shall be fifteen (15) dwelling units
per acre.
b. Multiple dwellings and apartments: The maximum density shall be twenty (20) dwelling units per acre.
E. LO/R zone/limited office and residential zone: Limited office district/minimum lot size for LO/R shall be seven thousand (7,000) square feet. The
intent of this district is to allow professional offices and higher density residential, i.e., single-family, duplex, cluster and multiple dwellings. It is
intended that this zoning designation shall act as a buffer between more intense nonresidential uses and residential uses. It is intended that office
uses permitted in this category be located and designed so as to be in harmony with adjacent residential uses. The setbacks and materials used in
construction shall correlate more closely to those used in residential areas.
1. Uses Allowed: See uses allowed by right and by conditional use in section 9-7-4 of this chapter. All residential development shall comply with the
R-4 regulations.
2. Development Requirements: See bulk/coverage chart, section 9-7-8 of this chapter.
3. Design: Design shall be compatible to surrounding residential uses.
4. Landscaping: Nonresidential shall comply with the landscape ordinance, chapter 11 of this title.
F. C-1 zone/neighborhood commercial: The intent of this district is to permit the compatible coexistence of residential and small scale convenience
business uses which are intended to meet the daily needs and service of the residents of an immediate neighborhood, to encourage clustering and
strategic siting of such businesses and avoid intrusion of such uses into the adjoining residential districts. All such districts should be very limited in
size and shall give direct access of transportation to arterials or collectors and shall not constitute all or any part of a strip development concept.
1. Uses Allowed: See uses allowed by right and by conditional use in section 9-7-4 of this chapter.
2. Development Requirements: See bulk/coverage chart, section 9-7-8 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 173/258
3. Abutting Residential: When abutting a residential use the side yard setback shall be buffered.
4. Design: Design shall be compatible with surrounding residential uses.
5. Landscaping: Landscaping shall be equal to ten percent (10%) of the total lot area. The development services department shall review and may
approve with modifications or disapprove any landscape plan for compliance with the provisions of chapter 11, "Landscaping/Open Space
Requirements", of this title.
G. C-2 zone/central business district: The intent of this district is to accommodate and encourage a broad spectrum of commercial activities of various
sizes and to promote and allow higher density residential development in the central business area.
1. Uses Allowed: See uses allowed by right and by conditional use in section 9-7-4 of this chapter.
2. Development Requirements: See bulk/coverage chart, section 9-7-8 of this chapter; landscaping, chapter 11 of this title; parking, chapter 12 of this
title; and any other applicable requirements.
3. Existing: Front and sides/zero lot line.
4. New Construction: Street frontages, minimum of ten feet (10').
5. Landscaping: New construction shall provide some landscaping in front and parking areas, i.e., planter boxes, etc. The development services
department shall review and may approve with modifications or disapprove any landscape plan.
H. C-3 zone/general commercial: This district is intended for residential use and commercial activities as allowed in the C-1 and C-2 districts, but also
allows general business uses that are of a larger scale and more motor oriented to fulfill the need for travel related services as well as retail.
Businesses shall be operated within enclosed buildings (excepting service station displays). This district promotes attractive "gateway" development
along American Legion Boulevard and around perimeters of the C-2 district as defined on the zoning map and shall not be used to further promote
any other strip development.
1. Uses Allowed: See uses allowed by right and by conditional use in section 9-7-4 of this chapter.
2. Development Requirements: See bulk/coverage chart, section 9-7-8 of this chapter; landscape, chapter 11 of this title; parking, chapter 12 of this
title; and any other applicable requirements.
I. C-4 zone/heavy commercial: This district is intended for commercial activities allowed in other commercial zones but also allows heavy commercial
activities such as large equipment/auto sales, wholesale, warehouse, and light manufacturing in conjunction with retail sales along already
established strip commercial (gateway) on Highway 30, and Airbase Highway. The businesses are of a larger scale than the C-3 district and shall
allow outdoor storage in rear yards and may be allowed in side yards if not on an opposing street. Screening of outdoor storage shall be required.
(See landscaping/gateway, chapter 11 of this title.)
1. Uses Allowed: See uses allowed by right and by conditional use in section 9-7-4 of this chapter.
2. Development Requirements: See bulk/coverage chart, section 9-7-8 of this chapter; landscape, chapter 11 of this title; parking, chapter 12 of this
title; and any other applicable requirements.
J. I-1 zone/light industrial: The intent of this district is to provide for light nonpolluting industrial development which is compatible with C-4, without
residential intrusion, and to encourage the development of manufacturing and wholesale establishments which are clean, quiet, free of hazardous
conditions or nuisances and are operated primarily within enclosed structures. Any outside storage/accessory shall be located in the rear, within a
structure or screened from public right of way. No use is intended to be included, which by reason of its location with respect to the boundaries of the
district or by reason of its operational characteristics, would create hazardous conditions or a threat to the health, safety and general welfare of the
public or surrounding land uses. Any I-1 district shall be annexed into the city and must be in proximity to ensure connection to the municipal water
and sewer systems of the city. The I-1 area north and northeast of the city limits shall be subject to requirements deemed necessary for protection of
the aquifer (see unique uses/area of critical concern, chapter 9 of this title). The city may require special studies and reports as deemed necessary
before any site, public or private, is allowed to develop.
1. Uses Allowed: See uses allowed by right and by conditional use in section 9-7-4 of this chapter.
2. Residential: Not permitted. A caretaker's/night watchman's sleeping quarters which is not used for living purposes may be permitted by conditional
use.
3. Development Requirements: See bulk/coverage chart, section 9-7-8 of this chapter; landscape, chapter 11 of this title; parking, chapter 12 of this
title; and any other applicable requirements.
4. Side Yard: When abutting residential zone, the side yard shall have a ten foot (10') side yard setback with buffer or screen required. (See
landscape, chapter 11 of this title.) (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
K. I-2 zone/heavy industrial: The intent of this district is to provide industrial users ample room in the city to develop and expand without encroachment
of noncompatible uses. No use is intended to be included, which, by reason of its location with respect to the boundaries of the district or by reason
of its operational characteristics, would create hazardous conditions or a threat to the health, safety and general welfare of the public or surrounding
land uses.
The city may require special studies and reports as deemed necessary before any site, public or private, is allowed to develop. Any I-2 development
shall be in such proximity to be annexed and must also be in such proximity to ensure connection to the municipal water and sewer systems of the
city. Any I-2 area development shall be subject to requirements deemed necessary for protection of the aquifer (see unique uses/area of critical
concern, chapter 9 of this title) and air quality. The city may require special studies and reports as deemed necessary before any site, public or
private, is allowed to develop.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 174/258
1. Uses Allowed: See uses allowed by right and by conditional use in section 9-7-4 of this chapter.
2. Residential Permitted: A caretaker's/night watchman's sleeping quarters which are not used for living purposes shall be permitted.
3. Development Requirements: See bulk/coverage chart, section 9-7-8 of this chapter; landscape, chapter 11 of this title; parking, chapter 12 of this
title; and any other applicable requirements. (Ord. 1644, 2-8-2016)
9-7-7: BULK AND COVERAGE CONTROLS:
The purpose of these requirements is to indicate the maximum permitted density and/or intensity for residential and nonresidential projects for
development on any given site. Also, to indicate the requirements for building location and bulk in both residential and nonresidential developments. All
development of land/land uses shall conform to all the regulations and requirements established herein. (See bulk and coverage chart, this chapter.)
A. Infill: It is not the intent of the bulk standard requirements to restrict old townsite lots (25 foot lots) when rebuilding an existing building or in promoting
infill. Existing structures in the original townsite (25 foot lots) that are destroyed by demolition, fire, act of God, etc., may be rebuilt and shall comply
with the bulk standards and all the other standards of this title. In the event that the original footprint of the structure cannot meet the bulk and
coverage standards, the development services office shall work with the developer and make every effort to meet the ordinances while allowing the
structure as infill. The new structure shall not exceed the original footprint in size unless all the bulk standards can be met.
B. Yards, Residential (Multiple Dwellings): A yard is the required open space on a lot, as established by the setbacks, which is unoccupied and
unobstructed by a structure from its lowest ground level to the sky, except as expressly permitted in this title. Provided, however, that accessories,
ornaments and furniture may be permitted in any yard. However, they shall be subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of
visibility and any signage shall conform to the sign ordinance, chapter 13 of this title.
1. Reduction Of Existing Yard: No yard existing at the time of passage hereof shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum
requirements set forth herein. Yards created after the effective date hereof shall meet at least the minimum requirements set forth herein.
2. Location Of Yard: All yards, courts and other open spaces allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be located on the same lot as such
building or dwelling group except as permitted in an approved planned unit development (PUD).
3. Supplemental Yard Regulations: In addition to all yard regulations specified in this title, the following provisions shall be adhered to:
a. Vision Triangle/Visibility: On any corner lot in any district, alley ingress/egress or driveway, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed
to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision.
b. Permitted In Any Yard: The following shall be permitted in any yard:
(1) Access driveway improved with asphalt or concrete to meet city standards.
(2) Vehicles. Parking of vehicles shall be in designated improved driveways.
(3) Flagpoles.
(4) Accessory building/detached. Shall be placed in the rear yard or side yard only. (See unique uses/accessory building, chapter 9 of this title.)
(5) Dog house/run. Located in the rear yard only and shall be ten feet (10') from the property lines. When an alley is present, the run may be
located five feet (5') from the rear property line.
C. Fences: The purpose is to regulate the materials, location, height, and maintenance of fencing, landscaping walls and decorative posts in order to
prevent the creation of nuisances, to provide aesthetic appearance of open space and to promote the safety and general welfare of the public.
1. Applicability: This subsection shall apply to all zoning districts and the requirements of this subsection shall apply to all fencing, landscape walls
and decorative posts equal to, or exceeding, thirty inches (30") in height, for all land uses and activities.
2. Permit: A building permit is required for construction of all fences, walls, latticework screens and other like structures.
3. Security Fences: A security fence with barbed wire above the height of six feet (6') may be placed in commercial and industrial zones when such
fences are necessary for the protection of the property and approved by the city building inspector. Security fences shall not be placed in front
yard setback areas.
4. Visibility: No fence, wall, latticework screen or natural growth shall be constructed or placed in the vision triangle, so as to obstruct or interfere with
the visibility of traffic.
5. Location: Fences shall be located inside the boundaries of property owned or lawfully controlled by permit applicant.
6. Height:
a. No fence, wall or latticework screen more than six feet (6') above ground level shall be constructed or erected in any residential zone, except
where a lot or parcel of property abuts a commercial or industrial zone, or where there are unusual terrain features.
b. The city's building official may approve fences higher than six feet (6') in a residential zone in cases where there are unusual terrain features
that may require a fence higher than six feet (6') when the proposed fence does not obstruct or obscure traffic visibility or cause any safety
concerns. If such fences are not approved by the city's building official, the property owner shall be required to apply for a variance to construct
such a fence.
c. Solid or other nonvisibility fences that exceed three feet (3') in height shall not be constructed in any required street setback area, or within any
vision triangle, except in situations in which the proposed fence does not obstruct or obscure traffic visibility or cause any safety concerns upon
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 175/258
approval of the city's building official. On corner lots, this shall include setback areas from both streets involved. If such proposed fences are not
approved by the city's building official, the property owner shall be required to apply for a variance to construct such a fence.
d. A visibility fence may be constructed in setback areas exceeding four feet (4') in height only when it does not obstruct or obscure traffic visibility
or cause traffic safety concerns and is approved by the city's building official. If such proposed fences are not approved by the city's building
official, the property owner shall be required to apply for a variance to construct such a fence.
7. Prohibited Fences: Electric and barbed wire are prohibited within the city limits unless provided for elsewhere in this title. (See section 5-1-9 of this
code.) (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-7-8: ZONING SCHEDULE OF BULK AND COVERAGE CONTROLS:
Residential Districts:
District
Minimum
Range
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Minimum
Yard
Area
Minimum
Street
Frontage
Lot
With
Front
Loaded
Garage
Lot
With
Garage
Loaded
Setback
Or Rear
Loaded
Interior
Minimum
Street
Maximum
Building
Height
Minimum
Floor
Area
R-1 17,000 sf
17,000
sf
35% 65% 100' 30' 25' 35' 10'
minimum,
25'
combined
30' 30' 1,500
ground
floor,
1,800
minimum/2
story
R-2 9,000 sf2
7,200 -
10,800
sf
35% 65% 80' 25'1 20' 15' 5'
12'
25' 30' 1,300
ground
floor,
1,600
minimum/2
story
R-3 6,500 sf2
6,000 -
7,800 sf
35% 55% 70' 20'1 15' 15' 5'
12'
20' 30' 1,100
ground
floor,
1,350
minimum/2
story
R-4 5,000 sf2
5,000 -
7,000 sf
35% 55% 50' 15'1
20'
(garage)
15' 15' 5'
12'
15' 30' 800
ground
floor
Commercial/Industrial Districts:
Front7
Rear
Interior
Side8
Street
Side8
LO9 Limited Office/7,000 sf
(Residential/R-4 standards)
20'1 15' 5'
10'
20' 50% 30' 50'
C-19 Neighborhood Commercial/1 - 5
acres (Residential/R-4 standards)
20'1 15' 10' 20' 70% 35' n/a
C-29 Commercial (Residential/R-4
standards)
New const.
comm. 10'
8' with alley
16' no alley
n/a
Clear
vision
triangle
n/a 45' n/a
C-39 Commercial (Residential/R-4
standards)
20'1 8' with alley
16' no alley
5'4 20' No portion of lot
shall be
undeveloped
45' n/a
Lot Size/DU3,6
Yard Setbacks
Front7,10,11
Rear11
Side8,11
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
District
Minimum Lot Area3 Minimum Yard Setback Requirements5
Maximum Lot
Coverage
Maximum
Building
Height12
Minimum
Street
Frontage
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 176/258
C-4 Commercial (Residential/R-4
standards)
30'1 8' with alley,
16' no alley
5'4 30' No portion of lot
shall be
undeveloped
45' n/a
I-1 n/a
No residential
30'1 n/a n/a4
30' No portion of lot
shall be
undeveloped
60' n/a
I-2 n/a
No residential
30'1 n/a n/a
30' No portion of lot
shall be
undeveloped
60' n/a
Notes:
1. Gateway/highways 30 feet. Arterial or collectors, 25 feet. Large sized building and/or height of building may require a 60 foot setback.
2. Single-family/multiple. (Also see section 9-7-6 of this chapter.)
3. Minimum lot size shall be determined exclusive of land that is used for streets, highways, roads and rights-of-way.
4. If property abuts Residential Zone, 10 foot setback with buffer screening regulations. (See chapter 11 of this title.)
5. No structure may encroach upon the front or street yard unless otherwise permitted herein.
6. Corner lots (new subdivisions) shall be significantly larger to accommodate setbacks.
7. The required front setback or the already established front setbacks of the majority of buildings on the street, whichever is greater.
8. Older subdivisions: Side yard setback shall be as required or may be the established side yard setback of the majority of buildings on the block as
determined by the Code official.
9. Business shall be conducted within enclosed buildings.
10. Odd numbered lots shall have a 2 foot larger front setback than even numbered lots (i.e., R-3 even number lot 20 feet, odd numbered lot 22 feet).
11. These setback area rules and requirements shall not apply to carport in setback areas as defined in section 9-3-2 of this title.
12. FAA Regulations may reduce building height allowance.
(Ord. 1677, 2-13-2019)
9-7-9: BULK AND COVERAGE CONTROLS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
A. Lot Size:
1. The minimum lot size shall be determined exclusive of the land that is used for streets, highways, roads, utility, water, sewer and storm drainage
rights of way.
2. The minimum lot size (column 1) is required for all lots in new subdivisions of five (5) acres or less in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 zoning districts.
3. The range in lot size (column 2) is required in all new subdivisions greater than five (5) acres in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 zoning districts. The range
of lot sizes shall be provided as follows:
a. Twenty percent (20%) of the number of lots in the subdivision shall be at the low end of the range; and
b. Twenty percent (20%) of the lots shall be at the high end of the range.
4. All corner lots shall be a minimum of twenty percent (20%) larger than the minimum lot size.
5. The minimum lot size for each duplex unit shall be the low end of the range (column 2).
B. Front Setbacks: (See figure 1 of this section.)
1. The minimum front setback to gateway streets and highways is thirty feet (30'); to arterial or collector streets is twenty five feet (25') and large size
or tall buildings may require sixty feet (60').
2. The minimum front setbacks for lots with the garage facing the street shall be as shown in column 6.
3. The minimum setback for garages in the R-4 district which face the street shall be twenty feet (20').
4. The minimum front setback for lots where the garage has one of the following configurations shall be as shown in column 6:
a. Garage Setback: The garage is set back a minimum of forty feet (40') from the front property line;
b. Rear Loaded Garage: The garage faces an alley or rear property line; or
c. Side Loaded Garage: The garage faces the side setbacks of the house and is set back at the minimum setback of the house.
FIGURE 1
District
Minimum Lot Area3 Minimum Yard Setback Requirements5
Maximum Lot
Coverage
Maximum
Building
Height12
Minimum
Street
Frontage
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 177/258
Diagrams A and B: Front loaded garage
Diagram C: Garage with additional setback
Diagram D: Rear loaded garage
Diagrams E and F: Side loaded garage
C. Side Yard Setbacks:
1. Lots that do not have a side yard adjacent to a street shall satisfy the minimum and the combined side yard setback requirements (columns 9 and
10).
2. Lots that have a side yard adjacent to a street shall satisfy the street side yard setback and the minimum side yard setback requirements
(columns 9 and 10).
3. In older subdivisions, the side yard setback shall be as required or may be the established side yard setback of the majority of buildings on the
block as determined by the code official. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 178/258
Chapter 8
GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR ALL ZONING DISTRICTS
9-8-1: INTENT:
In addition to all other regulations as specified in this title, the following performance standards shall be adhered to in all zoning districts. (Ord. 1628, 1-
12-2015)
9-8-2: ESSENTIAL SERVICES:
All new structures, land uses, or substantial improvements to a building or structure shall require essential services, such as sewers, storm drains, fire
hydrants, sidewalk/public streets, street lighting, and similar services, and shall obtain such approval as required by the agency providing such service
prior to project approval. Development shall be at the expense of the developer unless otherwise agreed by the city council, and all service extensions
shall be designed and installed in full conformance with the city's standards for such service.
A. Traffic Study: Development which reasonably may substantially increase traffic counts, affects pedestrian or vehicular safety, etc., shall be required to
provide a traffic study and to provide full width streets, traffic lights, etc., as determined by the city council. All costs will be borne by the developer.
B. Nonavailable Services: Nonavailability of essential services may be grounds for denying permits for additional development until such services are
available. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-8-3: ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREET:
Except as otherwise provided for herein by planned unit developments (PUD) and/or the subdivision ordinance, every principal building shall be
constructed or erected upon an individual lot or parcel of land which abuts upon a private or public street, unless access is otherwise provided.
A. Street Right Of Way Improvements: It shall be required, as a minimum, that the street be completed from property line to the centerline of the street
and that sidewalk, curb and gutter be constructed according to city standards.
B. Sidewalk/Curb And Gutter For Remodels: Sidewalk, curb and gutter may be required on remodels, and/or expansion of the land use (see sidewalk
ordinance).
C. Fire/Garbage Turnarounds: Adequate turnarounds for fire equipment and garbage service shall be provided and approved by the city engineer and
fire chief.
D. Extension Of Time For Completion Of Street, Sidewalk, Curb And Gutter: For individual lot development, outside of a subdivision or PUD,
requirements shall not be waived but may be deferred, by written agreement, upon recommendation of the city engineer and approval of the city
council when existing improvements are not within three hundred feet (300'); or until such time as an adjacent property is developed with
improvements; or an LID is undertaken by the city; or other agreement has been entered into by the city council. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-8-4: FIRE PROTECTION:
The developer and/or individual shall be required to provide for adequate fire protection. The city council shall seek and review recommendations by the
fire chief and building inspector prior to imposing such conditions.
A. Fire Lanes: All fire lanes shall provide clear, unobstructed access for vehicles and apparatus at all times through a combination of pavement marking
and signage; shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') wide; and shall be surfaced as an all weather roadway with asphalt or concrete.
B. Fire Hazards: Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or explosive materials, including hazardous materials, shall be protected by
adequate firefighting and fire prevention equipment and by such safety devices as are normally used in the handling of any such material. (Ord.
1628, 1-12-2015)
9-8-5: CONVERSION OF DWELLINGS TO MORE UNITS OR NONRESIDENTIAL USE:
A residence may not be converted to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or a nonresidential use unless it meets all requirements of
this title and other applicable codes and requirements for new structures within the existing zoning district. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-8-6: SEPARATION BETWEEN BUILDINGS:
All buildings shall conform with applicable setbacks and there shall be at least five feet (5') of clear space between every main building and detached
accessory building on a lot. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 179/258
9-8-7: ANTENNAS/TV DISHES/BROADCASTING TOWERS:
Broadcasting towers shall not be located in any residential zone. Commercial uses shall require a conditional use permit in most zones and shall not
use strobe lights. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-8-8: ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS:
Open structures which are covered, such as porches, decks, canopies, balconies, platforms, carports, patios, chimney chase and similar architectural
projections, shall be considered parts of the building to which they are attached and not project into the required minimum front, side or rear yard.
Covered structures shall be counted as lot coverage. Architectural projections without a cover/roof shall meet the setback requirements but shall not be
counted as lot coverage.
Eaves may not project into any required setback more than two feet (2'). (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-8-9: REQUIRED TRASH AREAS/SCREEN:
All trash and/or garbage collection areas for commercial, industrial, limited office and multi-family (3 or more) residential uses shall be enclosed on at
least three (3) sides by a solid wall or fence of at least six feet (6') in height or within an enclosed building or structure, and not visible from the street.
Adequate vehicular access to and from such area or areas for collection of trash or garbage, as determined by the administrator, shall be provided.
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-8-10: FILLING OF CANYON:
Any filling of canyons shall be subject to all federal, state and local laws. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-8-11: GRADING, EXCAVATION AND REVEGETATION:
Prior to applying for a building permit or filing of the preliminary plat the applicant shall submit a grading plan, as required by the city engineer, and shall
be responsible for the prevention of damage to any public utilities, services or private property. The applicant shall be responsible for controlling traffic,
dust, damage from water and wind erosion, and hazards or nuisances to adjoining property owners. The applicant shall be responsible for the
revegetation of disturbed areas which are not actively developed. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-8-12: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
A. Purpose And Intent: The purpose and intent of this section is to:
1. Ensure the future health, safety, and general welfare of city of Mountain Home citizens by regulating or eliminating nonstormwater discharges to
the municipal separate storm drain system, including controlling discharges from spills, dumping or disposal of waste materials, and reducing
pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable; and
2. Protect and enhance the water quality of our watercourses, water bodies, groundwater and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with
the clean water act.
B. Definitions: The terms as used in this section shall have the following meanings:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENT: The director of public works and/or any individual designated by the director of development services as
an environmental enforcement officer.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, design
standards, operational practices, maintenance procedures, educational activities, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the
discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to waters of the state or U.S. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and
practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA): The federal water pollution control act enacted by public law 92-500 as amended by public laws 95-217, 95-576, 96-
483, and 97-117; 33 USC 1251 et seq.
DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES: The director of the city of Mountain Home development services department.
ILLICIT CONNECTION: Any physical connection to a publicly maintained storm drain system composed of nonstormwater which has not been
permitted by the public entity responsible for the operation and maintenance of the system.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges pursuant to an
NPDES permit, discharges resulting from firefighting activities, and discharges further exempted in subsection D of this section.
LOCAL AGENCY: This term, as used in the U.S. EPA's NPDES general stormwater permits for industries and construction activities, shall mean one
or more of the agencies that is involved with providing review, approval or oversight of the site's: 1) activities; 2) pollution prevention controls; or 3)
stormwater discharge.
MUNICIPAL NPDES PERMIT: An area wide NPDES permit issued to a government agency or agencies for the discharge of stormwater from a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 180/258
storm drain system.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT: A stormwater discharge permit issued by the U.S. EPA, region
X, in compliance with the federal clean water act.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: See definition of Illicit Discharge.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, association, club, organization, corporation, partnership, business trust, company or other entity which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties.
POLLUTANT: Dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, silt, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal and agricultural waste, gases entrained
in water, paints, oil and other automotive fluids, soil, rubbish, trash, debris, refuse, fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus, enterococcus, heavy metals,
hazardous waste, road sanding materials, yard waste from commercial landscaping operations, animal waste, materials that result from the process
of constructing a building or structure, nauseous or offensive matter of any kind, or other materials which, when discharged to water in excessive
quantities, cause or contribute to water pollution.
POLLUTION: The degradation of the physical, thermal, chemical, biological or radioactive properties of the waters of the state or U.S. "Pollution"
also means the discharge of any pollutant into the waters of the state or U.S., which will or is likely to create a nuisance or to render such waters
harmful, detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, recreational, aesthetic, or other beneficial
uses.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM: Includes, but is not limited to, those facilities located within the city and owned or operated by a public entity by which
stormwater may be collected and conveyed to waters of the United States, including any roads with drainage systems, public streets, inlets, curbs,
gutters, piped storm drains and retention or detention basins, which are not part of a publicly owned treatment works ("POTW") as defined at 40
CFR section 122.2.
STORMWATER: Surface runoff and drainage associated with rain storm events and snowmelt.
C. Regulatory Consistency: This section shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the federal clean water act and acts
amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, applicable implementing regulations, and the municipal NPDES permit and any amendments,
revisions or reissuance thereof.
D. Discharge Of Pollutants: A nonstormwater discharge to the storm drain system is a violation of this section except as specified below.
1. The prohibition of discharges shall not apply to any discharge regulated under an NPDES permit waiver or discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered by the EPA or the state of Idaho under the authority of the EPA, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit waiver or order and other applicable laws or regulations.
2. Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a source of pollutants to waters of the state or U.S. when properly managed: water
line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources, landscape irrigation and lawn watering, irrigation water, diverted stream flows,
rising groundwaters, groundwater infiltration to separate storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation and footing drains, roof
drains, water from crawl space pumps, residential air conditioning condensation, springs, individual residential and nonprofit group car washings,
flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges or flows from firefighting activities and training. Accordingly,
discharges from such activities are not subject to this prohibition.
With written concurrence of the U.S. EPA, the city may exempt in writing other nonstormwater discharges which are not a source of pollutants to
the waters of the state or U.S.
E. Compliance With BMPs: Where BMP requirements have been promulgated by any federal, state of Idaho, regional, city, county and/or local entity, for
any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution and/or illicit discharges to the stormwater system, every
person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such requirements. All physical development or
redevelopment activities shall refer to the most current Mountain Home "Storm Water Management Design Manual" for guidance in the best
management practices for design of drainage facilities to provide flood control, water quality improvement, and visual appeal.
F. Notification Of Spills: All persons in charge of a facility or responsible for emergency response for a facility are responsible to train facility personnel,
maintain records of such training and maintain notification procedures to assure that immediate notification is provided to the city development
services department upon becoming aware of any suspected, confirmed or unconfirmed release of material, pollutants or waste creating a risk of
discharge into the storm drain system.
As soon as any person in charge of a facility or responsible for emergency response for a facility has such knowledge, such person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the containment and cleanup of such release and shall notify the city development services department of the occurrence
no later than the next business day.
The notification requirements of this section are in addition to any other notification requirements set forth in federal, state or local regulations and/or
laws.
G. Discharge In Violation Of Permit: Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of an existing or future municipal NPDES permit and
any amendments, revisions or reissuance thereof, either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for
any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge, and such persons shall defend, indemnify
and hold harmless the city in any administrative or judicial enforcement action against the permit holder relating to such discharge.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 181/258
H. Illicit Connections: It is prohibited to establish, use, maintain or continue illicit drainage connections to the storm drain system, or to commence or
continue any illicit discharges to the storm drain system.
I. Reduction Of Pollutants In Stormwater:
1. Any person engaged in activities which will or may result in pollutants entering the storm drain system shall undertake all reasonable measures,
as determined by the entity responsible for the maintenance and operation of the system, to reduce such pollutants. Examples of such activities
include, but are not limited to, use and disposal of household chemicals such as pesticides and fertilizers; and ownership and use of facilities
which may be a source of pollutants such as parking lots, gasoline stations, industrial facilities, retail establishments, etc.
2. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained, any refuse, rubbish, garbage,
or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain inlet, catch basin, conduit
or other drainage structures, parking area, or upon any public or private plot of land so that the same might be or become a pollutant. The only
exception being where such pollutant is being temporarily stored in properly contained waste receptacles.
3. It is a violation of this section to cause or permit any dumpster, solid waste bin, or similar container to leak such that any pollutant is discharged
into any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, business place, or upon any public or private
plot of land in the city.
4. The occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee, or proprietor of any real property in the city where there is located a paved sidewalk or parking area
shall maintain said paved surface free of dirt or litter to the extent reasonable and practicable and provide an adequate means for the disposal of
refuse, rubbish, garbage, or other articles so as to prevent such matter from entering a storm drain system. Sweepings from said sidewalk shall
not be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway, but shall be disposed of in receptacles maintained on said real
property.
5. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city.
J. Parking Lots And Similar Structures: Persons owning or operating a paved parking lot, gas station pavement, paved private street or road, or similar
structure, shall clean and maintain those structures in a manner that does not result in discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system.
K. Outdoor Storage Areas; Commercial And Industrial Facilities: In outdoor areas, no person shall store grease, oil or other hazardous substances in a
manner that will or may result in such substances entering the storm drain system. In outdoor areas, no person shall store motor vehicles, machine
parts, or other objects in a manner that may leak grease, oil, or other hazardous substances to the storm drain system. To prevent the discharge of
hazardous substances from the property to the storm drain system, the city may require the installation of a spill containment system. Spill
containment systems may consist of a system of dikes, walls, barriers, berms, or other devices as required. No person shall operate a spill
containment system such that it allows incompatible liquids to mix and thereby create a hazardous condition.
L. Construction Sites: Any person performing construction work in the city of Mountain Home shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and shall
provide erosion and sediment controls that effectively prevent discharges of pollutants to the storm drain system. The director of development
services may establish standards and guidelines implementing BMPs designed to provide erosion and sediment control from construction sites.
M. New Development And Redevelopment: To minimize the discharge and transport of pollutants, the city may require, in its discretion, a new
development or redevelopment project to control the volume and rate of stormwater runoff from the project so as to prevent any deterioration of
water quality which would impair the subsequent or competing uses of the water. The director of development services may adopt or establish
standards and guidelines implementing BMPs designed to control the rate and volume of stormwater runoff from new developments and
redevelopments as may be appropriate to minimize the discharge and transport of pollutants from and into a storm drain system.
Acceptable methods and standards for controlling stormwater runoff volumes, rates, and pollutant load may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
1. Increase Permeable Areas: Avoid placing impervious surfaces in highly porous soil areas; incorporate landscaping and open space into the
project design; use moderately porous materials for or near driveways and walkways; incorporate detention ponds and retention swales into the
project's design.
2. Direct Runoff To Permeable Areas: Direct stormwater runoff away from impermeable areas to swales, berms, green strip filters, and gravel beds.
Install rain gutters and orient them toward permeable areas. Modify the grade of the property to divert flow to permeable areas and minimize the
amount of stormwater runoff leaving the property. When designing curbs, berms or other structures, avoid designs which impede access and flows
to permeable or landscaped areas.
3. Maximum Stormwater Storage For Reuse: Use retention structures, subsurface areas, cisterns, or other structures to store stormwater runoff for
reclamation, reuse or slow release.
N. Compliance With General Permits: Any industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction activity, or other discharger subject to any
NPDES permit issued by the U.S. EPA, the Idaho department of water resources, or the Idaho division of environmental quality, shall comply with all
provisions of such permits, including notification to and cooperation with local entities as required by federal regulations. Proof of compliance with
said NPDES general permits may be required in a form acceptable to the director of development services prior to issuance of any grading, building
or occupancy permits.
O. Authority To Inspect:
1. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever an environmental enforcement officer
has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which may constitute a violation of the
provisions of this chapter, the agent may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed
upon the agent by this chapter; provided that: a) if such building or premises is occupied, he or she first shall present proper credentials and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 182/258
request entry; and b) if such building or premises is unoccupied, he or she first shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons
having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry.
2. The property owner or occupant has the right to refuse entry but, in the event such entry is refused, the officer is hereby empowered to seek
assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry and performing such inspection.
3. Routine or area inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of
this chapter, including, but not limited to, random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater pollution, illicit discharges, or
similar factors.
a. Authority To Sample And Establish Sampling Devices: With the consent of the owner or occupant or with court consent, any authorized
enforcement agent may establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. During all
inspections as provided herein, the agent may take any samples deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record the on site
activities.
b. Requirement To Test Or Monitor: Whenever the director of development services or his designee determines that any person engaged in any
activity and/or owning or operating any facility may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or illicit discharges to the stormwater system, the
director of development services or his designee may, by written notice, order that such person undertake such monitoring activities and/or
analyses and furnish such reports as the director of development services or his designee may recommend. The written notice shall be served
either in person or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, and shall set forth the basis for such order and shall particularly
describe the monitoring activities and/or analyses and reports required. The burden to be borne by the owner or operator, including costs of
these activities, analyses and reports, shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for the monitoring, analyses and reports and the benefits
to be obtained. The recipient of such order shall undertake and provide the monitoring, analyses and reports within the time frames set forth in
the order.
4. Within twenty (20) days of the date of receipt of the order notice, the recipient shall respond personally or in writing advising the city of the
recipients' position with respect to the order's requirements. Thereafter, the recipient shall be given the opportunity to meet with the development
services director or his designee to review the order's requirements and revise the order as the development services director or his designee
deem necessary. Within ten (10) days of such meeting, the development services director or his designee shall issue a final written order. Final
orders of the development services director or his designee may be appealed to the city of Mountain Home council by the filing of a written appeal
with the development services department within ten (10) days of receipt of the final order. The appeal notice shall set forth the particular order
requirements or issues being appealed. The city of Mountain Home council shall hear the appeal at its earliest practical date and may either
affirm, revoke or modify the order. The decision of the city of Mountain Home council shall be final.
5. In the event the owner or operator of a facility fails to conduct the monitoring and/or analyses and furnish the reports required by the order in the
time frames set forth therein, the city may cause such monitoring and/or analyses to occur and assess all costs incurred, including reasonable
administrative costs and attorney fees, to the facility owner or operator. The city may pursue judicial action to enforce the order and recover all
costs incurred.
6. The knowing violation of any provision of this section, or failure to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
P. Appeal: Any person, firm, corporation or organization notified of noncompliance with this section or required to perform monitoring, analyses,
reporting and/or corrective activities who is aggrieved by the decision of the environmental enforcement officer shall comply with the appeal
provisions of this title.
Q. Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of protection required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific,
engineering and other relevant technical considerations. The standards set forth herein are minimum standards and this section does not imply that
compliance will ensure that there will be no unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the waters of the United States. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the city, any agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on this section or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
R. Continuing Violation: Unless otherwise provided, a person, firm, corporation or organization shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each
and every day during any portion of which a violation of this section is committed, continued or permitted by the person, firm, corporation or
organization and shall be punishable accordingly, as herein provided.
S. Concealment: Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a violation of such
provision.
T. Acts Resulting In Violation Of Federal Clean Water Act: Any person who violates any provision of this section, any provision of any permit issued
pursuant to this section, or who discharges waste or wastewater which causes pollution, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, or
effluent limitation, also may be in violation of the federal clean water act and may be subject to the sanctions of that act including civil and criminal
penalties.
U. Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance: In addition to the penalties hereinbefore provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of
any of the provisions of this section shall be considered a threat to the public health, safety, welfare and the environment, may be declared and
deemed a nuisance by the director of development services or his designee, and may be summarily abated and/or restored by the city and/or civil
action taken to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance.
The cost of such abatement and restoration shall be borne by the owner of the property and the cost thereof shall be a lien upon and against the
property and such lien shall continue in existence until the same shall be paid.
V. Civil Actions: In addition to any other remedies provided in this section, any violation of this section may be enforced by civil action brought by the
city. In any such action, the city may seek, and the court shall grant, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 183/258
1. A temporary and/or permanent injunction.
2. Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and
for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this subsection.
3. Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effects resulting from the violation.
4. Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life. Assessments under this subsection shall be paid to
the city to be used exclusively for costs associated with monitoring and establishing stormwater discharge pollution control systems and/or
implementing or enforcing the provisions of this section.
W. Administrative Enforcement Powers: In addition to the other enforcement powers and remedies established by this section, any environmental
enforcement officer has the authority to utilize the following administrative remedies:
1. Cease And Desist Orders: When an environmental enforcement officer finds that a discharge has taken place or is likely to take place in violation
of this section, the agent may issue an order to cease and desist such discharge, or practice, or operation likely to cause such discharge and
direct that those persons not complying shall: a) comply with the requirement; b) comply with a time schedule for compliance; and/or c) take
appropriate remedial or preventive action to prevent the violation from recurring.
2. Notice To Clean: Whenever an environmental enforcement officer finds any oil, earth dirt, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse,
waste or any other material of any kind, in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining any parcel of land, or upon any parcel of land or grounds or
in close proximity to any open drain or ditch channel, which may result in an increase in pollutants entering the storm drain system or a
nonstormwater discharge to the storm drain system, he or she may give notice to remove and lawfully dispose of such material in any manner that
he or she reasonably may provide. The recipient of such notice shall undertake the activities as described in the notice within the time frames set
forth therein.
In the event the owner or operator of a facility fails to conduct the activities as described in the notice, the director of development services or his
designee may cause such required activities as described in the notice to be performed, and the cost thereof shall be assessed and invoiced to
the owner of the property. If the invoice is not paid within sixty (60) days, a lien shall be placed upon and against the property. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-
2015)
Chapter 9
UNIQUE LAND USES AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
9-9-1: INTENT:
The intent of this chapter is to recognize that certain land uses pose special problems that may have unordinary or detrimental influences on
surrounding land uses. The following performance standards for such unique land uses shall be adhered to in addition to all other provisions of this title.
Some of these uses may require conditional use permits as shown on the use chart of this title. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-2: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS FOR ALL ZONING DISTRICTS:
The Development Services Department shall make the initial determination as to whether a building, structure or use is accessory to a principal
permitted use.
The accessory structure, including accessory dwelling unit where allowed, must be reasonably incidental and subordinate to the principal permitted use
and the determination shall be based upon the relationship of the building, structure or use to the principal permitted use. No accessory building or
structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the start of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory.
A. General Provisions:
1. Permits:
a. Permit Required: All accessory structures over one hundred twenty (120) square feet in size shall require a building permit.
b. Permit Not Required: One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided that the
floor is wood and the structure is movable and the total area does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet with no other covering or
enlarged overhangs or eaves shall not require a building permit. Accessory structures not requiring a building permit shall be located within the
lot of ownership and shall be placed in the rear or side yard only (side yard setbacks on opposing street shall not be infringed upon). If the
accessory structure is placed in a rear yard or side yard setback and needs to be moved for utility work it will be the owner's responsibility to
move the accessory structure at the owner's cost. A carport in setback areas as defined in section 9-3-2 of this title shall require a building
permit no matter the size.
2. Location: All parts of an accessory building over one hundred twenty (120) square feet in size shall be located within the lot of ownership and shall
be placed in the rear yard or side yard only (side yard setbacks on opposing street shall not be infringed upon), and shall meet all required
setbacks. A carport in setback areas shall not be required to meet all setback requirements.
a. No detached accessory building or portion thereof, except a carport in setback areas as defined in section 9-3-2 of this title, shall be located
closer to the principal building than five feet (5').
b. Attached accessory buildings shall meet all yard setback requirements for the principal building. A carport in setback areas shall not be
attached to the principal building or any other structure or building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 184/258
3. Proof Of Ownership: The property owner shall show proof of ownership before any construction is allowed upon vacated alleys, easements, etc.
No accessory building that is not movable shall be placed within any utility easement without the prior written consent of the utility company or
companies possessing the easement.
4. Consistent Appearance With Principal Building: Any attached or detached accessory building shall be consistent with the existing principal
building with regard to external design, color and materials. Any accessory building exceeding one hundred twenty (120) square feet in size shall
be anchored or have a foundation. A carport in setback areas shall be anchored to the ground or a hard surface, but shall not have a foundation.
A carport in setback areas shall be moveable and shall not be used for general storage.
5. Driveways/Concrete Or Asphalt: Any property owner who constructs an accessory building that is intended for vehicular access shall be required
to construct a concrete or asphalt driveway. In cases of a secondary accessory structure located in the rear yard, the Code Official may permit two
(2) concrete runners which are each two feet (2') in width from the accessory building to the curb line.
B. Residential: In addition to the general provisions in subsection A of this section, both detached and attached accessory buildings shall be subject to
the following requirements:
1. Lot Coverage/Residential: No detached accessory building or structure shall occupy more than thirty five percent (35%) of the rear yard area
without first obtaining a conditional use permit. This does not allow exceeding the total lot coverage for the zoning district in which the building is
located.
2. Setbacks And Lot Coverage:
a. R-1 Zone: No detached accessory building located in the R-1 District shall be located closer than ten feet (10') to the rear or interior side yard
lot line.
b. R-2, R-3 And R-4 Zones: No detached accessory building located in the R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts shall be located closer than five feet (5') to
any interior lot line or rear lot line in the rear yard.
c. Corner Lots: No attached or detached accessory building or portion thereof shall infringe upon the side yard setback area which is adjacent to
an opposing street.
d. Carport In Setback Areas: A carport in setback areas shall not be required to meet the setback requirements in this subsection B2. (Ord. 1658,
4-10-2017)
9-9-3: ADULT DAYCARE:
Requires conditional use permit. "Adult daycare", as defined, has different use characteristics from other allowed uses, and therefore the following
additional standards shall be required. (See use chart of this title.)
A. The care center shall meet all local, State and Federal standards required for accessibility for physically handicapped residents/patrons of the facility.
B. All required licenses must be obtained from the City or the State, if applicable.
C. If located on an arterial or collector street, the facility must provide for an on site patron pick up area designed to prevent vehicles from backing onto
the street (backing into an alley is permissible). (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-4: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
A. Purpose; Intent:
1. The purpose of these regulations is to allow the reasonable location of a sexually oriented business within the City in a manner which will protect
property values, neighborhoods and residents from the potential adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses while providing to
those who desire to patronize sexually oriented businesses such opportunity in appropriate areas within the City. It is not the intent of this section
to suppress any speech activities protected by the first amendment of the United States Constitution, but to impose content neutral regulations
which address the adverse secondary effects sexually oriented businesses may have on adjoining properties and the immediate neighborhood.
a. It has been determined, and reflected in the land use studies of various U.S. cities, that businesses which have as their primary purpose the
selling, renting or showing of sexually explicit materials have negative secondary impacts upon surrounding businesses and residences. The
experience in other U.S. cities is that the location of a sexually oriented business significantly increases the incidence of crimes, especially sex
offenses, including rape, indecent exposure, lewd and lascivious behavior, and child molestation.
b. It has been determined, and reflected in the land use studies of various U.S. cities, that the operation of sexually oriented businesses in
business districts which are immediately adjacent to and which serve residential neighborhoods has a deleterious effect on both the business
and the residential segments of the neighborhood, causing blight and downgrading of property values.
2. It is the intent of these regulations to allow sexually oriented businesses to exist within the city in various dispersed locations rather than to allow
them to concentrate in any one business area. It is further the purpose of these regulations to require separation requirements between sexually
oriented businesses and residential uses, churches, public parks with a playground and educational institutions in an effort to buffer these uses
from the secondary impacts created by sexually oriented business activity.
B. Regulations: No person shall operate or conduct any sexually oriented business upon any property or premises unless it conforms to this title. Any
violation of this provision may be enforced through administrative civil and/or criminal remedies. In order for a certificate of occupancy to be issued,
the building official and the city planner must determine that the following conditions are met:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 185/258
1. Adult Bookstore:
a. Such business shall not be located within three hundred feet (300') of a public or parochial school, church, public park with a playground or
daycare licensed through the state of Idaho. Distance shall be measured in a straight line from the property line of the public or parochial
school, church, public park with a playground or daycare licensed through the state of Idaho to the property line of the proposed adult
bookstore; and
b. Such business shall not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of any other adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or adult
performance business. Distance shall be measured as in subsection B1a of this section; and
c. Distance standards shall apply regardless of the political jurisdiction in which a public or parochial school, church, public park with a playground,
daycare licensed through the state of Idaho or other adult businesses are located; and
d. The sign package and exterior building design must be submitted with the application for a certificate of occupancy for review by the building
official and the city planner. Advertisements, displays, or other promotional materials shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the
public from the exterior of the building; and
e. Lobby and entrance areas shall be designed so as to minimize obstruction of sidewalks during operating hours and shall be oriented and
consistent with other commercial activities in the area; and
f. All building openings, entries, windows, and the like shall be located, covered, or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the
interior from any public or semipublic area; and
g. No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used for such businesses that can be discerned by the public outside the building; and
h. The disposal of garbage and trash containing sexually explicit materials must be disposed of in a manner which prevents minors from having
access to the material; and
i. For purposes of this subsection, the above conditions and standards shall be applicable in the following circumstances:
(1) The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business.
(2) The conversion of an existing business to any of the adult businesses regulated herein.
(3) The addition or expansion of any business to include any of the adult businesses regulated herein.
(4) The relocation of any such business.
(5) For the purposes of this subsection, a "school" shall be considered as an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which
offers instruction in those courses of study required by the state or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of
education. This definition includes a kindergarten, elementary, junior high, or senior high school, or any special institution of learning under
the jurisdiction of the state department of education, but does not include a vocational or professional institution or institution of higher
education, such as a community or junior college, college or university. A church shall be considered any place of worship.
(6) These provisions shall not be construed as permitting any use or act which is otherwise prohibited or made punishable by law.
2. Adult Motion Picture Theater, Adult Theater, Adult Performance Business And Bikini Bars:
a. Such business shall not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a public or parochial school, church, public park with a playground or
daycare licensed through the state of Idaho. Distance shall be measured in a straight line from the property line of the public or parochial
school, church, public park with a playground or daycare licensed through the state of Idaho to the property line of the proposed adult motion
picture theater, or adult performance business; and
b. Such business shall not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of any other adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or adult
performance business. Distance shall be measured as in subsection B2a of this section; and
c. Distance standards shall apply regardless of the political jurisdiction in which a public or parochial school, church, public park with a playground,
daycare licensed through the state of Idaho, or other sexually oriented businesses are located; and
d. The sign package and exterior building design must be submitted with the application for a certificate of occupancy for review by the building
official and the city planner. Advertisements, displays, or other promotional materials shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the
public from the exterior of the building. No advertising signs, billboards, displays, advertisements, or other promotional materials depicting
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities or displaying instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities shall be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from the exterior of the
building; and
e. Lobby and entrance areas shall be designed so as to minimize obstruction of sidewalks during operating hours and shall be oriented and
consistent with other commercial activities in the area; and
f. All building openings, entries, windows, and the like shall be located, covered, or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the
interior, so that personnel, instruments, devices, paraphernalia, and body parts thereof, which are associated in any manner with specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, cannot be seen from any public or semipublic area; and
g. No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used for such businesses that can be discerned by the public outside the building; and
h. The disposal of garbage and trash containing sexually explicit materials must be disposed of in a manner which prevents minors from having
access to the material; and
i. Hours of operation are from four o'clock (4:00) P.M. to two o'clock (2:00) A.M. One security staff is required for each twenty (20) required parking
spaces or fraction thereof. The hours of operation shall be visibly posted on all entrances and exits. The bar may operate as a normal bar prior
to four o'clock (4:00) P.M., however no live performances, bikini servers or theater showings will be allowed until four o'clock (4:00) P.M.; and
j. On site security must be present during all hours of operation; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 186/258
k. No sexually oriented materials or performances shall be disseminated, performed for, by or upon minors. Signs prohibiting minors upon
premises shall be visibly posted on all entrances and exits; and
l. All areas of a sexually oriented business shall be illuminated at a minimum of twenty (20) foot-candles, normally maintained and evenly
distributed at ground level; except, adult theaters and cabarets shall only be required to be illuminated at a minimum of five (5) foot-candles.
During performances, adult theaters and cabarets may reduce the lighting to be no less than 1.25 foot-candles; and
m. An adult motion picture show or adult arcade shall limit the maximum number of image producing devices to the maximum occupancy load
permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in which an image producing device is located; and
n. For purposes of this subsection, the above conditions and standards shall be applicable in the following circumstances:
(1) The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business.
(2) The conversion of an existing business to any of the adult businesses regulated herein.
(3) The addition or expansion of any business to include any of the adult businesses regulated herein.
(4) The relocation of any such business.
(5) For the purposes of this subsection, a "school" shall be considered as an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which
offers instruction in those courses of study required by the state or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of
education. This definition includes a kindergarten, elementary, junior high, or senior high school, or any special institution of learning under
the jurisdiction of the state department of education, but does not include a vocational or professional institution or institution of higher
education, such as a community or junior college, college or university. A church shall be considered any place of worship.
(6) These provisions shall not be construed as permitting any use or act which is otherwise prohibited or made punishable by law.
o. The owner of a premises serving alcohol which features live performers or servers wearing bikinis or swimsuits must comply with all the above
items and any federal, state, county and city requirements. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-5: AREA OF CRITICAL CONCERN/ELMORE COUNTY CDO DISTRICT (WATER RECHARGE AREA):
Commercial and industrial uses require a conditional use permit. Areas of critical concern shall be designated Elmore County CDO district and
floodplain. Within the aquifer sensitive area north and northeast of the city limits, development shall be in accordance with the area of city impact
agreement and this code. Any further development within the city limits which would include underground tanks, chemicals, storage of any materials,
i.e., asphalt stockpile, manure, fertilizers, surface runoff, etc., shall be allowed by conditional use permit and shall not be permitted without providing
proper containment as required by city, county, state and federal laws. Soils studies in the CDO district may be required by the city engineer in order to
protect the integrity of the aquifer and health and safety of surrounding residents.
Nonconforming uses which currently exist in the aquifer sensitive area (north and northeast of the city limits) shall not be allowed substantial
improvements or expansion without meeting all the requirements of federal, state, and local codes and the area of impact agreement.
A. Commercial And Industrial Uses Within Area Of Critical Concern (CDO/Elmore County):
1. Projects or developments within the area of critical concern and/or CDO shall be served by a wastewater disposal system that provides aquifer
protection, which shall be at least equivalent to one of the following:
a. A collection and treatment facility utilizing sealed lagoon(s); or
b. A collection and treatment facility utilizing holding tanks and transport/disposal at a site licensed for disposal of the particular effluent; or
c. An approved connection to an existing public or private collection/treatment facility.
2. Facilities will be designed so that surface waters or any spilled or leaked materials cannot infiltrate into the ground or irrigation systems.
3. Commercial or industrial activities designated as use of critical material (designated by state and federal law) shall have specially designed
stormwater runoff drainage facilities in areas where spills might occur. Such facilities shall be designed to:
a. Prevent the commingling of stormwater runoff and critical material spills; and
b. Enhance spill cleanup procedures. (Also see subdivisions of this title.)
B. Residential Development:
1. All residential development within the area of critical concern and/or CDO shall be of at least five (5) acres per dwelling unit, with one septic and
one well as allowed by the health authority.
2. New residential development with lots less than five (5) acres shall, as a condition of approval, be required to connect to a central water system
and to a central sewer system, as approved by the city engineer, prior to occupancy. If such a sewer is not available, development shall be served
by sewage disposal systems that provide aquifer protection equal to or greater than those listed below:
a. A collection and treatment facility utilizing sealed lagoon(s); or
b. A collection and treatment facility utilizing holding tanks and transport/disposal to a licensed disposal site.
3. Facilities shall be designed so that surface waters or any spilled or leaked materials cannot infiltrate into the ground or irrigation systems.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 187/258
C. Mining Operations: Not permitted.
D. Solid Waste And Septic Tank Sludge Disposal Within The Area Of Critical Concern: No new sanitary landfill or septic tank sludge disposal sites shall
be allowed within the area of critical concern. Surface or subsurface disposal of critical materials (as defined by EPA hazard class, DOE hazard
designation and a chemical class) is specifically prohibited in the area of critical concern/CDO Elmore County.
E. Cemetery(ies): No new cemetery shall be allowed within the area of critical concern/CDO Elmore County.
F. Agricultural Activities: No heavy concentration of livestock permitted, i.e., dairies, feedlots, etc. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-6: GROUP HOMES FOR AGED, MENTALLY AND PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED RESIDENT HOMES:
In accordance with Idaho Code, homes for mentally and physically handicapped persons are allowed as single-family dwellings. Such homes must
comply with the following approval criteria in order to be considered a single-family dwelling:
A. The number of resident patients does not exceed eight (8).
B. No more than two (2) resident staff may reside in the home at any one time.
C. The home must be continuously supervised by qualified professional staff.
D. All license and standard of operation requirements of the state shall have been complied with. (See use chart of this title.) (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-7: ANIMAL CLINIC, ANIMAL HOSPITAL, VETERINARY OFFICE AND KENNEL:
A. Any above-land use will be located at least three hundred feet (300') from any residence, including motels and hotels, except for an owner's
residence. The administrator may modify these requirements if the animals are completely housed in soundproof structures that completely screen
them from view of the abutting residential property; and
B. Any above-land use will comply with all regulations relative to such an operation, and maintain adequate housekeeping practices designed to prevent
the creation of a nuisance and to reduce to a minimum the factors of noise and odor. (See land use chart of this title.) (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-8: BOARDING HOUSE/BED AND BREAKFAST:
May require conditional use permit as set forth in the land use table of this title. Boarding house/bed and breakfast establishments are sleeping facilities
which provide breakfast in the morning to its guests. They are generally converted homes or in residential settings. The following conditions shall apply:
A. Permit Required: All such facilities shall be required to obtain a permit to serve food and beverages from the Elmore County Central district health
office.
B. Signs: Signage shall comply with chapter 13 of this title, and comply with the district in which the business is located.
C. Buffer Yard: The facility shall provide a buffer yard along all borders of the property abutting residentially zoned property. (See chapter 11 of this title.)
D. Parking: Parking shall comply with chapter 12 of this title. (See land use chart of this title.) (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-9: BULK STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS AND GASES, ABOVE GROUND AND FOR RESALE:
Requires a conditional use permit.
A. Will be located and constructed according to the regulations of the international fire code, the current edition of the life safety code of the National
Fire Protection Association (NFPA 101), and all municipal, county, state and federal codes.
B. The city fire chief and city building inspector shall ensure compliance with all applicable codes.
C. Will have suitable loading and unloading spaces and off street parking facilities subject to the approval of the city fire chief, city building inspector and
all applicable codes. (See land use chart of this title, and unique uses/area of critical concern, section 9-9-5 of this chapter.) (Ord. 1645, 2-8-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 188/258
9-9-10: CHEMICALS, PESTICIDES AND FERTILIZER STORAGE AND/OR MANUFACTURING:
Requires a conditional use permit.
A. Will be located and constructed according to the regulations of the international fire code, the current edition of the life safety code of the National
Fire Protection Association (NFPA 101), and all municipal, county, state and federal codes.
B. The city fire chief and city building inspector shall ensure compliance with all applicable codes. (See also unique uses/area of critical concern/county
CDO, section 9-9-5 of this chapter; land use chart of this title; and unique uses/hazardous materials, section 9-9-15 of this chapter.) (Ord. 1645, 2-8-
2016)
9-9-11: CHILDCARE/DAYCARE:
Conditional use permit may be required as set forth in the use table in chapter 7 of this title. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide for
daycare homes which will not adversely impact surrounding properties due to children's noise, traffic and other activities; and, which are located away
from, and properly screened from, adverse impacts to the health, safety and welfare of the children. These conditional uses require consideration of
additional approval criteria unique to the specific application. In reviewing such applications the commission must consider the standards of approval set
forth for each kind of childcare described in this section in addition to the general criteria and findings set forth for conditional use permits of this title.
A. Definitions: See chapter 3, "Definitions", of this title.
B. General Provisions: The following standards shall apply to all daycare uses and any additional standards listed in the specific daycare category:
1. Conditional Use Permits: Conditional use permits are required in most zones. (See the "Daycare/child or adult" entry in section 9-7-4, "Land Use
Chart", of this title.)
2. License Required: Applicant shall show proof of childcare license from the Idaho state department of health and welfare-child care licensing
division when required by the state.
3. Commercial Use: Group daycare facilities and daycare centers shall be considered as a commercial use. The applicant shall be required to pay
any additional sewer, water and trash charges or fees.
4. Off Street Parking And Loading For Residential And Limited Office Zones: Applicant shall provide a plot plan (to scale) showing square footage of
building and lot with off street parking for residents and employees and the loading/pick up area. All other zoning districts shall comply with the
parking ordinance of this title.
a. Applicant shall provide for a paved (concrete or asphalt) on site child pick up area designed to prevent vehicles from backing onto the
roadway/street (backing into an alley is permissible).
A residential home is required to have two (2) paved/concrete off street parking spaces. These spaces may be used for a child pick up area if
the use is not located on a collector or arterial street.
b. As a permitted accessory use, a "family daycare home", as defined in this title, located in residential and/or limited office districts may use the
residential driveway for off street loading and unloading.
5. Signs For Daycare: Signs for daycare shall comply with the sign code of this title. No signs are permitted for accessory use "family daycare
homes".
6. Screening: A fenced play area or landscape screening of the facility may be required to protect the children from adverse activities such as
irrigation ditches, animal pastures, traffic on arterial or collector streets, at intersections or to screen adjacent properties from adverse impacts, i.e.,
six foot (6') solid wood fence in rear yard.
C. Violations: Violation of any of the required conditions shall be cause to revoke a conditional use permit, a certificate of occupancy or zoning permit.
The procedures as outlined in procedures/conditional uses of this title, shall be followed.
D. Categories For Daycare:
1. Family Daycare Home: No more than six (6) children. Permitted accessory use in all residential and limited office zones, subject to the following
criteria and development services department approval:
a. Application Letter: The applicant shall submit an application/letter to the development services department for childcare as an accessory use.
Application to contain the following:
(1) Name, address and phone.
(2) Days and hours of operation.
(3) Number of adult persons and number of children and their ages living in the residence.
(4) Maximum number of children to be cared for.
(5) Employees not permitted when operating as an accessory use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 189/258
b. Restrictions: The childcare use must be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes, and operated solely
by the occupants living within the dwelling and must not change the structural character of the dwelling. The childcare home must be in the
operator's principal residence.
c. Procedure: The applicant will pay a nonrefundable fee as established by the city council. The development services department will review the
approval criteria and make a determination of approval or denial of the application within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of the application
and will submit the findings and conclusions, with required conditions, in writing, to the applicant.
In the event the development services department approves said application, a radius notice will be sent informing property owners of the
adjacent properties (side, back and across the street and/or alley) of the applicant's request for the use of the property and of the decision of the
development services department for the proposed family daycare home. If, within fourteen (14) days, there is no response to the notice, the
accessory use shall be permitted and the development services department shall notify the applicant in writing. If a written response is
submitted within fourteen (14) days contesting the use, the development services department will review both the response and the application
to ensure that all applicable city codes are met. If all applicable city codes are not met, or if more than one written response is received
contesting the proposed use, then the applicant must go through the conditional use process along with any required fees for the conditional
use procedure.
2. Group Daycare Facility: The application shall meet the provisions of conditional use and the following criteria:
a. Off street parking requirements must be met and off street loading site provided.
b. Operating hours: Eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
3. Daycare Center: The application shall meet the provisions of conditional use and the following criteria:
a. Off street parking requirements must be met and off street loading provided.
b. So as not to impact or increase traffic on a residential neighborhood, a daycare center located in a residential zone or limited office zone shall
be located on the fringes of the residential neighborhood, on arterial or collector streets, and not within the interior of a residential neighborhood.
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-12: COMPOSTING:
Commercial composting operations are any land uses devoted to the collection, storage, processing and/or disposal of vegetation and shall adhere to
the following standards:
A. Conditional use required. Composting shall comply with all standards and procedures applicable to all conditional uses.
B. Composting shall comply with all city, county, state and federal regulations.
C. All composting facilities shall provide a buffer yard along all borders of the property. (See chapter 11 of this title.)
D. All buildings, structures, and activity areas used for composting shall be located a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from all lot lines.
E. Composting materials shall not consist of food scraps or other vermin attracting materials nor shall they be processed, stored or disposed of on site.
F. Composting operations shall not involve the on site holding, storage or disposal of hazardous wastes, as defined by state statutes, in any manner.
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-13: CONTRACTOR'S YARD:
Contractor's yard may include the storage of heavy equipment and trucks. The following standards shall be adhered to:
A. A contractor's yard will be located a minimum distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') from any residence except for an owner's residence;
B. A contractor's yard will have a six foot (6'), solid, screening fence around areas utilized for storage of equipment; and
C. A contractor's yard will be limited to storage, maintenance and processing incidental to contracting work. There shall be no general industrial or
commercial uses. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-14: DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS:
Requires a conditional use permit. No drive-up window establishment shall be permitted unless the commission finds that the design and operation of
the establishment is substantially in compliance with the following requirements and conditions, which shall be in addition to those otherwise required in
this title:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 190/258
A. That the location of the establishment shall not cause an increase of commercial traffic in nearby residential neighborhoods, increase general traffic
congestion where congestion problems have been identified, or cause other significant adverse impacts on surrounding public or private property.
The advice of the city engineer and appropriate transportation authority shall be solicited for the purpose of evaluating existing and projected levels
of service and the effects of projected turning movements on highway safety; and
B. That the internal circulation on the site provides for pedestrians to walk from parking lots to the lobby entrance(s) without traversing the waiting
lane(s) for the drive-up window; and
C. That the waiting lane(s) be of sufficient length to provide for anticipated average monthly peak volumes; and
D. That design, signage or operational characteristics of the establishment prevent or discourage vehicles from waiting for service on public sidewalks
or streets; and
E. That all communication systems shall not exceed a measurement of allowed decibels at any residential property lines adjoining the site or across the
alley from any site as stated in title 7 of this code; and
F. That all lights, including vehicular, and other illuminated materials shall be screened to prevent lighting and glare from falling on adjoining properties;
and
G. That the design, operation and sign characteristics of the project will attempt to minimize air pollution and wasteful consumption of fuel; and
H. That the use meets all city and Elmore County Central district health requirements for water, sewer, etc. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-15: HAZARDOUS/TOXIC/DANGEROUS/INJURIOUS/NUISANCE USES:
A. General Provisions:
1. Measurement Procedures: Methods and procedures for the determination of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall
conform to applicable standard measurement procedures as established by federal, state, and local agencies.
2. Requirements And Enforcement Provisions: The development services department, commission or city council, prior to the issuance of a building
permit, may require the submission of statements and plans indicating the manner in which potential nuisance and hazardous uses are reduced to
acceptable limits and tolerances. Within the city limits or area of impact, technical studies may determine that additional site specific development
standards are necessary for impact mitigation. In this category, any new development or expanding existing development (upon making a
substantial improvement to the structure or land) shall meet all requirements of city, county, state and federal laws. (See comprehensive plan/air
and unique uses/area of critical concern, section 9-9-5 of this chapter.)
3. Cleanup/Development Agreement: Before any site, public or private, is allowed to develop for the storage or use of environmentally hazardous
materials, the city shall negotiate a legal contract with regard to the responsibility of cleanup should a spill or negligence occur. Bonding may be a
requirement, as determined by the city engineer and/or governing body.
B. Hazardous/Nuisance Uses:
1. Abandoned Appliances: See title 6 of this code.
2. Animals And Poultry: See title 6 of this code.
3. Automobiles/Abandoned Or Inoperable/Wrecking Yards/Junkyards: Not withstanding any other provisions of this title to the contrary, the operator
of any auto wrecking yard or junkyard shall provide a wall or fence of six feet (6') in height and constructed so as to adequately screen the
materials stored on the property from the view of motorists and pedestrians traveling adjacent public rights of way.
4. Glare: No direct or reflected glare shall be permitted which is visible from any point beyond property line.
5. Junkyards: See title 5 of this code.
6. Noise: Objectionable noise which is due to volume, frequency, or beat shall be muffled or otherwise controlled. Sirens and related apparatus used
solely for public purposes are exempt from this requirement. (See title 7 of this code.)
7. Odors: Property shall be maintained in such a manner so as to not reasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjoining properties with
regard to offensive odors.
8. Pollution/Air And/Or Water:
a. Air Pollution: Air pollution shall be subject to the requirements and regulations established by the health authorities in addition to local, state or
federal requirements. (See comprehensive plan/air).
b. Water Pollution: Water pollution shall be subject to the requirements and regulations established by the health authorities, local, state or federal
requirements. (See unique uses/area critical concern/CDO/Elmore County, section 9-9-5 of this chapter.) In addition, the city may require any
additional reports or measures that are deemed necessary to protect the aquifer or environment.
9. Electrical Disturbances: No activity shall emit any electrical disturbances or harmful radioactivity at any point adversely affecting the operation of
any equipment at any point other than that of the creator of such disturbances.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 191/258
10. Refuse: See title 7 of this code.
11. Vibration: No vibration shall be permitted which is discernible without instruments on an adjoining lot or property.
12. Weeds/Trees: See title 7, chapters 5 and 6 of this code. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-16: HOME OCCUPATION:
It is the purpose of this section to permit limited legal business activities within a dwelling while retaining the residential character of the dwelling and the
residential districts, and to preclude any activities which are a nuisance, offensive or hazardous to a residential neighborhood. It is the responsibility of
the home occupation permittee to be a good neighbor and to have due regard for the importance of their neighborhood which reflects the quality of life
in the city.
A. Application For Permit: Prior to initiation of any home occupation, the resident shall make application for and obtain a home occupation permit from
the city development services department.
B. Home Occupation Criteria: All home occupations must meet all of the following criteria:
1. In no way shall the use jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or of the surrounding neighborhood.
2. The home occupation shall be operated completely within the principal dwelling unit or an attached garage and shall not substantially alter the
exterior character of the dwelling.
3. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants
and not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit may be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
4. The entrance to the space devoted to such use shall be from within the building and no external alterations or construction features not customary
to dwellings shall be involved.
5. The storage of materials to be used in the home occupation shall be inside either the dwelling or an accessory building.
6. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used that creates visual or
audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises or causes fluctuation in line voltage off the premises.
7. No parking requirements or traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in excess of that which is customary for dwellings.
8. Signs are not permitted, except as allowed under chapter 13 of this title.
9. Vehicular or boat repair, other than upon vehicles registered to the property owner or occupant therein, shall not be permitted.
C. Home Occupation Permit: The administrator shall grant a home occupation permit upon a finding that all of the criteria set out in this section are and
can continue to be met, and may include such conditions as are necessary to assure compliance with the criteria.
D. Noncompliance: Any noncompliance with the criteria set out in this section, or with any condition placed on the home occupation permit, shall
constitute a violation of the zoning ordinance.
1. Whenever the administrator determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe such violation has occurred, he shall have served upon the
permit holder a written notice setting forth the act or omission believed to be in noncompliance and stating that the violation shall be corrected
within thirty (30) days.
2. If the violation is not corrected within the thirty (30) day period, the home occupation permit shall be revoked and the business shall cease and
desist operation.
E. Appeals: (See appeals of this title.)
F. Fee: A onetime fee, as established by the council, shall be charged at the time of application for a home occupation permit. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-17: KENNELS/BOARDING OF ANIMALS:
Commercial animal boarding facility land uses include land uses which provide short term and/or long term boarding for animals. Examples of these
land uses include commercial kennels and commercial stables. Exercise yards, fields, training areas, and trails associated with such land uses are
considered accessory to such land uses and do not require separate consideration. Conditional use shall be required for most zoning districts. (See
section 9-7-4, "Land Use Chart", of this title.) This type of business shall meet the following requirements:
A. The following setbacks shall be required in addition to those of the zoning district:
1. No activity area, including pastures or runs, shall be located closer than ten feet (10') to any property line.
2. Any building housing animals shall be located a minimum of two hundred feet (200') from any adjacent residentially zoned property.
3. The use shall meet all state, city and Elmore County Central district health requirements for water, sewer, runoff, etc.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 192/258
4. A landscaped buffer yard may be required if, in the opinion of the development services department, the use is not compatible to the adjoining
land use. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-18: MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME PARKS:
See chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-19: MINERAL EXTRACTION/PROCESSING (GRAVEL PITS, ROCK QUARRIES, SAND AND CLAY PITS AND OTHER
NATURAL RESOURCES OF COMMERCIAL VALUE):
Requires a conditional use permit. Any land use for the extraction of mineral, rock, etc., or processing of such within the city limits or the area of impact
would require conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 17 of this title, with review by staff, commission, city council or any other entity deemed
necessary to assure that the intrusion of noncompatible land uses will not be injurious to adjacent property owners and to assure that the extraction of
these resources are so managed and the land reclaimed in such a manner that no hazard or nuisance be created which, either immediately or in the
future, may adversely affect the health, safety or general welfare of the community. Mineral extraction, processing and storage may be conducted only
after completion of a thorough study, review and a land reclamation plan with appropriate development agreements and bonding must be prepared and
approved prior to any extraction.
A. Such mining operation shall not encroach underground or above ground within three hundred feet (300') of any adjoining property line.
B. During the period of operation, safety and screening fencing shall be erected around all pits that create a safety hazard or may tend to create a
nuisance for adjoining property owners.
C. Shall establish specified daylight hours of operation.
D. Upon depletion of the area or discontinuation of the use, all temporary buildings and structures shall be entirely removed from the property within
thirty (30) days; and
E. Landscaping and reclamation plans (with appropriate bonding) to be approved by the city council.
F. Existing gravel pits, rock quarries, sand and clay pits within the city limits which, in the opinion of the development services department, pose a safety
hazard at the time of adoption hereof shall conform to this section within two (2) years of its adoption. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-20: OUTDOOR STORAGE AND SALES LOTS FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES:
A. Restrictions: Outdoor storage of any product, packaging or other materials shall not be located in any front yard setback area in any zone. In LO/R,
C-1 and C-2 zones, exterior storage is not permitted unless in an enclosed accessory building. In C-3, C-4, I-1 and I-2 zones exterior storage shall
be allowed in the rear or interior yard areas only, provided storage shall be screened from public view by an opaque fence, wall or hedge. "Exterior
storage" in this title and chapter means storage of display items for sale only. Outdoor storage which abuts a residential zone shall provide a solid
screen six feet (6') in height, whether or not such property is separated by an alleyway or street.
B. Outdoor Sales Lots: Sales lots for large vehicular merchandise, i.e., automobiles, manufactured homes, trailers, boats, and motorcycles, shall be
permitted in front yard areas in C-3, C-4, I-1 and I-2 zones. Merchandise displayed in sales lots shall not overhang into public right of way. (Ord.
1653, 11-28-2016)
C. Vehicles: Any vehicles, other than a recognized sales car lot, which are unlicensed or inoperable for more than thirty (30) days on any lot, in any
zone, must be maintained in an area enclosed from public view. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-21: PUBLIC AND/OR QUASI-PUBLIC FACILITIES:
May require a conditional use permit. Government buildings, schools, parks, public recreation facilities, hospitals, etc., are allowed by conditional use in
various zones after approval of specific plans and specifications for the use of said property. Any facilities of the city in its governmental capacity, as
opposed to its proprietary capacity, shall not be subject to the above requirements regarding a conditional use. These facilities shall be compatible in
appearance to the zones in which they are located. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-22: POWER PLANT/ENERGY PRODUCTION/UTILITY TRANSMISSION FACILITIES:
May require a conditional use permit. (See section 9-7-4, "Land Use Chart", of this title.) Any land use for a power plant or utility transmission facility
shall require a conditional use permit with review by staff, the commission, city council or any other entity deemed necessary to assure that the intrusion
of noncompatible land uses will not be injurious to adjacent property owners and to assure that the facility is so managed that no hazard or nuisance be
created which either immediately or in the future may adversely affect the health, safety or general welfare of the community. Any such facility shall be
in compliance with all municipal, county, state and federal laws. Prevailing wind direction shall be considered as a prime concern if there are any
emissions into the air. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 193/258
9-9-23: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS/RV PARKS:
May require a conditional use permit. (See section 9-7-4, "Land Use Chart", of this title.) Recreational vehicle parks, as allowed in certain zones, shall
be located on a highway, collector or arterial street. RV parks shall be compatible to the surrounding areas where they are located. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-
2015)
9-9-24: SALVAGE/WRECKING/JUNK YARDS:
Requires a conditional use permit.
A. The above stated use(s) shall be completely enclosed by a solid six foot (6') high site obscuring fence, and materials will not be stacked closer than
one foot (1') from the top of the fence.
B. The above stated use(s) shall not result in the storage of automobile, junk, or salvage material that is visible from any public right of way.
C. The above stated use(s) shall have such landscaping that is appropriate with the surrounding area. This will be concentrated along the frontage and
outside the fence perimeter.
D. The above stated use(s) shall have lighting directed away from adjoining properties or highway rights of way. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-25: STABLE/RIDING STABLES AND RIDING SCHOOLS:
Requires a conditional use permit.
A. The above stated use(s) shall be located not nearer than one hundred fifty feet (150') from any residence, except for an owner's residence. All
structures shall be set back a distance of fifty feet (50') from any property line;
B. The above stated use(s) shall be designed and located with full consideration being given to their proximity to adjacent uses and their effect upon
adjacent and surrounding properties as to the storage of horse trailers and the factors of noise and odor; and
C. The above stated use(s) shall require that the owner or operator of such use have a continuous obligation to maintain adequate housekeeping
practices to prevent the creation of an animal nuisance as per section 6-6-1 of this code. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-26: TEMPORARY USES AND/OR STRUCTURES:
Temporary uses are those uses which have the potential to create undesirable impacts on nearby properties which cannot be determined except on a
case by case basis. In order to prevent this, all temporary uses shall be required to meet certain procedural requirements applicable to temporary uses,
in addition to any other applicable requirements of this title. Temporary structures and temporary outdoor sales require a conditional use permit and/or
license.
A. Application For Zoning Permit: A temporary building or land use shall first obtain a zoning permit which shall be issued by the development services
department and shall clearly state the time frame for removal. All applications for proposed temporary uses shall be filed with the development
services department, shall be in harmony with the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan and city ordinances and shall contain, as a
minimum, the following:
1. If applicable, a map of the subject property and names and addresses of adjoining property owners.
2. A written description of the proposed temporary use describing the type of activities, buildings and structures proposed for the subject property
and their general locations. This description shall contain a statement which clearly indicates the first and last date of temporary use operation.
3. Written justification for the proposed temporary use.
B. Zoning Permit: If the development services department determines that the temporary use is in harmony with the goals and objectives of the
comprehensive plan and does not create a substantial or adverse impact on adjacent property, the character of the neighborhood, traffic or other
matters affecting the public health, safety, or general welfare, a zoning permit may be issued for a period of no more than six (6) months.
The permit shall state that the proposed site be fully restored to its original condition within seven (7) days of the completion of the operational period
of the proposed temporary use.
C. Fee: A fee, as determined by the city council, shall be charged for the zoning permit.
D. Temporary Uses:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 194/258
1. Building: A temporary building which is located in a commercial or industrial zone shall obtain a zoning permit which shall be issued by the
development services department for no longer than six (6) months unless otherwise expressly provided herein. Any temporary buildings which
are used in conjunction with temporary outdoor sales shall be removed within ten (10) days of discontinuance of sales.
2. Construction Projects: Construction projects shall not require review or special permitting for a temporary structure/building used during the
construction period. Such temporary structure/use shall not remain more than one hundred eighty (180) days, unless given a written extension by
the code official.
3. Contractor's Project Office: Includes any structure containing an on site construction management office for an active construction project and any
structure or outdoor storage area designed for the on site storage of construction equipment and/or material for an active construction project.
Requires development services department review.
a. Projects requiring said land use to be in place for more than three hundred sixty five (365) days (1 year) shall require a conditional use permit.
b. Facility shall be removed within ten (10) days of completion or ceasing of development activity.
4. Garage Sales/On Site: Includes all general sales open to the public, conducted from or on a residential premises in any residential zone, as
defined by this title, for the purpose of disposing of personal property including, but not limited to, all sales entitled "garage", "lawn", "yard", "attic",
"porch", "room", "backyard", "patio", "flea market" or "rummage" sale.
a. Personal Property: Property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an individual, or members of his or her residence, and acquired in the
normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on
consignment.
b. Limit: No more than four (4) garage sales in any one calendar year shall be held at a dwelling unit, and no garage sale shall last more than
three (3) days.
5. On Site Real Estate Sales Office (All Districts): Includes any building which serves as an on site sales office for a new development project.
a. Allowed for a total period of one year.
b. Facility shall be removed or converted to a permitted land use within ten (10) days of the completion of sales activity.
c. Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary signs in chapter 13 of this title.
6. Outdoor Sales/Temporary: Includes any display, in commercial or industrial zones, of any items outside the confines of a building which is not
otherwise permitted as a permitted, special, or conditional use, or a special event otherwise regulated by this code, i.e., sidewalk sales, produce
sales. Requires development services department review and may require a city license.
a. Display shall be limited to a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) days in any calendar year.
b. Display shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation, including vehicular sight distances.
c. Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary signs in chapter 13 of this title.
d. If subject property is located adjacent to a residential area, sales and display activities shall be limited to daylight hours.
7. Outdoor Assembly: Includes any advertised outdoor assembly of more than one hundred (100) persons on private property. Requires a
conditional use permit.
a. Activities shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation, including vehicular sight distances.
b. Signage shall comply with the requirements for temporary signs in chapter 13 of this title.
c. Adequate parking, drinking water, and toilet facilities shall be provided and shall be described in the application.
d. If subject property is located adjacent to a residential area, activities shall be limited to daylight hours.
e. Adequate provisions for crowd control shall be made and shall be described within the application.
f. Shall comply with all codes and standards applicable to all temporary uses and shall be limited to no more than three (3) times per year.
8. Sign/Temporary: See signs/temporary, chapter 13 of this title.
E. Revocation Of Temporary Use Permits And/Or Approval: Any temporary use found not to be in compliance with the terms of this section shall be
considered in violation of this section and shall be subject to all applicable procedures and penalties. (See chapter 2, "Organization And
Enforcement", of this title.) (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-27: WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS:
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to promote the safe, effective and efficient use of small wind energy systems installed to reduce the on site
consumption of utility supplied electricity and to do so in a manner that is consistent with prudent planning and the existing city ordinances.
B. Findings:
1. The city of Mountain Home finds that wind energy is an abundant, renewable, and nonpolluting energy resource and that its conversion to
electricity will reduce our dependence on nonrenewable energy resources and decrease the air and water pollution that results from the use of
conventional energy sources; however, wind energy systems must meet zoning and land use requirements as well as address issues related to
their use in an urban environment. Evenly distributed small wind energy systems will also enhance the reliability and power quality of the power
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 195/258
grid, reduce peak power demands, and help diversify the state's energy supply portfolio when located properly. Small wind systems also make the
electricity supply market more competitive by promoting customer choice.
2. The state of Idaho and the federal government have enacted a number of laws and programs to encourage the use of small scale renewable
energy systems including rebates, tax exemptions, and net metering. However, many existing zoning ordinances contain restrictions which, while
not intended to discourage the installation of small wind turbines, can substantially increase the time and costs required to obtain necessary
construction permits. Therefore, the city of Mountain Home finds that it is necessary to standardize and streamline the proper issuance of building
permits for small wind energy systems so that this clean, renewable energy resource can be utilized in a cost effective and timely manner.
C. Definitions:
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion
electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than one hundred (100) kilowatts and which is intended to primarily reduce on site consumption
of electrical utility power.
TOWER HEIGHT: The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, including the wind turbine itself.
D. Applications And Permits: All wind turbine installations shall require a conditional use permit. It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter or
locate any small wind energy system within the city of Mountain Home unless a permit has been obtained pursuant to this section. The applicant
shall submit an application on a form provided by the city to development services. The application shall contain a site plan and wind turbine
drawings prepared by the manufacturer of the wind turbine and such other pertinent information as requested in the application. The applicant shall
thereafter meet with development services concerning the application and information provided in support of the application. Drawings prepared and
stamped by a structural engineer shall be required. If the small wind energy system proposed meets all of the applicable requirements, then the
application shall be sent to the planning and zoning commission for consideration for a conditional use permit. It shall then go to city council. If city
council approves the small wind energy system and the application, plans and specifications meet all of the requirements of this section a building
permit shall be issued by the city's building official. The cost of a building permit shall be based on the actual construction value. The conditional use
permit for a small wind energy system may be suspended and subsequently revoked at any time the system does not comply with this section. The
holder of the permit shall be given a reasonable opportunity to comply with this section before the permit is revoked and in the event of any
questions as to the interpretation of the section and/or compliance with the same the holder of the permit may appeal to the city council to determine
interpretation and/or compliance.
E. Requirements For Small Wind Energy Systems: Small wind energy systems shall be a conditionally permitted use in all zoning classifications where
structures of any sort are allowed; subject to the requirements set forth below:
1. Size Of Permitted Property: Any property under one-half (1/2) acre shall not be permitted to have a wind turbine.
2. Clearance Of Blade: No portion of the turbine or blades, or any other moving parts of the small wind energy system shall extend within twenty feet
(20') of the ground. No blade may extend over parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, or exposed utility lines.
3. Tower Height: For property sizes between one-half (1/2) acre and one acre the tower height shall be limited to forty feet (40'). For property one
acre or more in size, tower height shall be limited to sixty feet (60') except as otherwise imposed by FAA regulations.
4. Setback: No part of the wind system structure, including guywire anchors, may extend closer than fifteen feet (15') to the property boundaries of
the installation site.
5. Noise: Small wind energy systems shall not exceed fifty eight (58) dBA (as stated in the manufacturer's specifications) and as measured at the
closest neighboring property line. The level, however, may be exceeded during short term events such as utility outages and/or severe
windstorms.
6. Commercially Approved Wind Turbines: Only small wind turbines that have been approved and are on the list of commercially approved U.S.
equipment providers identified by the American Wind Energy Association shall be permitted to be installed within the city limits of the city of
Mountain Home.
7. FAA Regulations: Small wind energy systems must comply with all applicable federal aviation administration (FAA) regulations, including any
necessary approvals for installations close to airports.
8. Other Aviation And Flight Restrictions: Proposed towers and other structures that will exceed the building height restrictions from the table
provided for in this title must be compatible with the flight operations of Mountain Home Air Force Base (MHAFB) and the city of Mountain Home
municipal airport operations. The proposed small wind energy systems plan shall be coordinated and approved by local, state, federal and military
aviation officials. Height variances normally shall not be granted within five (5) miles of MHAFB or along depicted flight corridors.
9. National Electrical Code: All small wind energy systems shall comply with all requirements of the national electrical code. All building permit
applications for small wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of installation conforms to the national electrical code. This information is frequently supplied by the manufacturer.
10. Utility Notification: No small wind energy system shall be installed until evidence has been provided to the city that the local power company has
been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer owned generator. Off grid systems shall be exempt from this
requirement.
11. International Building Code: All small wind energy systems shall comply with all requirements of the international building code. All building
permit applications for small wind energy systems shall be accompanied by the approved conditional use permit and standard drawings of the
wind turbine structure, including the tower, base, and footings. A soils report shall be required. An engineering analysis of the tower showing
compliance with the international building code and certified by a licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted. This analysis is
frequently supplied by the manufacturer. Wet stamps shall not be required.
F. Unsafe Systems: Any small wind energy system found to be unsafe by the city's building official shall be repaired by the landowner to meet federal,
state and local safety standards or removed within forty five (45) days. If any small wind energy system is not operated for a continuous period of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 196/258
twelve (12) months, the city's building official shall notify the landowner by registered mail requiring that the owner declare his intention with the
respect to the continued nonuse of the small wind energy system in writing within twenty eight (28) days of receipt of the request. In such a
response, the landowner shall set forth reasons for the operational difficulty and provide a reasonable timetable for corrective action. If the city's
building official deems the timetable for corrective action as unreasonable, he shall notify the landowner and such landowner shall remove the small
wind energy system within one hundred twenty (120) days of receipt of notice from the city's building official. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-9-28: WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES:
A. Definitions: As used in this section the following terms shall mean:
ANTENNA: A transmitting or receiving device used in telecommunications that radiates or captures radio signals.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE OR SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any building or structure which can be used for locating wireless communication
facilities (WCFs).
APPLICANT: Any person who applies for a tower or wireless communication facility (WCF) development permit.
APPLICATION: The process by which the owner of a parcel of land submits a request to develop, construct, build, modify, or erect a tower or WCF
upon a parcel of land. The application includes all written documentation, verbal statements, and representations in whatever form, made by the
applicant to the city concerning the request.
ENGINEER: Any engineer licensed by the state of Idaho.
LATTICE TOWER: Any self-supporting multiple sided, open steel frame structure used to support communication equipment.
MICROCELL FACILITY: A small wireless communications facility consisting of an antenna that is either: 1) four feet (4') in height with an area of not
more than five hundred eighty (580) square inches, or 2) if a tubular antenna, no more than four inches (4") in diameter and no more than six feet
(6') in length.
MONOPOLE: A support structure, which consists of a single pole, sunk in the ground and/or attached to a foundation.
OWNER: Any person with fee title or long term (exceeding 10 years) leasehold to any parcel of land within the city, who desires to develop,
construct, build, modify, or erect a tower or WCF upon such parcel of land.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, company, or other legal entity, public or private, whether for profit or not for profit.
STEALTH: Any tower or WCF which is designed to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses, including, but not limited to, architecturally
screened roof mounted antennas, antennas integrated into architectural elements, and towers designed to look other than like a tower, such as light
poles, and trees. The term stealth does not necessarily exclude the use of uncamouflaged lattice, guyed, or monopole tower designs, except in
residential and LO/R zones.
TOWER: A self-supporting lattice, guyed, or monopole structure constructed from grade, which supports WCFs. This term does not include amateur
radio operator's equipment, as licensed by the FCC.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY OR WCF: An unstaffed facility for the transmission and reception of radio or microwave signals used for
commercial communications, including the tower and/or support structure to which it is attached or upon which it is built. WCFs are composed of two
(2) or more of the following components: 1) antenna, 2) support structure, 3) equipment enclosure, 4) security barrier. It also includes any cables,
wires, lines, wave guides, antennas, and any other equipment or facilities associated with the transmission or reception of communications which a
person seeks to locate or has installed upon or near a tower or antenna support structure.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS: Any personal wireless services as defined in the federal telecommunications act of 1996 which includes FCC
licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services, including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio
(SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging and similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed.
B. Facilities: This subsection establishes standards for the placement of wireless communication facilities (WCFs) including towers and other
appurtenant structures, in all zoning districts. In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public as a whole, it is the intent of this
subsection to minimize the adverse impacts of such equipment and structures on neighborhoods and surrounding developments by regulating the
height, number, location, and design of such devices. All new WCFs and the expansion and/or alteration of any existing WCFs shall be subject to
this section. Approval of requests to locate, improve, expand or modify WCFs shall be based upon the following criteria:
1. Permit Requirements: Permit requirements for the installation of WCFs are identified in table 1 of this section.
2. Collocation Requirement: Collocation is considered to be a visually unobtrusive installation method as the equipment is attached to an existing
structure. Collocation shall require only an administrative review under the terms of subsection D of this section. No new tower shall be permitted
unless the applicant demonstrates a good faith effort to collocate on an existing facility. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower
or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of the following:
a. No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area that meets applicant's engineering requirements.
b. Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements.
c. Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
d. The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing tower or structure, or the antenna
on the existing tower or structure would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
e. The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner of the existing tower or structure to share or adapt for sharing are unreasonable.
Costs exceeding new tower development costs are considered unreasonable.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 197/258
f. The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers or structures unsuitable.
TABLE 1
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES - ALLOWED,
CONDITIONAL OR PROHIBITED USE BY ZONE
AA - Administrative review * Stealth installation (see definitions)
CC - Conditional use permit PH - Prohibited
Zone
Microcell
Facilities
Visually
Unobtrusive/
Attached Facilities
Monopole Less Than
Maximum Height
Of Base Zone
Monopole More
Than Maximum
Height Of Base
Zone
Lattice
Tower
R-1 AA * AA * CC * PH PH
R-2 AA * AA * CC * PH PH
R-3 AA * AA * CC * PH PH
R-4 AA * AA * CC * PH PH
LO AA * AA * CC * PH PH
C-1 AA AA AA CC PH
C-2 AA AA AA CC PH
C-3 AA AA AA CC CC
C-4 AA AA AA CC CC
I-1 AA AA AA CC CC
I-2 AA AA AA CC CC
Airport (R-4) AA CC CC PH PH
TABLE 1-A
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT BY BASE ZONE
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, LO/R, airport (R-4) 30 feet
C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, I-1, I-2 35 feet
TABLE 1-B
MINIMUM SEPARATION OR BUFFER REQUIREMENTS
FOR TOWERS EXCEEDING BASE ZONE HEIGHT
Any tower to residentially zoned land (irrespective of city boundaries) The greater of 200 feet or 200 percent of tower height
Monopole to any other tower 750 feet
Lattice or guyed to any other lattice or guyed tower 1,500 feet
C. Site Development Standards: The following standards shall apply to applications for noncollocated WCFs in all zoning districts:
1. Minimum Lot Area: No minimum lot area is required for a wireless communications facility. WCFs may be considered to be either principal or
accessory uses, and the presence of an existing use or structure on the same lot shall not prohibit the placement of an antenna and/or tower on
that lot. For purposes of determining compliance with zoning development regulations, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, and the
antennas and/or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lots.
2. Setbacks; Separation: Support tower structures that do not exceed the height limit of a zone must meet the setback requirements for that zone
and all of the landscape and screening requirements. Support tower structures which exceed the height limit of the zone in which they are located
shall be set back from all property lines as required by that zone or one foot (1') for every two feet (2') of total tower height, whichever produces
the greater setback (tower separation, see table 1-B in this section).
3. Height: The height measurement of a WCF shall include the total height of the structure including antenna attachments. The maximum height
allowed without obtaining a conditional use permit shall be determined by the zoning district in which the WCF is to be located (see table 1-A in
this section). Structures exceeding these height limitations shall require the applicant to obtain a conditional use permit as indicated by table 1 of
this section. Engineering studies and radio frequency modeling showing the need for the proposed height exception shall accompany the
conditional use request. Maximum height allowed with a conditional use permit shall be determined by table 2 of this section. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-
2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 198/258
TABLE 2
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, LO/R, airport (R-4) 30 feet (stealth installation)
C-1, C-2 75 feet
C-3 100 feet
C-4 125 feet
I-1, I-2 150 feet
(Ord. 1646, 2-8-2016)
Note: Facilities locating on an existing structure may be exempt from this standard as long as they do not exceed the approved height of the
structure.
4. Engineering: All support tower structures shall be certified by an engineer licensed in the state of Idaho and be capable of supporting at least one
additional WCF of the same size, weight and surface area as the applicant's.
5. Construction Code Applicability: The installation of any antenna shall comply with all applicable building and electrical codes.
6. Deed Restrictions: The installation of WCFs shall not violate any existing valid deed restrictions.
7. Equipment Facility: All equipment shelters, cabinets, or other on the ground ancillary equipment shall meet the setback requirements of the zone
in which the WCF is located, and shall be maintained in safe working order at all times.
8. Screening And Landscaping: Tower facilities shall include a landscape buffer. The buffer shall consist of a landscape strip at least four feet (4')
wide outside perimeter of the compound. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the plant materials shall be of an evergreen variety. In locations
where the visual impact of the facility is minimal, the landscape requirement may be reduced or waived by the zoning administrator.
9. Color And Placement: To the greatest extent possible, materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping shall be used that blend the tower
facilities to the natural setting and the existing environment. Antennas and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment installed on a structure
other than a tower shall use colors that are similar to the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible.
10. Lighting And Security: Except as specifically required by the federal aviation administration (FAA) or the federal communications commission
(FCC), transmission structures shall not be artificially lighted. Transmitter equipment shelters may use security lighting, which is compatible with
the surrounding neighborhood and confined to the boundaries of the site.
11. Advertising: No advertising or display shall be located on any antenna or antenna support structures.
12. Discontinuation Of Use: Any WCF that is no longer in use shall be reported immediately by the service provider to the zoning administrator.
Discontinued facilities shall be completely removed by the owner within six (6) months of the date the use is discontinued, and the site shall be
restored to its preexisting condition. To ensure compliance with this requirement, the owner or applicant shall post a bond in an amount
determined by the city for the removal and restoration of an abandoned or discontinued WCF or tower.
13. Areas Where Prohibited Because Of Height: Lattice towers and monopoles that exceed the base zone height are prohibited within five hundred
feet (500') of the following gateway streets:
a. American Legion Boulevard/Highway 20,
b. Highway 30/north and south, and
c. Airbase Road/West 6th south.
D. Facilities Which Are Not Visually Obtrusive: WCFs (including any supporting structures and appurtenances) which are installed to meet the following
standards shall require only an administrative review (otherwise a conditional use permit is required). Any such installation must also be constructed
or located so as to not create the potential for adverse noise (from generators or other accessory equipment), access or grading problems. These
types of installations may also require building, electrical or other construction permits as well as design review approval. It shall be necessary for
the applicant to submit site plans, drawings, photographs, simulations and other related information deemed necessary to the zoning administrator
to determine that a proposed installation meets the criteria contained in this section.
Installations which are considered to be not visually obtrusive include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Antennas located entirely within an otherwise approved sign. These may include antennas placed within the sign face or attached to a support
structure so long as the design is such that the antenna is effectively unnoticeable. Such antenna may not be placed on a nonconforming sign.
2. Flush mounted, color coordinated panels on existing buildings where equipment is not visible above the roofline. All equipment shelters, cabinets
or other accessory structures shall be located within the building utilized for the antenna, or on the ground outside and not conflict with any
required setbacks, required landscaping or parking spaces.
3. Antennas, attached or built into architectural features or which appear to be architectural features themselves, added to existing structures (such
as chimneys, cupolas, dormers, bell towers, water tanks, stadium lights, utility poles and other similar features) where the height limit for such
architectural features is not exceeded.
4. Collocation on existing facilities where the height of the existing antenna tower or pole does not increase.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 199/258
5. Installations which are located far from any prospective viewer and in such a way as to have a backdrop of terrain which obscures the visibility of
the antenna which makes it visibly unobtrusive and effectively unnoticeable.
6. Antennas constructed such that they appear to be natural features or indigenous to the site and which are located in proximity to the features they
are imitating so that they blend in and do not stand out visually.
E. Microcell Cellular Communication Facilities: "Microcell" cellular communication facilities provide communications coverage to a geographically limited
and specifically defined area (e.g., a busy street intersection, an individual building or a topographically constrained area). Such facilities are
integrated with standard cellular technology (i.e., a macrocell) to provide wireless communication services to the public. The installation of such
facilities shall only require an administrative review if all of the following criteria are met, otherwise a conditional use permit shall be required:
1. No new antenna tower is erected (microcell facilities may be located on existing poles, towers, buildings, etc., in compliance with this section).
2. No antenna shall be located within thirty inches (30") of any space occupied by or available to the public.
3. No antenna shall exceed an area of six (6) square feet.
4. The equipment shelter associated with a microcell site may not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in floor area.
5. The antenna(s) may be mounted on a roof only if the height of the antenna(s) at the highest point does not exceed the horizontal distance from
the antenna to the edge of the rooftop.
F. Application For Facilities: No person shall build, erect, or construct a tower or antenna support structure, nor install any WCFs upon any parcel of
land within the city of Mountain Home, Idaho, without first having received a development permit from the city for that purpose.
1. An application to develop a WCF (including towers and support structures) shall include the following:
a. The name, address, and phone number of the property owner, and/or lessee of the land. If the applicant is not the owner of the land, then the
written consent of the owner is required.
b. The legal description and address of the property.
c. The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of other towers or other support structures, within a one-half (1/2) mile radius.
d. Applicant must include and use the most recent technological design, including microcells, if applicable, and must demonstrate the need for
towers or other support structures as opposed to microcells to accomplish their needs.
e. Applicant must show the need for a lattice or guyed tower as opposed to monotower, if a tower is required.
f. An affidavit attesting to the fact the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful attempts to get permission to install or collocate the applicant's
WCF on towers or usable support structures owned by other persons located within a one-half (1/2) mile radius of the proposed site.
g. Written statement or evidence from a qualified engineer that the proposed structure or installation will meet structural requirements of the
building code and does not pose safety hazards to the public, such as explosion, fire or damage to property due to its proximity to volatile,
flammable, explosive, or hazardous materials, and will not interfere with public safety communications or reception of radio, television, or other
communication services enjoyed by adjacent property owners.
h. Applicant shall submit an accurate, color photo simulation of the proposed site with a realistic representation of the proposed installation, as it
would appear when completed.
2. The development services department may require supplemental information or may deny an application based on insufficient or inaccurate
information required by this section. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
Chapter 10
NONCONFORMING USES
9-10-1: AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NONCONFORMING USE:
A. Lawful Nonconforming Uses Protected: The owner of a lawful use of land or lawful use involving individual structures, or of a structure and land in
combination, existing on the effective date of this title or amendment, has the right to continue the use of the property despite the subsequent
enactment of conflicting ordinances so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Fundamental Character Of The Use: It is the intent of this chapter to preserve and protect the fundamental or primary character of the use of the
property prior to the enactment of conflicting ordinances, but not to encourage their survival.
C. Vested Right: A nonconforming use shall exist if the owner or developer of such use has lawfully, in reliance on existing laws, ordinances or permits,
made substantial expenditures or otherwise committed himself, to a substantial disadvantage, before the law, ordinance, or permit is changed.
Substantial shall be measured by consideration of all factors evidencing a change of position. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this title shall be
deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which preliminary approvals and/or building permits were
granted and remain currently valid or where actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date hereof and upon which actual building
construction has been carried on diligently. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-10-2: EXTENSION, ENLARGEMENT, OR CHANGE OF NONCONFORMING USE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 200/258
A. Generally: A nonconforming use shall not be extended, enlarged, or changed after the effective date hereof unless the use of the land and/or use of
the structure is changed to a use which is permitted or conditionally permitted in the district in which it is located and the applicant receives design
review and, where applicable, conditional use approval.
1. Policy: Nonconforming uses are declared by this title to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts in which such use is located. While the
continuation of nonconforming uses is designed to avoid the imposition of hardship on the owner of the property, the underlying policy of this title
is to restrict and ultimately abolish, not enlarge, nonconformities, in order that structures and uses will be segregated in areas suitable for them in
accordance with a comprehensive plan for the utility and welfare of all.
B. Character Of The Use: A use is extended or enlarged where the character, nature, and/or purpose of a new use are different from those of the
preexisting nonconforming use. Factors constituting an unlawful expansion or extension of a prior nonconforming use of land include: 1) the extent
to which the current use reflects the nature and purpose of the original use; 2) whether there is a difference in the quality or character, as well as the
degree of the use; and 3) whether the current use is different in kind and/or impact upon the neighborhood resulting from differences in the activities
conducted on the property. To qualify as a continuation, a use must be sufficiently similar to the existing nonconforming use so as not to constitute a
new or different use.
1. Intensification Distinguished: The mere intensification of a nonconforming use does not render it unlawful provided the character and impact of the
use are not enlarged or expanded.
2. Commercial Modernization Distinguished: The reasonable substitution or replacement of modern equipment or facilities for obsolete or dilapidated
equipment does not constitute an enlargement or extension provided the character of the use is not enlarged or expanded.
C. Change Of Nonconforming Use: Any building or part of a building or any land which as of the time of the adoption of this title is being put to a lawful
nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use, or changed to a nonconforming use which is less intensive in character than the present
nonconforming use upon the issuance of a conditional use permit by the council. In permitting such change, the council may require appropriate
conditions and safeguards in accord with other provisions of this title.
With an accompanying nonconforming use design review application, reasonable alterations of a nonconforming structure ancillary to any such
change in use is permissible provided that all such alterations comply with this code and do not amount to an enlargement or expansion of said use.
D. Nonconforming Use Of Open Land: No legal nonconforming use of land may be expanded or extended to occupy additional land area nor shall the
boundary of any site containing a nonconforming use be relocated, extended, or expanded.
E. Nonconforming Lots Of Record:
1. Single Nonconforming Lots Of Record: In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary
accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date hereof, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions
of this title. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership (see subsection E2 of
this section). This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable
in the district; provided, that hard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the
regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
2. Nonconforming Lots Of Record In Combination: If two (2) or more lots or a combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in
single ownership are of record at the effective date hereof, and if all or part of the lots with no buildings do not meet the requirements established
for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this title and no portion of said parcel
shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this title, nor shall any division
of any parcel be made which creates a lot with a width or area below the requirements stated in this title.
F. Nonconforming Structures: Any existing nonconforming structure devoted to a permitted or conditionally permitted use in the district in which it is
located may not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or structurally altered unless a conditional use permit and design review approval is obtained
from the city and the provisions of this chapter are otherwise adhered to. A nonconforming structure devoted to a nonconforming use may not be
enlarged, extended, or reconstructed unless the structure is devoted to a permitted or conditionally permitted use and design review and, where
applicable, conditional use approval is obtained from the city.
1. With an accompanying nonconforming use design review application, reasonable alterations of a nonconforming ancillary structure devoted to a
nonconforming use provided that all such alterations comply with this code and do not amount to an enlargement or expansion of said use.
2. No building partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be altered in such a way to permit the enlargement or expansion of the space
occupied by such nonconforming use. However, a nonconforming use may be extended to include the structurally unaltered entire floor area of the
existing structure or building in which it was conducted at the time the use became nonconforming.
3. Additions or structural alterations to a legal nonconforming structure shall be permitted to the extent required by law.
4. Maintenance, minor alterations, and minor repairs necessary to keep nonconforming uses in sound condition during continuance of such use shall
be permitted. On any nonconforming structure, or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs or
on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing; provided, that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming
shall not be increased. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part
thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety upon order of such official. Reasonable alteration of any
such use may be permitted to continue the use; however, alteration is not permitted for a purpose, or in a manner, substantially different from the
use to which it was put before alteration. Alterations are prohibited which cause any change in the use, structure, or physical improvements of
greater adverse impact on the neighborhood except as provided for herein.
5. The placement on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses of a nature
which would be generally prohibited in the district in which such use is located shall constitute an enlargement or expansion of a use. (Ord. 1628,
1-12-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 201/258
9-10-3: DISCONTINUANCE, DESTRUCTION, RESTORATION, AND ABANDONMENT OF USE:
A. Discontinuance Of Nonconforming Use: When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, is discontinued or
abandoned for more than one year (except when government action impedes access to the premises), upon written request, the owner shall declare
his intention with respect to the continued nonuse of the improvements in writing within twenty eight (28) days of receipt of the request pursuant to
Idaho Code section 67-6538. If the owner does not declare his intention or if the discontinuance of the use of the property for its designed purposes
extends for a period of ten (10) years, the structure, or structure and land in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the
regulations of the district in which it is located.
B. Intervening Change To Conforming Use: Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a
permitted use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the city, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
C. Damaged Or Destroyed Building: Any nonconforming building destroyed by fire or other calamity to an extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of the
appraised value may not be restored unless such restoration shall make the building a conforming building and any intended use shall be a
conforming use; provided however, that nothing in this title shall be construed to prevent the restoration and the resumption of former lawful use of
any building that is damaged or partially destroyed by fire, or other calamity, to the extent of less than fifty percent (50%), provided that such
restoration is started within one calendar year and diligently prosecuted to completion.
D. Elimination Of Nonconforming Structure: Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination, removal or destruction of
the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-10-4: PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, AND WELFARE EXCEPTION:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit a city or a county from passing or enforcing any other law or ordinance, either
retroactively or prospectively, for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
Chapter 11
LANDSCAPING/OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS
9-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to indicate the minimum landscape, open space and water conservation requirements for all new residential and
nonresidential development commenced after the effective date hereof. These provisions do not apply to single-family, duplex dwelling units existing at
the time of adoption hereof or the downtown, C-2 district. These standards are established in order to:
A. Enhance the visual attractiveness of the city for the enjoyment of residents and visitors;
B. Promote community pride;
C. Safeguard property values and protect public and private investments;
D. Promote high quality development;
E. Clarify processes and requirements for water efficient landscape development within the city;
F. Improve the livability of residential neighborhoods;
G. Protect and preserve water resources within the community;
H. Ensure protection of water resources from excessive use of high water using plant materials; and
I. Provide landscape design standards which achieve water conservation while also contributing to an aesthetically enriched community landscape.
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-11-2: APPLICABILITY:
The landscaping provisions of this chapter shall apply to the following:
A. Landscaping shall be required in buffer yards, parking areas and along designated city "gateways" as defined in chapter 3 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 202/258
B. Any project involving residential, commercial, industrial, manufactured home park, public or quasi-public, civic or multi-family land uses that:
1. Involve new construction and/or use of land or construction consisting of a substantial improvement requiring a building permit; or
2. Require the provision of new or substantial improvements to a parking area; or
3. Result in a change of occupancy classification as listed in the current city adopted building code involving residential, commercial, industrial,
manufactured home park, civic and multi-family land uses.
C. Any subdivision or planned unit development. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-11-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Reduction Of Existing Landscaping: No landscaping, including buffer yards, parking lot landscaping, and gateway landscaping existing at the time of
passage hereof shall be reduced in area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Landscaping required after the effective date hereof shall
meet at least the minimum requirements set forth herein.
B. Yard/Lot Minimum: Legally required yards, landscaping or minimum lot area allocated to any building shall not be used to satisfy minimum
landscaping or lot area requirements for any other building.
C. Location: All buffer yards and other open spaces allocated to a building or group of buildings shall be located on the same lot as such building or
group of buildings except as permitted in an approved planned unit development (PUD).
D. Irrigation: All landscaped areas shall be served by an automated, underground irrigation system meeting the criteria of this chapter.
E. Multiple Dwellings: Multi-family dwellings shall be considered as one building for the purpose of determining front, side and rear yard requirements.
The entire group as a unit shall require one front, one rear and two (2) side yards.
F. Vision Triangle: On any corner lot in any district, landscaping shall be no more than thirty six inches (36") high in mature height.
G. Use Of Required, Landscaped Areas: Required buffer yards and landscaped areas may contain pedestrian, bike or equestrian trails, etc., provided
that the total area of required landscaping is maintained. No tennis courts, swimming pools, sports fields, golf courses, parking of vehicles, etc., or
other active recreation may be permitted in required landscaped areas unless approved by the city council.
H. Access Driveways: Access driveways are permitted in the required landscaped areas if clearly for access to a garage or parking area and meet city
design guidelines. Accessway width will be included in the total front yard dimension calculation.
I. Weeds: Each landscaped strip shall be kept clean and free of noxious and other weeds.
J. Nonpotable Water Supply: Use of nonpotable water shall be used for landscape irrigation if a permanent, legal supply is available. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-
2015)
9-11-4: LANDSCAPE DESIGN CRITERIA:
A. Landscape improvements shall be an integral part of the overall site design for each property.
1. Landscape areas shall be configured to maximize their interconnectivity within the site and to landscape natural areas in adjacent developments.
Except in parking lots and for screening along roadways, small, isolated islands of landscaping shall be avoided;
2. Landscape areas shall be compatible with the character of the proposed development and the surrounding areas to reinforce neighborhood
identity;
3. Landscape design shall enhance natural drainageways and environmental features;
4. Spacing of trees shall allow for their natural spread.
B. Landscape improvements shall follow water efficient design principles to facilitate water conservation:
1. Design planting schemes for water conservation;
2. Create lawns of appropriate size, shape and type of turf;
3. Use mulch to maintain soil moisture and reduce evaporation; all plantable areas not covered with turf shall be covered with a minimum of four
inches (4") of mulch to retain water and inhibit weeds;
4. Group plants by hydrozone with high hydrozones separated from low and very low hydrozones by moderate hydrozones;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 203/258
5. Improve the soil with organic matter; soil preparation shall include scarification to six inches (6"), with organic or other soil amendments. (Ord.
1628, 1-12-2015)
9-11-5: IRRIGATION DESIGN CRITERIA:
A. Irrigation system improvements shall be designed in conformance with the following criteria:
1. Coverage: The irrigation system shall be designed to provide one hundred percent (100%) coverage with head to head spacing or triangular
spacing as appropriate.
2. Matched Precipitation Rates: Sprinkler heads shall have matched precipitation rates within each control valve circuit.
3. Irrigation Districts: Sprinkler heads irrigating lawn or other high water demand areas shall be circuited so that they are on a separate zone or
district from those irrigating trees, shrubs, or other reduced water demand areas.
4. Overspray: Sprinkler heads shall be adjusted to reduce overspray onto impervious surfaces such as streets, sidewalks, driveways, and parking
areas. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-11-6: COMMON OPEN SPACE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of common open space is to improve the livability of residential neighborhoods, buffer the street edge, and protect natural
resources.
B. Applicability: The standards for common open space apply to all new single-family, duplex, manufactured home, and multi-family developments of
five (5) acres or more.
C. General Provisions:
1. Total Land Area: The total land area of all common open space shall equal or exceed five percent (5%) of the gross land area of the development.
2. Qualified Space: Qualified common open space includes the following:
a. Any open space that is active or passive in its intended use, and accessible by all residents of the development including, but not limited to:
(1) Open grassy area of at least fifty feet by one hundred feet (50' x 100') in area;
(2) Community garden; or
(3) Plaza.
b. The buffer yards (see section 9-11-8 of this chapter) along streets may be included in required common open space for residential subdivisions.
c. Parkways along local residential streets that meet all the following standards may count toward the common open space requirement:
(1) The parkway is a minimum of five feet (5') in width from street curb to edge of sidewalk.
(2) The parkway is planted with street trees in accord with section 9-11-7 of this chapter.
d. Parkways along collectors and arterials that are a minimum of ten feet (10') in width from street curb to sidewalk can be counted toward the
open space requirement.
e. Stormwater retention facilities when designed in accordance with section 9-11-11 of this chapter.
3. Location:
a. The common open space shall be located on a common lot or an area with a common maintenance agreement.
b. Common open space shall be grouped contiguously with open space from adjacent developments whenever feasible.
4. Maintenance:
a. All common open space shall be the responsibility of an owners' association for the purpose of maintaining the common area and
improvements thereon; or
b. Land designated as common open space may be conveyed to the city, where the city council agrees to accept conveyance. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-
2015)
9-11-7: RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPING:
A. Common Area Landscaping: Landscaping shall be appropriate to the use and function of the area and include trees, shrubs, ground cover, irrigation
(where necessary) and paving.
B. Trees:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 204/258
1. For lots with thirty feet (30') to eighty four feet (84') of linear frontage, one tree shall be planted in the front yard setback.
2. For lots with eighty five feet (85') or more of linear frontage, two (2) trees shall be planted with one tree located in the front yard setback.
3. Trees shall be from the city's approved list of appropriate tree species.
4. Trees shall be planted with adequate spacing to allow for the mature spread of the trees.
C. Landscaping For Multi-Family Dwelling Units:
1. Landscape improvements shall be designed to enhance the overall appearance of the development and integrate the project with adjacent land
uses and the surrounding neighborhood.
2. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the gross site area shall be landscaped area including any area and planting requirements for buffer yards
(see section 9-11-8 of this chapter) shall qualify.
3. A minimum of one tree from the city's approved list of appropriate tree species per one thousand (1,000) square feet of landscaped area and one
shrub per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of landscaped area shall be planted. Trees and shrubs shall be distributed throughout the site.
Shrubs shall be grouped and distributed throughout the site.
4. Trees may be substituted for up to one-half (1/2) of the required shrubs at the rate of one tree for ten (10) shrubs and vice versa, subject to city
approval. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-11-8: BUFFER YARD LANDSCAPING:
Buffer yards are located along the perimeter of a lot and all development required to have landscaping shall designate one front, one rear, and two (2)
side yards, all known as buffer yards. Buffer yards create a visual screen that is used to screen incompatible uses or undesirable elements. Buffer yards
can include plantings, fences, berms, or a combination of these, to reduce unwanted noise, views, and pollutants. (See city approved list of acceptable
species maintained by the tree committee.)
A. General Provisions:
1. All buffer yards shall provide for a mixture of trees, shrubs, ground cover, and/or berming. Fencing may be utilized in the side and rear buffer
yards as part of an overall buffer yard landscaping plan.
2. When a commercial, industrial, manufactured home park, or multi-family land use is located next to a public/private street, a continuous buffer
yard along the public or private street, measuring at least ten feet (10') wide is required. A fifteen foot (15') wide buffer yard is required on gateway
streets.
3. When a parking lot serving a commercial, civic, industrial, or multi-family land use is located next to any residential use, a ten foot (10') wide buffer
yard with an eighty percent (80%) visual screening of five feet (5') to six feet (6') in height (achieved within 3 years after planting) is required.
4. A commercial, manufactured home park, civic, or multi-family land use shall provide five foot (5') rear and side buffer yards.
5. The required landscape area is to be measured along the entire lot frontage/lot line including access areas.
B. Buffer Yard Minimum Landscaping Standards (See City Approved List Of Acceptable Species Maintained By The Tree Committee):
1. Front buffer yard landscape areas shall meet the following requirements:
a. One tree and ten (10) shrubs per fifty (50) linear feet.
b. The street tree size must be large enough to attain a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet (8') between the sidewalk and the lowest branch
and/or fourteen feet (14') between the street and the lowest branch.
2. Side yard landscape areas must meet the following requirements:
a. The side yard landscaping must achieve an eighty percent (80%) visual screen within three (3) years after planting; and
b. One tree and five (5) shrubs per fifty (50) linear feet.
3. Backyard landscape area must meet the following requirement:
a. One tree and five (5) shrubs per fifty (50) linear feet. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-11-9: PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping within parking lots helps to reduce the impact of noise, glare, sun, and air pollution and reduces the amount of asphalt by interspersing
green spaces throughout the lot. It also provides a shady place to park a car on a sunny day. Construction of all new parking lots and substantial
alteration or renovation of parking lots or areas, with the exception of resurfacing or striping, will fall under the following guidelines:
A. General Provisions:
1. Parking lot landscaping shall be in addition to required landscaping within buffer yards and designated gateways.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 205/258
2. All parking lot landscaping within interior planters shall be a mixture of deciduous trees, small shrubs, and ground cover.
3. No parking shall be permitted in required landscaped areas nor shall any outdoor display or storage of materials be permitted in such areas.
4. The development services department may reduce the parking by up to five percent (5%) of the required number of spaces if the proposed
landscape plan exceeds the requirements of this chapter by fifteen percent (15%) or more.
B. Parking Lot Landscaping Standards:
1. Small Parking Lots: Parking lots with fewer than ten (10) spaces shall be encouraged to consider alternative landscaping options, i.e., container
landscaping.
2. Trees Required: There shall be at least one deciduous tree for every five (5) outdoor parking spaces.
3. Planter Requirements: All interior planters shall:
a. Have curbing or wheel restraints sufficient to prevent cars from overhanging into landscaped areas.
b. Have no tree planting area less than five feet (5') wide in any dimension.
4. Percentage Required: The amount of landscaping required is based on the total number of parking spaces as provided in the table below.
Number Of Parking Spaces
Percent Of Gross
Area To Be Landscaped
1 - 9 3
10 - 50 5
51 - 99 8
100 - 300 10
5. Wheel Restraints/Bumpers: All parking areas adjacent to buffer yards shall be provided with substantial wheel restraints to prevent cars from
damaging landscaped areas, except that cars may overhang a maximum of two feet (2'). (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-11-10: GATEWAY LANDSCAPING:
Gateways are main entrances to the city requiring special attention and additional landscaping to enhance the city's image.
A. Gateways: These areas shall be designated as city gateways for the purposes of meeting the landscaping requirements as specified elsewhere in
this chapter: Highway 30, American Legion Boulevard, Airbase Road, and East 8th North Street.
B. Landscaping Requirements: The following landscaping shall be provided and maintained on all properties in commercial, civic, industrial,
manufactured home parks, or multi-family districts which front a gateway arterial:
1. A landscaped strip at least fifteen feet (15') in width shall be provided immediately behind the sidewalk or future sidewalk along the entire
frontage.
2. Any unpaved area between the sidewalk and street or curb shall be landscaped, if only with grass.
3. Landscaping shall be as set forth in sections 9-11-8 and 9-11-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-11-11: STORMWATER RETENTION LANDSCAPING:
A. Purpose: The purpose of landscaping stormwater retention facilities shall be to promote innovative and effective land and water management
techniques that protect and enhance water quality.
B. General Provisions:
1. All stormwater retention facilities shall be appropriately landscaped in coordination with the city.
2. Landscaping associated with stormwater retention facilities shall be integrated into the overall design of the project.
3. Landscaping shall enhance the overall appearance of the project, prevent erosion and improve water quality of stormwater runoff whenever
possible.
4. Stormwater retention facilities may function as open area for active recreation, trail corridors or habitat enhancement areas if they are designed
appropriately and approved by the city.
5. The use of planting strips and shallow landscaped depressions in parking lots and along roads is encouraged to help trap and remove pollutants
from stormwater runoff.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 206/258
C. Minimum Requirements:
1. All stormwater retention facilities shall be planted with grass appropriate to the function of the area. Areas to be used for active recreation shall be
turf type grass and irrigated with a permanent irrigation system. Areas to be maintained for habitat enhancement shall be seeded to native
grasses and wildflowers. The property owner shall establish a complete, weed free stand of grass. Trail corridors may be seeded with native
grasses if appropriately integrated with adjacent improvements.
2. Landscape improvements shall be designed to enhance the function of the facility. Areas designed for recreation shall include clusters of trees to
provide shade, located so they do not impair the function of the facility.
3. Habitat and water quality enhancement, including wetland plantings in low wet areas is encouraged.
4. All retention facilities shall be owned and maintained by the property owner unless otherwise approved by the city council. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-11-12: PLANT AND MATERIALS FOR RESIDENTIAL, BUFFER YARDS, PARKING LOTS, AND GATEWAY LANDSCAPE
AREAS:
A. General Provisions:
1. Appropriate species of trees and shrubs shall be selected from the city recommended list maintained by the tree committee.
2. All plant material must be sized at time of planting according to the following table:
Type Size
Standard deciduous trees 2 inch caliper, measured 1 foot above the ground
Small ornamental and flowering trees 11/2 inch to 13/4 inch caliper, measured 1 foot above the ground
Evergreen trees 6 feet in height
Shrubs and hedges 5 gallon or adequate size consistent with design intent
3. All landscaping in the proximity of any utility line shall be limited as to size and species. See city recommended list maintained by the tree
committee.
4. Existing trees shall be retained, if possible. They will be counted toward meeting the landscaping requirement.
5. No required landscape areas shall include artificial trees, plants, or carpeting designed as a vegetative substitute.
6. All landscaping elements such as walls, fences, etc., shall comply with this title.
B. Alternative Plan: The administrator may approve alternative plans or designs to allow innovative landscaping, i.e., xeriscape (xeriscape shall include
green shrubs). (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-11-13: ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS:
A. Trash Receptacles: Trash receptacles and/or containers, satellite dishes, and transformers shall be located in the side or rear yards only, and
screened by a six foot (6') high landscaped or fenced area which is free of any advertising, and, if landscaped, will achieve eighty percent (80%)
sight obscurance within three (3) years.
B. Screening Unattractive Features: All development must screen unattractive features which would adversely impact the visual quality of a
neighborhood. Screening requirements are to be per development services department approval. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-11-14: APPROVALS AND PROCESSING:
A. Landscape And Irrigation System Plans: Landscape and irrigation system plans shall be required and shall be submitted to the development services
department:
1. Landscaping and irrigation system plans will be submitted for review prior to issuance of a building permit or final plat, whichever is sooner, to
construct any building and/or parking lot for a commercial, civic, or residential project.
2. Subdivision landscaping and irrigation system plans shall be submitted for review with the final plat.
B. Plan Requirements: Required landscape and irrigation system plans shall be drawn to scale and include:
1. Boundaries and dimensions of the site.
2. All existing trees and any vegetation that is to be retained, identified by species and height.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 207/258
3. The location and design of areas to be landscaped.
4. A legend with the common name for each proposed plant material and/or tree species.
5. The location, number, size, caliper and type of plant material and tree species proposed.
6. Existing and/or proposed berms, identified by shape and gradient.
7. The height and size of shrubs and trees at maturity.
8. The plan for the irrigation system meeting the criteria as set forth in section 9-11-5 of this chapter.
C. Approval Of Plan: The development services department shall review and may approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove any landscape
plan for compliance with the provisions of this title.
D. Certificate Of Occupancy: Landscaping conforming to the approved landscaping plan shall be completed before a certificate of occupancy is issued
by the city.
E. Extension: Upon a request in writing by the owner of the property, the development services department may authorize an extension of time for the
completion of the landscaping and irrigation system of up to six (6) months. If an extension is granted and the owner decides not to use the
landscaping plan that was approved at time of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, a new landscaping plan must be approved before the
installation of any landscaping or before any final landscaping inspection will be performed.
F. Appeals: An appeal of an interpretation or administrative determination may be taken first to the planning and zoning commission and then to the city
council in accordance with this code.
G. Enforcement: Failure to comply with this requirement shall be considered a violation of this title and shall be subject to any and all applicable
enforcement procedures and penalties. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-11-15: MAINTENANCE:
The continued maintenance of all required landscaping materials shall be a requirement of this title and shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
property. This requirement shall run with the property and is binding upon all future property owners. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
Chapter 12
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS FOR DISTRICT USES
9-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to alleviate or prevent congestion of public rights of way so as to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by
establishing minimum requirements for the provision of off street parking and circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic in accordance with the
utilization of various sites. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-12-2: PARKING OVERLAY PO ZONE:
A. Purpose: Generally, businesses in the downtown commercial core C-2 area of the city do not meet current off street parking requirements. In order to
preserve and protect the downtown core businesses it is the purpose of this chapter to allow a deviation for the number of parking spaces required
in the parking ordinance of this title, for the off street parking requirements. For that purpose, the parking overlay zone is created.
B. Parking Overlay PO Zone:
1. Description Of Overlay Zone: The following described real property located in the city of Mountain Home, county of Elmore, state of Idaho, is
hereby declared to be a part of the parking overlay PO zone:
Begin at the intersection of South Main Street and East 3rd South Street (see asterisk), then proceed in a northeasterly direction along East 3rd
South Street to the alley between South 3rd East Street and South 4th East Street; then turn left and proceed along this alley in a northwesterly
direction to East 5th North Street; turn left on East 5th North Street and proceed in a southwesterly direction to North 3rd East Street; proceed
northwesterly along North 3rd East Street to the alley that runs behind Star Dust Plaza; proceed along this alley in a southwesterly direction to
North 2nd East Street; turn right on North 2nd East Street and proceed in a northwesterly direction until the end of the Albertsons parking lot; turn
left and proceed in a southwesterly direction to the Union Pacific rail road tracks; turn left and proceed in a southeasterly direction along the rail
road tracks to the intersection of the rail road tracks and East 5th North Street; turn left at East 5th North Street and proceed in a northeasterly
direction to North Main Street; turn right on North Main Street and proceed in a southeasterly direction along North Main Street and then along
South Main Street to the intersection of South Main Street and East 3rd South Street, the point of beginning.
2. Reduction Of Existing Off Street Parking/Loading: Off street parking and loading areas now existing in the parking overlay PO zone shall not be
reduced or eliminated due to the expansion, enlargement or reconstruction of an existing building in the parking overlay PO zone, except when
such reduction complies with the current off street parking regulations of this title. The conversion of a residential use to multiple dwellings or
commercial shall require compliance with this chapter with regard to the number of parking spaces required.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 208/258
3. Existing Commercial Buildings: A commercial building now existing in the parking overlay PO zone that does not comply with the current city off
street parking regulations, of this chapter, that is destroyed by fire or other causality, when rebuilt, shall provide, as a minimum, the same amount
of off street parking area or spaces and loading spaces that existed prior to the destruction of the building.
4. New Buildings: Any new building or land use on a parcel of land in the parking overlay PO zone shall conform to this chapter.
5. Use Change: The use of commercial buildings within the parking overlay PO zone may be changed from one use to another without having to
comply with this chapter.
6. New Or Expanded Parking Area: When a commercial business expands or increases the size of its existing parking area (customer, employee or
sales) or any new parking areas within the parking overlay zone are constructed, the requirements of this chapter shall be met. (Ord. 1655, 12-27-
2016)
9-12-3: SCHEDULE C, PARKING OVERLAY MAP:
(Ord. 1655, 12-27-2016)
9-12-4: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS:
A. General Requirements For All Districts:
1. Applicability: No land use, building or structure shall be commenced, erected, substantially altered, or changed to a use which increases traffic
and/or the need for increased parking, unless permanently maintained access driveways and off street parking and loading spaces have been
provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such parking space shall be reserved for the sole use of the occupants of the building
or lots, their employees and their customers.
2. Expansion And Enlargement:
a. Whenever any building is enlarged in height or ground coverage, off street parking shall be provided for the expansion or enlargement in
accordance with the requirements of this section.
b. When a building and/or use is substantially altered, the parking requirements of this section shall apply to the total building (both the addition
and preexisting building).
c. No additional parking spaces need to be provided in case of enlargement or use change, where the number of parking spaces required for such
expansion or use change is less than ten percent (10%) of the parking spaces required for the building and/or use before enlargement.
An accumulative total of building permits for enlargements over a five (5) year period which exceeds the ten percent (10%) shall require the
additional parking.
d. Already established required parking shall not be eliminated unless otherwise provided for.
3. Existing Facilities: Accessory off street parking or loading facilities that are located on the same lot as the building or use served and that were in
existence on the effective date hereof, or were provided voluntarily after such effective date, shall not thereafter be reduced below, or, if already
less than, shall not further be reduced below, the requirements of this chapter for a similar new building or use.
B. Location Of Off Street Parking:
1. Access: Each required off street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and
efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space and shall conform to the minimum standards as established by the city. All off street
parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic
movement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 209/258
2. Eliminating On Street Parking: Whenever a developer eliminates on street parking spaces by constructing a public or private trafficway, he shall
provide, in addition to the off street parking requirements of this chapter, off street parking equal to the amount of on street parking so eliminated.
3. Location/Residential Off Street Parking: Parking spaces accessory to dwellings shall be located on the same lot as the use served and shall not
be stacked (one behind the other) but shall be located within a garage or side by side. Residential driveways shall be located as far from a corner
as is possible to eliminate vision problems, and the driveway shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') in length from the garage/carport to the
sidewalk.
An exception that would allow the parking to be stacked may be allowed by the development services department for infill development in the
original townsite or when special circumstances arise due to extreme narrowness of the lot. Special efforts shall be made to fit the building design
to the narrowness of the lot.
4. Commercial Accessory Off Street Parking: Required parking spaces shall be within two hundred feet (200') of the entrance to the establishment
being served by said parking spaces or as otherwise provided for in this chapter. However, no parking spaces accessory to a use in a commercial
or industrial district shall be located in a residential district except that private or free off street parking, which is accessory to such
commercial/industrial uses, may be allowed by conditional use permit. Any such parking must be within two hundred feet (200') of the use which it
serves and meet all code requirements.
5. Joint Parking Facilities: Joint parking facilities may be utilized by commercial, industrial or public use establishments for up to seventy five percent
(75%) of the required parking, provided such parking spaces are within two hundred feet (200'). The joint use of parking facilities may be permitted
in cases where major parking demands occur on different days of the week or during different hours, if the owner of the off site parking spaces
agrees in writing that any subsequent sale or change in the use of such property will not interfere with the joint use of the parking facilities. The
parties concerned in such joint use of off street parking facilities shall submit a written agreement to be approved, as to form and content, by the
city attorney and such document, when approved as conforming to the provisions of this chapter, shall be recorded in the office of the county
recorder.
6. Parking In Setback Area: When abutting another commercial use, parking shall be permitted within the setback area. When abutting residential
uses, parking shall not be permitted in the setback area.
7. Wheel Blocks: Whenever a parking lot extends to a property line, wheel blocks or other suitable devices shall be installed to prevent any part of a
parked vehicle from extending beyond the property line.
8. Minimum Distance And Setbacks: Any parking area shall be separated from adjoining land uses by acceptably designed buffer yard(s).
9. Parking In Residential Front Yard Setback: No parking shall be permitted in a front yard other than on a designated hard surface driveway which
serves the dwelling unit. Vehicles shall not overhang or infringe on public rights of way.
C. Use Of Parking Facilities:
1. Residential Off Street Parking: Under no circumstances shall required parking facilities, which are accessory to residential structures, be used for
the storage of a commercial vehicle other than that owned by the occupant of the residential lot, and in no case shall large commercial trucks,
buses, semis, etc., be parked or stored on the property.
2. Parking And Storage Of Certain Vehicles: Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates, or inoperable, shall not
be parked or stored in the public right of way or on any residentially zoned private property other than in a completely enclosed building.
3. Abandoned Or Wrecked Vehicles: See title 6 of this code.
4. Boat, Trailer, Overweight Commercial Vehicles: See title 6 of this code.
D. Loading Zones: Parking spaces are not to be combined with loading zones.
1. Loading Zones: Any retail, hospital, school, wholesale, distributing or manufacturing establishment shall have a clearly marked loading zone
adjacent to or on the premises of such establishment. Loading zones shall be located and arranged in a manner which creates no interference
with the vision triangle or the public use of streets and alleys. One loading zone, not less than ten feet by twenty five feet (10' x 25'), shall be
provided for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area.
2. School Bus Loading: Off street bus loading area shall be provided, separate and apart from regular parking, for loading and unloading buses only.
3. Uses Not Specified/Requirements Not Met: The parking space requirements for buildings and uses not specifically set forth herein shall be based
upon the requirements for the most comparable building or use specified herein. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-12-5: DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Parking Layout: Whenever off street parking is required by this code, a parking layout drawing shall be submitted and approved by the city engineer.
The layout shall show all required improvements, access aisles, entrances and exits to the site, the layout shall be drawn to scale, show all
dimensions and indicate all information necessary to determine the employee and customer parking required. The completion of the parking
improvements, according to the plan, shall be required before a certificate of occupancy is issued or one hundred ten percent (110%) bonding shall
be required.
B. Design/Materials: Parking lots, parking spaces/areas and access driveways shall be graded to properly drain off all surface water and paved with
portland cement concrete or asphaltic concrete pavement to the sidewalk/curb of the adjoining public way or abutting alleyway.
1. Alley Access: When an alleyway that abuts a residential zone is allowed to be used as ingress or egress for multi-dwellings (3 or more), offices,
business or public parking, that portion of the alley used to access the parking shall be paved with concrete or asphaltic material by the developer.
The alleys shall be maintained by the city, if a public right of way, or the developer or property owner, if private.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 210/258
2. Backing Into Public Trafficway Prohibited: Backing a vehicle from an off street parking space directly into a public trafficway creates a traffic
hazard. Parking layouts requiring this maneuver shall not be allowed, except for residential uses exiting onto a local street or a street with a low
traffic volume.
C. Handicap Parking: There shall be one handicapped parking space for every twenty five (25) spaces or fraction thereof. Said handicap space shall be
fourteen feet (14') wide, open on one side to allow room for individuals in wheelchairs or individuals requiring the aid of a mechanical device to
egress and ingress from a motor vehicle on a level surface and be located convenient to a door which accesses the building. The space shall be
signed for handicapped use only.
D. Dimensions Of Parking Space/Driveways: Each parking space shall be not less than nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18'), with direct access to a
public street or alley. Parking spaces shall not be placed one behind the other unless the case being considered is infill and shall be at the discretion
of the development services department.
Driveways shall have a minimum length of twenty feet (20') measured from the property line and shall not infringe upon the vision triangle.
E. Stormwater Management: The management of stormwater for all development, including, but not limited to, parking lots, subdivisions, commercial,
industrial, residential, recreational, and public shall conform to the city of Mountain Home stormwater management policy/performance standards, of
this title.
F. Striping: Parking lot spaces shall be marked with striping which outlines each parking space and designates direction of traffic on the concrete or
asphalt surface and shall be maintained by the property owner.
G. Landscaping/Screening: See chapter 11 of this title.
H. Lights: Parking lot light pole height shall be no more than the maximum height allowed for buildings in the zoning district in which the parking lot is
located. Lights used to illuminate parking lots shall be arranged to reflect lighting away from adjoining premises in a residential district. Such lighting
shall be maintained in a safe condition by the property owner. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-12-6: REQUIRED NUMBER OF SPACES:
The minimum number of paved, off street parking spaces required shall be as set forth in the following. All of the required paved parking spaces shall be
constructed of concrete or asphalt. After the required number of paved off street parking spaces has been met, any additional spaces may be
constructed of the "hard surface" material as defined in section 9-3-2, "Definitions Enumerated", of this title. (For the purpose of this section, "floor area"
shall mean the sum of the area of each building story, including basements. To calculate the area of each building story, the measurement shall be
taken from the outside wall, excluding architectural features. In multiple use buildings, floor area shall be calculated on the total area used for each
occupancy. "Floor and display area" shall mean the floor area plus any area outside the building used to display merchandise.) (Ord. 1647, 2-8-2016)
REQUIRED NUMBER OF SPACES
Use Parking Spaces
Indoor recreation facilities:
Bowling alleys 7 per alley
Dance halls, skating rinks, game centers 1 per each 200 square feet of floor area
Golf courses 5 per each hole, plus 1 space for each 100 square feet of floor area for an eating
establishment
Racquetball, handball/tennis courts 3.5 per court
Theaters containing 2 or more screens 1 per 5 seats
Others not defined As determined by the development services department
Manufacturing:
Manufacturing 1 per each 3 employees at maximum employment, plus 1 parking space for each
vehicle necessary for conducting business
Public assembly:
Places of public/private assembly 1 per each 4 seats or 1 for each 28 square feet of largest multipurpose, gym or
auditorium, whichever is greater
Kindergartens, daycare, nursery 2 per every 12 children, plus 1 per each vehicle necessary for conducting business. Off
street loading areas if required
Elementary schools 2 per each teaching station or 1 for each 50 square feet of largest multipurpose,
auditorium, whichever is greater. Loading zones as required by this chapter
Junior high/high schools 1 per each 4 persons (students, teachers, staff) at maximum capacity or 1 per each 28
square feet of largest multipurpose, auditorium, gymnasium, whichever is greater.
Loading zones as required by this chapter
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 211/258
Residential use:
Boarding houses/bed and breakfast 1 for each guest bedroom
Dwellings 2.0 per dwelling unit:
R-1/R-2 - Requires 2 covered spaces
R-3 - Requires as a minimum that 1 space be covered
R-4 - Requires 2 spaces neither of which shall be required to be covered
Manufactured/mobile homes 2.0 per mobile home
Located on individual lots, shall meet the standards of zoning district in which located
Transient lodging 1 per unit
Retail trade uses:
Bulky retail, farm equipment, motor vehicles,
building, materials, farm and garden supplies,
home furnishings and equipment
1 for each 600 square feet of sales storage and display area
General retail establishments 1 per each 300 square feet of sales, storage and display area
Restaurants and fast food 1 per each 100 square feet
Services:
Funeral homes 15 spaces, plus 5 for each area which can be used as a funeral parlor. Must be on the
premises of the funeral home
Gasoline service station, fuel and repair floor 1 per each 300 square feet of total area
Hospitals 1.5 spaces for each hospital bed, plus loading zones, as specified under this chapter
Medical office (dental, eye, ear, etc.) 1 per each 300 square feet of total floor area, plus 1 for each 2 full time employees
Nursing homes 1 space for each 4 beds
Services (governmental, legal, finance, etc.) 1 per each 300 square feet of floor area, plus 1 space for each vehicle necessary for
conducting business
Utility companies/business 1 per each 200 square feet of total floor area, plus 1 per each vehicle necessary for
conducting business
Wholesale trade uses:
Wholesale, distributing, warehousing 1 per each 3 employees at maximum employment, plus 1 parking space for each
vehicle necessary for conducting business
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015; amd. Ord. 1647, 2-8-2016)
Chapter 13
SIGN REGULATIONS
9-13-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the city by regulating advertising signs of all
types. This chapter creates the legal framework for signage regulation that is intended to facilitate an easy and agreeable communication between
people and to reduce sign or advertising distractions, obstructions and visual clutter that may contribute to traffic accidents and the aesthetic
appearance of the community. It recognizes the need for a well maintained and attractive community and the need for adequate and professional
business identification, advertising and communication. It is further intended to protect property values. Signs that reflect sensitivity to human scale and
appearance are encouraged. (See sign definitions in chapter 3 of this title.) (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-13-2: ALLOWED SIGNS:
Signs for which a permit is not required:
A. Directional/Institutional Sign: Directional or institutional signs which do not in any way advertise a business, signs identifying restrooms, public
telephones, walkways or signs providing direction, such as parking lot entrance and exit signs, and those of similar nature.
B. Governmental Sign: Governmental signs for the control of traffic or other regulatory purposes, or signs of public service companies indicating danger,
which are erected by or on the order of a public officer in the performance of public duty.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 212/258
C. Flags, Emblems, Etc.: For the purpose of this chapter, the word "sign" does not include the flag or emblem of any nation, organization of nations,
state, city, religious, fraternal, or civic organization; also, merchandise and pictures or models of products or services incorporated in a window
display, works of art which in no way identify a product, or scoreboards located on athletic fields.
D. Holiday Decorations/Signs: Holiday decorations and signs of a primarily decorative nature, clearly incidental and customary and commonly
associated with any national, local or religious holiday; provided that such signs shall be displayed for a period of not more than sixty (60)
consecutive days nor more than sixty (60) days in any one year. Such signs shall provide that a clear vision triangle is maintained.
E. Addressing Numbers/Mailboxes:
1. House Numbers: House/addressing numbers which are no more than six inches (6") and not less than three inches (3") in height and placed on
the building so as to be visible from the street. House numbers may also be painted on the curb.
2. Mailboxes: Mailboxes shall bear only the name and address of the occupant or legally conducted business, except as limited by the zoning district
encompassing the use.
3. Commercial Buildings: Building/addressing numbers are to be no more than twelve inches (12") and not less than six inches (6") in height.
F. Interior Signs: Interior signs located within the interior of any building or structure that are not visible from the public right of way.
G. No Trespassing/Dumping Signs: "No Trespassing" or "No Dumping" signs, not to exceed one and one-half (11/2) square feet in area per sign and not
exceeding four (4) in number per lot.
H. Memorial Signs: Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part of
the building.
I. Occupant Sign: Occupant signs not to exceed one for each dwelling unit indicating the name of the occupant, or the location or identification of a
home or professional office, except as limited by the zoning district encompassing the use.
J. Picket Sign: Picket signs.
K. Plaques/Nameplate: Plaques or nameplate signs of not more than two (2) square feet in area which are fastened flat against the face of the building.
L. Political Signs: Political and campaign signs, provided that such signs shall not be posted in any place or in any manner that is destructive to public
property upon posting or removal. No political sign shall be posted in a public right of way nor shall any such sign be posted on a utility pole.
M. Public Notice: Public notices posted by public officials in the performance of their duties.
N. Public Signs: Public signs required or specifically authorized for a public purpose by any law, statute or ordinance, which may be of any type,
number, area, height above grade, location, illumination or animation as required by the law, statute or ordinance under which the signs are erected.
O. Real Estate Signs: Real estate and open house signs (1 only) on any lot or parcel, provided it is removed within seven (7) days after the sale, rental,
or lease has been consummated.
P. Signboards/A-Frame (Double Sided): A-frame signboards shall be allowed as an accessory use in commercial and industrial zones. They shall be
professionally done and not exceed six (6) square feet in size (1 side measured) and shall be placed so as to not impair pedestrian or vehicular
traffic in the public right of way. One per business.
Q. Temporary Sign: Temporary signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in area pertaining to outdoor temporary sales, grand openings, drives or events
of civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organizations, provided that said signs are posted for a period of time not exceeding sixty (60) days.
If a sign display area is permanent but the message displayed is subject to periodic changes, that sign shall not be considered as temporary. A
mobile or portable sign shall not be considered a temporary sign or used for such purpose.
Signs advertising warning or danger, or announcing the site of future buildings or otherwise identifying or informing the viewer of a condition, a
situation or event of known temporary nature, shall be considered, for purposes of this section, as temporary signs, These temporary signs shall be
removed by the owner of the sign or by the owner of the premises upon which the sign is located at the expiration of the time for which the sign is
allowed or within sixty (60) days.
R. Warning Signs: Signs warning the public of the existence of danger, but containing no advertising material, of a size as may be necessary, to be
removed upon subsidence of danger.
S. Window Sign: Window signs in commercial or industrial districts, provided that permanent signs shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the window
area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 213/258
T. Portable Signs: Portable signs (on a chassis) designed to be relocated shall be placed as to not impair pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the public right
of way. There shall be only one such sign per business. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-13-3: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following types of signs are expressly prohibited in all districts, except as otherwise provided by this code:
A. Public Area Signs: Signs placed on any street right of way, curb, sidewalk, post, pole, power pole, hydrant, bridge or tree, except official public
notices posted by a public officer.
B. Signs Resembling Traffic Control/Emergency Vehicles: Signs which, by reason of their size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of
illumination may be confused with or construed as a traffic control sign, signal, or device, or the light of an emergency or road equipment vehicle; or
which obstruct the visibility of any traffic or street sign or signal device.
C. Off Premises Signs And Billboard Signs: Signs advertising a business which is conducted elsewhere. This includes billboard signs. (See "off
premises sign" for permitted off premises and billboard signs in chapter 3 of this title, and section 9-13-5, "Sign Regulations Use Chart", of this
chapter.)
D. Animated Signs: A sign with action or motion, flashing, color changes requiring electrical energy, electronic or manufactured sources of supply, but
not including wind actuated elements such as flags, banners, or specialty items. This definition does not include public service signs such as time
and temperature units. (See definition of "animated sign" in chapter 3 of this title, and section 9-13-5, "Sign Regulations Use Chart", of this chapter.)
E. Roof Signs: See chapter 3, "Definitions", of this title. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-13-4: SCHEDULE OF SIGNS PERMITTED IN ZONING DISTRICTS:
Signs for uses in the zoning districts of the city shall conform with the dimensional, locational, and other standards specified in section 9-13-5, schedule
D of this chapter. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-13-5: SIGN REGULATIONS USE CHART:
SCHEDULE D6
Maximum
Area
Of Signage
Allowed
Maximum
Height
Allowed
Location
Of
Sign On
Property3
Number
Allowed
Illuminated
Animated
(Not
Revolving)
Projection
(May
Not
Project
Into
Public
Right Of
Way)
Clearance
Comments
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 And Limited Office
On premises
signs: rent,
lease, sale
4 sq . ft. 4' 5' behind
property
line
1 per street
frontage
None None None n/a May be
freestanding
or fascia
Personal
nameplate
2 sq . ft. n/a Fascia 1 per
dwelling unit
None None 3" None
Construction
sign
(freestanding
sign or fascia)
32 sq. ft. per
sign
6' 5' behind
property
line
1 per street
frontage
None None n/a None
PUD or
subdivision
identification
sign
(monument)
32 sq . ft. 4' 5' behind
property
line
1 per street
frontage
Indirect or
floodlight
None n/a n/a Monument
type
encouraged
(rock, stone,
brick and
landscaping)
Approved
conditional use
or limited office
6 sq. ft. (1
sign)
Wall: No
higher than
the walls or
freestanding
Face of
wall 5'
behind
1 per
building
None None 3" (fascia)
n/a Monument
type
encouraged
(rock, stone,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 214/258
Monument: 4'
property
line
brick and
landscaping)
Public/church
schools/hospital
uses
By
conditional
use (site plan
and drawings
required) up
to 35 sq. ft.
Wall: No
higher than
the walls
Monument:
Up to 8'
Pole sign: 10'
Schools and
hospitals only
20'
5' behind
property
line
10' behind
property
line
As per
conditional
use permit
Indirect or
floodlight
None None n/a Freestanding
signs
encouraged
(rock, stone,
brick and
landscaping)
Off premises
signs
Conditional
use permit
n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
C-1 Neighborhood/Commercial
On premises
signs: rent,
lease, sale
8 sq . ft. 6' 5' behind
property
line
1 per street
frontage
None None None n/a May be
freestanding
or fascia
Personal
nameplate
2 sq . ft. n/a Face of
wall
1 per
dwelling unit
None None 3" n/a None
Construction 32 sq. ft. per
sign
10' 5' behind
property
line
1 per street
frontage
None None n/a None
Fascia or wall1 5% of
building face
(sq. ft.)
fronting street
Not to
exceed
building
height
Fascia 1 per street
frontage
Indirect or
internal
35% of
sign area
18" from
wall
8'
pedestrian
None
Canopy
(awning)1
50% of
canopy
Not to
exceed wall
height
On wall of
building
fronting
street
1 per street
frontage
Indirect or
internal
None 2' 8'
pedestrian,
15'
vehicular
None
Freestanding (1
only)2:
Pole
or
1 sq. ft. per
linear foot of
building front
(maximum 30
sq. ft.)
20' 10' behind
property
line
(center of
sign)
1 per
business
Indirect or
internal
35% of
sign area
None 8'
pedestrian,
15'
vehicular
Monument
encouraged
(rock, stone,
brick, and
landscaping)
Monument 20 sq. ft. Up to 8' 5' behind
property
line
PUD/subdivision
identification
sign
(monument)
32 sq . ft. 4' n/a 1 per street
frontage
Indirect or
floodlight
None Not over
public right
of way
n/a Monument
encouraged
(rock, stone,
brick, and
landscaping)
Public/quasipublic
Conditional
use
Fascia: No
higher than
the walls
Freestanding:
20'
Behind
property
line
n/a n/a n/a Not over
public right
of way
8'
pedestrian,
15'
vehicular
Monument
encouraged
(rock, stone,
brick, and
landscaping)
Off premises
and billboard
signs
Conditional
use permit
n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a None
C-2 Central Business District
On premises
signs: rent,
lease, sale
16 sq. ft. per
sign
6' 5' behind
property
line or
fascia
1 per street
frontage
None None n/a n/a May be
freestanding
or fascia
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 215/258
Nameplate 2 sq . ft. Face of
wall
1 per unit None None 3" n/a n/a
Construction 32 sq. ft. per
sign
10' 5' behind
property
line
1 per street
frontage
None None n/a n/a May be
freestanding
or fascia
Fascia or wall1
or
8% of
building face
(sq. ft.) on
street front
Not to
exceed
building
height
Fascia 1 per street
frontage
Indirect or
internal
35% of
sign area
18" from
wall
8'
pedestrian,
15'
vehicular
None
Projecting sign1
20 sq . ft. Not to
exceed
building
height
On wall of
building
fronting
street
1 per street
frontage
Indirect or
internal
None 3' 8'
pedestrian,
15'
vehicular
None
Canopy
(awning)
50% of
canopy
Not to
exceed wall
height
On wall of
building
fronting
street
1 per street
frontage
Indirect or
internal
None 3' 8'
pedestrian,
15'
vehicular
None
Under canopy
sign
12" by 4'
wide
Suspended 12" below
canopy
1 per street
frontage
Indirect or
internal
None n/a 8'
pedestrian
None
Freestanding (1
only)2:
Pole
or
1 sq. ft. per
linear foot of
building front
(maximum 40
sq. ft.)
20' 10' behind
property
line
(center of
sign)
1 per
business
Indirect or
internal
35% of
sign area
None 8'
pedestrian,
15'
vehicular
Monument
signs
encouraged
(masonry
and
landscaping)
Monument Maximum 20
sq. ft.
Up to 8' 5' behind
property
line
Indirect,
internal or
floodlight
Alley
signs/fascia
0.025% of
building face
(sq. ft.) on
alley front
Not to
exceed wall
height
Face of
wall
1 per
business
Indirect or
internal
None May not
project
over public
right of
way
8'
pedestrian,
15'
vehicular
None
Public/quasipublic
Conditional
use
n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
Directional
business sign
6 sq. ft. n/a 5' behind
property
line
3 per
business
Indirect None None 8'
pedestrian,
15'
vehicular
None
Off premises
and billboard
signs
Conditional
use permit
n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a None
C-3 General Commercial District
On premises
signs: rent,
lease, sale
16 sq. ft. per
sign
10' 5' behind
property
line or
fascia
1 per street
frontage
None None Not over
public right
of way
n/a May be
freestanding
or fascia
Nameplate 2 sq. ft. n/a Fascia 1 per unit None None 3" n/a None
Construction 32 sq. ft. per
sign
10' 5' behind
property
line
1 per street
frontage
None None n/a n/a May be
freestanding
or fascia
Fascia or wall1 8% of
building face
(sq. ft.) on
street front
Not to
exceed
building
height
Fascia 1 per street
frontage
Indirect or
internal
35% of
sign area
18" from
wall
8'
pedestrian,
15'
vehicular
None
Freestanding (1
only)4:
Pole
or
1 sq. ft. per
linear foot of
building front
(maximum 60
sq. ft.)
25' 10' behind
property
line
(center of
sign)
1 per
business
conditional
use permit
required for
2 or more
Internal,
indirect or
direct
floodlight
35% of
sign area
Not over
public right
of way
8'
pedestrian,
15'
vehicular
Encourages
rock, brick,
stone and
landscape
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 216/258
Monument Maximum 20
sq. ft.
Up to 8' 5' behind
property
line
I-84 frontage
freestanding
400 sq . ft. 40' 100'
behind
property
line
1 per I-84
frontage
Internal,
indirect or
floodlight
100% of
sign area
Not over
public right
of way
n/a None
PUD/subdivision
identification
sign
(monument)
32 sq . ft. Up to 8' 5' behind
property
line
1 per street
frontage
Indirect or
internal
None Not over
public right
of way
n/a Encourages
rock, brick,
stone and
landscape
Public/quasipublic
Conditional
use
n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Encourages
rock, brick,
stone and
landscape
Directional
business sign
6 sq . ft. n/a 5' behind
property
line
3 per
business
Indirect None None 8'
pedestrian,
15'
vehicular
None
Off premises
and billboard
signs
Conditional
use permit
n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a None
C-4 And I-1 Heavy Commercial/Light Industrial
On premises
signs: rent,
lease, sale
32 sq. ft. per
sign
10' 5' behind
property
line or
fascia
1 per street
frontage
None None Not over
public right
of way
n/a May be
freestanding
or fascia
Nameplate 2 sq . ft. n/a Fascia or
wall
1 per unit None None 3" n/a None
Construction 64 sq. ft. per
sign
10' 5' behind
property
line
1 per street
frontage
None None n/a n/a May be
freestanding
or fascia
Fascia or wall1 8% of
building face
(sq. ft.) on
street front
Not to
exceed
building
height
Fascia 1 per street
frontage
Indirect or
internal
None 18" from
wall
8'
pedestrian,
15'
vehicular
None
Freestanding (1
only)4:
Pole
or
1 sq. ft. per
linear foot of
building front
(maximum 75
sq. ft.)
25' 10' behind
property
line
(center
sign)
1 per
business
conditional
use permit
required for
2 or more
Indirect,
internal or
floodlight
35% of
sign area
Not over
public right
of way
8'
pedestrian,
15'
vehicular
Encourages
rock, brick,
stone and
landscape
Monument Maximum 30
sq. ft.
Up to 8' 5' behind
property
line
I-84 frontage
freestanding
400 sq . ft. 40' 50' behind
property
line
1 per I-84
frontage
Indirect,
internal or
floodlight
100% of
sign area
Not over
public right
of way
n/a None
PUD/subdivision
identification
signs
32 sq . ft. Up to 8' 5' behind
property
line
1 per street
frontage
Indirect or
internal
None Not over
public right
of way
n/a Encourages
masonry and
landscaping
Public/quasipublic
Conditional
use
n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Encourages
masonry and
landscaping
Directional
business sign
6 sq . ft. n/a 5' behind
property
line
3 per
business
Indirect None None 8'
pedestrian,
15'
vehicular
None
Off premises
and billboard
signs
Conditional
use permit
n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a None
I-2 Heavy Industrial
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 217/258
On premises
signs: rent,
lease, sale
32 sq. ft. per
sign
10' 5' behind
property
line
1 per street
frontage
None None n/a n/a None
Construction 64 sq . ft. 10' n/a 1 per street
frontage
None None n/a n/a None
Fascia or wall1 10% of
building face
(sq. ft.) on
street front
Not to
exceed
building
height
Fascia or
wall
1 per street/
highway
frontage
Indirect or
internal
None 2' from
wall
8'
pedestrian,
15'
vehicular
None
Freestanding (1
only)5:
Pole
or
1.5 sq. ft. per
linear foot of
building front
(maximum 80
sq. ft.)
25' 10' behind
property
line
(center
sign)
1 per
business
conditional
use permit
required for
2 or more
Internal,
indirect or
floodlight
35% of
sign area
Not over
public right
of way
8'
pedestrian,
15'
vehicular
Encourages
the use of
masonry and
landscaping
Monument Maximum 40
sq. ft.
Up to 8' 5' behind
property
line
I-84 frontage
freestanding
400 sq . ft. 40' 50' behind
property
line
1 per I-84
frontage
Internal,
indirect or
floodlight
100% may
not revolve
Not over
public right
of way
n/a None
PUD/subdivision
identification
signs
32 sq . ft. Up to 8' 5' behind
property
line
1 per street
frontage
Internal,
indirect or
floodlight
None Not over
public right
of way
n/a Encourages
the use of
masonry and
landscaping
Public/quasipublic
Conditional
use
n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Encourages
the use of
masonry and
landscaping
Directional
business sign
6 sq . ft. n/a 5' behind
property
line
3 per
business
Internal,
indirect or
floodlight
None None 8'
pedestrian,
15'
vehicular
None
Off premises
and billboard
signs
Conditional
use permit
n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a None
Notes:
1. When a combination of signs is used, only 50 percent of the total combined square footage is allowed. Sign area may be divided into 1 or more signs
for that frontage, but may not exceed the total square feet allowed and square footage may not be transferred from 1 street to another.
2. Mall or grouping of businesses shall be permitted 1 group identification sign (no individual freestanding pole business signs). Maximum size: 60
square feet.
3. Temporary sign (see section 9-13-2 of this chapter).
4. Mall or grouping of businesses shall be permitted 1 group identification sign (no individual freestanding pole business signs). Maximum size: 100
square feet.
5. Mall or grouping of businesses shall be permitted 1 group identification sign (no individual freestanding pole business signs). Maximum size: 150
square feet.
6. No signs allowed in the vision triangle. Sign area may be divided into 1 or more signs for that frontage, but may not exceed the total square feet
allowed and square footage may not be transferred from 1 street to another. All other signs prohibited unless otherwise provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-13-6: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
In conjunction with all other adopted codes, the following requirements shall apply to signs in all zoning districts:
A. Area Allowed/Height/Setback, Etc.: As shown on the sign regulations use chart, section 9-13-5 of this chapter.
B. Projection: No sign or sign foundation shall encroach or project beyond the property line except as otherwise provided for in this code. The owner of
a sign allowed to project over a public way shall relocate the sign immediately upon written notification by the city of a modification to the public way.
C. Alley Frontage: Where the rear of a business has frontage on an alley, it may have one sign in the alley. Signage shall be 0.025 percent of the
building face on the alley. Such sign may not project over the public right of way and shall be a fascia sign.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 218/258
D. Abandoned Signs: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any on premises sign located on property which becomes vacant and unoccupied
for a period of six (6) months or more shall be deemed to have been abandoned and the sign permit shall become automatically void. An abandoned
sign is prohibited and shall be removed by the owner of the sign or owner of the premises.
E. Community Information Signs/Banners: An officially designated sign may be illuminated and is limited to the display of information of interest to the
general community regarding scheduled public events and public activities or provides historical or other special information of public interest and
shall contain no advertising material. Allowed only by approval of the city council.
F. Signs Adjacent To Residentially Zoned Areas: Any sign or structure located on a lot which is adjacent to a residentially zoned lot shall meet the
setback requirements of the adjoining residential district. In any event, no sign surface or area facing the side or rear lot line of an abutting
residentially zoned lot shall be located within fifty feet (50') of such side or rear lot line. Distance shall refer to the linear measurement in either
direction on the street to which the sign faces.
G. Vision Triangle: Signs at railroad and street intersections shall not be permitted in the "vision clearance/triangle", as defined in chapter 3 of this title,
except at a height of less than three feet (3') and greater than twelve feet (12') to the bottom of a sign display surface or sign area. Signs classified
as wall signs are permitted. Sign structures above three feet (3') in height having a projected width of greater than one foot (1') shall not be permitted
in the vision triangle.
H. Public Parking Lot Accessory Signs: In all districts, one identification sign for each street frontage of the parking lot is permitted. Each sign shall not
exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area and shall not exceed the sign height for the district in which it is located. The sign shall not be located closer
than five feet (5') to any street property line unless attached to a building. All signs shall be stationary, and, if lighted, may be indirectly or internally
illuminated only. Attached signs shall not be roof signs.
I. Planned Unit Development (PUD) Sign: All shopping centers and planned unit developments shall develop a signage plan as part of their preliminary
application stating the size, location, shape, structure and need for signs within the project.
J. Sign Maintenance And Repair: Nothing in this chapter shall relieve the owner or user of any sign, or owner of property on which a sign is located,
from maintaining the sign in a safe condition and in a state of good repair.
K. Canopy Signs: Canopy signs shall not project more than three feet (3') from the wall of the building.
L. Wall Signs: Wall signs shall not extend beyond the edge of any wall or other surface to which they are mounted.
M. Group Identification Signs: Only one such sign shall be allowed and shall not be counted in the total square footage allowed per business. No sales
or price information shall be permitted.
N. Message Center Signs:
1. Maximum Size: Shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet.
2. Spacing: None within one thousand feet (1,000') in any direction of another such sign or within five hundred feet (500') of another such sign on the
intersecting streets.
3. Height: Sign must be compatible with building heights of existing neighborhood and not intrude on the visual quality of a public open space such
as a square, plaza, courtyard, etc.
4. Indication Of Sponsorship: May not exceed five (5) square feet identifying businesses or individuals. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-13-7: PROCEDURES FOR SIGNS:
A. Permits Required: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to change, erect, construct, enlarge, move or
convert any sign in the city, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a sign permit. A permit shall not be required for a change of copy
on any sign, nor for the repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance or repair of a legal sign or sign structure for which a permit has previously
been issued in accordance with this sign code, provided that the sign or sign structure is not altered in any way.
A fee based upon the contractor's total bid value for the sign and installation of said sign shall be charged.
B. Application For Permit: The application for a permit shall be accompanied by such information as may be required to assure compliance with all
appropriate laws and regulations of the city.
An application for a sign which does not comply with all appropriate laws and regulations of the city shall be denied, stating the reasons for denial.
The city shall, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit when it is found that the permit was issued on the basis of fraud or misstatement of fact.
C. Effect Of Issuance: No permit for a sign issued hereunder shall be deemed to constitute permission or authorization to maintain an unlawful sign nor
shall any permit issued hereunder constitute a defense in an action to abate an unlawful sign. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 219/258
9-13-8: ADMINISTRATION:
The building inspector or designee is hereby empowered to inspect and ensure compliance with the provisions of this sign code. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-13-9: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
If any other provisions of adopted codes conflict with the provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-13-10: NONCONFORMING SIGNS/BILLBOARDS:
Any nonconforming signs in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or LO/R zones shall be removed within a period of six (6) months from the date and enactment of this
chapter.
Any nonconforming signs in C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, I-1 and I-2 zones may remain with normal maintenance. An existing nonconforming sign shall be
maintained in good structural condition or shall be removed or replaced with the same size or smaller sign. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-13-11: SIGNS DECLARED UNLAWFUL:
Upon finding that any sign that has been abandoned or endangers public safety, the building inspector or designee shall send the owner written notice
that the sign has been declared unlawful, specifying the reasons why the sign endangers public safety, and ordering that the sign be repaired or
removed within thirty (30) days from the date of notice. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-13-12: REMOVAL OF UNLAWFUL SIGN:
Any unlawful sign which has not been removed within thirty (30) days after sign permit revocation or expiration of the appropriate notice to remove
period may be removed at the request of the building inspector or designee and the costs charged to the owner. Neither the city nor any of its agents
shall be liable for any damage to the sign when removed under this section. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-13-13: REVOCATION OF SIGN PERMITS:
The building inspector shall have the authority to revoke any sign permit which has been granted when it has been determined that the sign authorized
by the permit has been constructed or is being maintained in violation of this chapter or of the conditions and limitations of the sign permit. In a
revocation proceeding, the building inspector or designee shall follow the following procedures:
A. Notice To Revoke/Remove: A notice of intent to revoke a sign permit shall be sent to the holder of the permit, or to one of its representatives; or, if
this is not possible, the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous position at the entrance to the premises and by the certified mailing of another copy
of the notice to the last known address of the permit holder.
B. Time Limit: The permit shall be revoked within fifteen (15) days of the posting of the notice of intent to revoke unless the cause of violation has been
removed and evidence of the same has been presented to the city within that period. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-13-14: APPEALS:
See chapter 6, "Procedures", of this title. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
Chapter 14
MANUFACTURED HOMES
9-14-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter establishes the minimum standards for the location and approval of manufactured housing. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-14-2: PERMITS REQUIRED:
A building permit as established by the city council is required before moving or locating a manufactured/mobile home within the city limits to ensure
that all city and state laws and codes are met. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-14-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 220/258
The use of a manufactured home as a permanent residential dwelling on an individual lot shall be permitted in any zoning district which permits
installation of family site built dwellings provided the following standards are met:
A. Is multi-section and at least twenty feet (20') wide;
B. Has a minimum floor area of one thousand (1,000) square feet;
C. Has roofing materials which are generally acceptable for site built housing. Any roofing materials may be used provided it has the appearance of a
nonmetallic shingle, shake or tile roof. Roofs shall also have a minimum slope of twenty five percent (25%) (3:12) and overhanging eaves;
D. Has siding materials which are generally acceptable for site built housing. Any siding materials may be used provided it has the appearance of wood,
masonry or horizontal metal siding. Reflection from horizontal metal siding shall be no greater than that from siding coated with white, gloss enamel;
E. Has a foundation of concrete or other material allowed by the international building code for site built homes which is aesthetically compatible with
the manufactured home having the appearance of site built construction. This means the fascia shall be an extension of the siding or be of materials
having the appearance of site built foundations such as brick, concrete or concrete block;
F. Is permanently affixed per manufacturer's instructions. Footings shall be of poured masonry extending twenty four inches (24") below grade;
G. Has a crawl space with the following minimum measurements: 1) eighteen inches (18") of clearance; 2) twelve inches (12") of clearance under
beams; and 3) an eighteen inch by twenty four inch (18" x 24") door;
H. Complies with all applicable lot size, setback, and other requirements of the zoning district in which it is to be located;
I. Provides two (2) off street parking spaces and shall be improved with such material to provide a durable and dust free surface;
J. Has a single car garage, or a carport with an attached enclosed storage room;
K. Provides right of way improvements in the same manner as site built construction, in accordance with city policy;
L. Manufactured home owners or purchasers shall own or be purchasing the land upon which their home is to be placed. The owner or purchaser shall
record with the county recorder a nonrevocable option declaring the manufactured home as real property. These requirements shall not apply within
any duly approved mobile home park. Exceptions may also be granted as a part of a planned unit development approval;
M. Manufactured homes shall be provided with smoke detectors as required in the international building code, section 1210, "Smoke Detectors And
Sprinkler Systems" before final inspection and occupancy. Smoke detectors required in addition to those provided for in the department of housing
and urban developments, part 3280 of 24 CFR, "Manufactured Home Construction And Safety Standards", may be of the battery operated type;
N. Manufactured homes not meeting standards in subsection B, E or J of this section shall only be allowed in mobile home parks, as permitted pursuant
to chapter 15 of this title. Placement of manufactured homes not meeting standards in subsection B, E or J of this section may be considered by the
planning commission on a case by case basis in all other residential use districts in accordance with the conditional use permit. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-
2015)
Chapter 15
MHP SUBDISTRICT ZONE MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT
9-15-1: PURPOSE:
The intent of this district is to provide for the development of mobile home parks for self-contained manufactured homes and mobile homes and to
establish minimum standards for the design, construction, alteration, extension and maintenance of mobile home parks and related utilities and
facilities, and to authorize the issuance of permits, licensing (if applicable) and inspection of such mobile home parks. All mobile home parks may be
subdivided pursuant to the city subdivision ordinance, chapter 16 of this title, or shall be processed as a conditional use at the option of the applicant.
The following additional provisions shall apply. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-15-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Conditional Use Permit: Mobile home parks shall be permitted by conditional use permit in zone districts R-4, C-1, C-3 and C-4.
B. Definition: "Mobile home lot" means a parcel of land within a mobile home park for the placement of a single mobile home.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 221/258
C. Applicable Codes: All city codes apply, including floodplain regulations.
D. Expansion/Existing Park: A conditional use permit may be issued for the expansion (increase in the number of lots or spaces) of an existing mobile
home park in any district. However, any expansion of an existing park shall require that the mobile home park be brought up to code with regard to
this chapter and title, and all other applicable city or state codes. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-15-3: MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME SPACES:
The minimum mobile home space requirements for a new or expanding mobile home park are as follows:
A. Lot Size: The minimum size of a mobile home lot space shall not be less than three thousand (3,000) square feet.
B. Spacing: The minimum distance between manufactured or mobile homes shall be ten feet (10').
C. Front Yard Setback: Front yard setback shall be twenty feet (20').
D. Yard Requirements: All manufactured or mobile homes shall be located at least twenty five feet (25') from any park property boundary line abutting
upon a public street and at least fifteen feet (15') from other park boundary lines or common areas. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-15-4: RECREATION PARK AREAS:
A minimum of two hundred (200) square feet for a common recreation area shall be provided on site for each mobile home space. This requirement
shall be in addition to yard requirements. Open space and/or a community center are desirable and encouraged. Open space and/or recreation areas
shall be improved and maintained. Such open areas and landscaping shall be continuously maintained by the owner. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-15-5: STORAGE AREAS:
A common fenced area shall be provided on site for the storage of recreational vehicles such as boats, vacation trailers and campers owned by park
residents. Such items shall be stored in the storage area and not be parked beside the manufactured or mobile home. The said storage area shall
contain paved access and a minimum of one paved parking space ten feet by twenty feet (10' x 20') for each two (2) mobile home spaces. The required
fence shall be six feet (6') high and sight obscuring.
In addition to the above, one permanent storage building, with a minimum of forty (40) square feet of floor area, shall be provided for each mobile home
space. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-15-6: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
All mobile home parks located adjacent to residential, commercial or industrial land uses shall be in compliance with this title. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-15-7: STREETS/ACCESS:
Access to mobile home parks shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards at the entrance or exit. Roadways shall be paved with concrete or
asphalt and be designed and constructed as established by the city engineer. All roadways within an existing mobile home park shall be paved with
concrete or asphalt within five (5) years of the adoption hereof. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-15-8: PARKING:
Off street parking areas shall be provided in all mobile home parks for the use of occupants and guests. Each mobile home lot shall be designed to
provide two (2) off street parking spaces. Parking may be in tandem. Guest parking shall be conveniently located in the park at the standard of one
additional space for every four (4) homes. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-15-9: WALKS:
All parks shall be provided with safe, convenient all season pedestrian access of adequate width for intended use, durable and convenient to maintain,
between individual mobile homes, the park streets and all community facilities provided for park residents. Such private common walks shall be hard
surfaced. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-15-10: REFUSE HANDLING:
The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the park shall be so conducted as to create no health hazard, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 222/258
accident or fire hazards or air pollution and shall be in compliance with this title. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-15-11: UTILITIES:
Sewage disposal, electrical systems, natural gas systems, liquefied petroleum gas systems and fuel oil supply systems shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-15-12: FIRE PROTECTION:
Fire protection shall be subject to the rules and regulations adopted by the city and subject to the approval of the city fire chief. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-15-13: STORMWATER:
Stormwater management shall meet city code requirements and policies. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-15-14: SIGNS:
The sign regulations of chapter 13 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-15-15: PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
Before construction permits are issued for a mobile home park, the applicant shall provide the site plan and required documents pertaining to the
development plan and shall first obtain a conditional use permit as provided in this title. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-15-16: COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS AND OCCUPANCY:
A. Possession Or Occupancy: No possession or occupancy of a mobile home park shall be allowed until all the required improvements are completely
and properly constructed. However, if the developer desires occupancy for a portion of the partially developed park, then he shall post an irrevocable
letter of credit, cashier's check or surety bond written by a surety company authorized to do business in the state in an amount equal to one hundred
twenty percent (120%) of the estimated cost for the completion of all improvements as shown on the final site plan and shall include engineering
fees. Upon the posting of one of the above securities, occupancy may be granted upon a partially constructed mobile home park.
B. Estimates: All estimates of completion costs shall be submitted to the city engineer for his approval.
C. Duration Of Bond: The duration of any bond or other security posted for the completion of improvements and development of mobile home parks
shall be for a maximum of two (2) years from the date of approval of the final site plan by the commission. An extension of time may be granted by
the council, upon application by the developer, provided such application is submitted at least sixty (60) calendar days prior to the expiration of the
bond and provided the issuer of the bond is willing to extend the time of the assurance.
D. Default: In the event the developer defaults, fails or neglects to satisfactorily install the required improvements within the time limitation, the council
may declare the bond forfeited and the city may install or cause to be installed the required improvements using the proceeds from the irrevocable
letter of credit, cashier's check or surety bond to defray the expense.
E. Continuing Obligation: The park developer or his assigns shall be responsible for maintaining the mobile home park in accordance with the approved
management policies, covenants, conditions, restrictions and agreements previously approved by the commission. Any neglect to do so will be
deemed a violation and shall be enforced in accordance with this title.
All maintenance of private drives, including, but not limited to, utilities, drainage, roadways and snow removal is the responsibility of the park owner.
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-15-17: FEE:
Persons filing preliminary, final site plans and development plans for mobile home parks shall pay a nonrefundable fee for preliminary plan, final plan
and development plan which is established by the city council. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
Chapter 16
SUBDIVISIONS
9-16-1: AUTHORITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 223/258
These regulations are authorized by title 50, chapter 13, Idaho Code; title 67, chapter 65, Idaho Code; and article 12, section 2 of the Idaho constitution,
as amended or subsequently codified. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-16-2: SUBDIVISION:
No person shall subdivide any tract of land into more than two (2) parcels if within the city limits or into more than four (4) parcels if within the area of
city impact, and no person shall subdivide any parcel or tract of land in which a new street is involved, and no person shall subdivide any lot, the
boundaries of which have already been fixed by a recorded plat, unless they shall first have or cause to have made a plat thereof as required by title 50,
chapter 13, Idaho Code and have complied with all the applicable provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to submit for recording
any plat or replat of any subdivision unless it is first approved by the city council. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-16-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to provide for:
A. The harmonious development of the area;
B. The coordination of streets and roads within the subdivision with other existing or planned streets and roads;
C. Adequate open space for travel, light, air and recreation;
D. Adequate transportation, water drainage and sanitary facilities;
E. The avoidance of scattered subdivision of land that would result in either of the following:
1. The lack of water supply, sewer service, drainage, transportation or other public services; and
2. The unnecessary imposition of an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services;
F. The requirements as to the extent and the manner in which:
1. Streets and roads shall be created and improved; and
2. Water and sewer and other utility mains, piping connections or other facilities shall be installed;
G. The manner and form of making and filing of any plat; and
H. The administration of these regulations by defining the powers and duties of approval authorities. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-16-4: JURISDICTION:
These regulations shall apply to the subdividing of land within the corporate limits of the city including the property within one mile outside the corporate
limits thereof. They shall also apply to the area of impact as established by agreement between the city and county in conformance with Idaho Code.
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-16-5: INTERPRETATION:
All "subdivisions" as herein defined shall be submitted for review to the commission and approval of the council and shall comply with the provisions of
these regulations. These regulations shall supplement all other regulations, and, where at variance with other laws, regulations, ordinances or
resolutions, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-16-6: ADMINISTRATION:
The administration of this chapter shall be conducted by the city engineer in conjunction with the development services department. The administrator
shall be appointed by the mayor and ratified by the council. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-16-7: PERMIT:
No permit shall be issued by an administrative officer of the city for the construction of any building or other improvement requiring a permit upon any
land for which a plat is required by this chapter, unless and until all of the requirements of this chapter have been met, and if a plat is not required by the
provisions of section 9-16-2 of this chapter, no such permit shall be issued until a letter of information, as provided for in section 9-6-8 of this title, has
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 224/258
been submitted to and reviewed by the commission and city council and the city council has decided that there is no substantial impact on present or
proposed public utilities, streets or parks, and is in accordance with the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-16-8: PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL:
Any person desiring to create a "subdivision" as herein defined shall submit all necessary applications to the development services department on
forms as provided by the city. No final plat shall be filed with the county recorder or improvements made on the property until the plat has been acted
upon by the commission as approved by the council. No lots shall be sold until the plat has been recorded in the office of the county recorder. (Ord.
1628, 1-12-2015)
9-16-9: PREAPPLICATION:
The subdivider shall submit a preapplication to enable the development services department to review and comment on the proposed subdivision. The
preapplication shall include at least one copy of a sketch plan. The sketch plan shall include the entire developmental scheme of the proposed
subdivision, in schematic form, and include the following:
A. General Layout: The general layout and approximate dimensions of streets, blocks and lots in sketch form.
B. Existing Conditions And Characteristics: The existing conditions and characteristics of the land on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision site.
C. Public Facilities: The areas set aside for schools, parks and other public facilities.
D. Fee: None required.
E. Administrative Action: The administrator shall notify the subdivider within a reasonable time of receiving an acceptable preapplication as to the
general conformance or nonconformance of the proposal with this chapter and shall provide the necessary forms and checklists, as well as the
additional following considerations:
1. Compliance of the proposed development with the existing local or state policies, goals and objectives or comprehensive plans;
2. Determination if additional special permits or ordinance conflicts, such as rezone, special development permit or variance are needed and the
manner of coordinating such permits;
3. Consideration of any unique environmental features or hazardous concerns that may be directly or indirectly associated with the subject property,
such as areas that have been designated as areas of critical environmental concern, unique plant or animal life and floodplains; and
4. Consideration of other local and state agencies that the applicant should contact before preparing a preliminary plat. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-16-10: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A. Application: The subdivider shall file with the development services department a complete subdivision application form and preliminary plat as
required in this chapter.
B. Combining Preliminary And Final Plats: The applicant may request that the subdivision application be processed as both a preliminary and final plat if
all the following exist:
1. The proposed subdivision does not exceed six (6) lots;
2. No new street dedication or street widening is involved;
3. No major special development considerations are involved, such as development in a floodplain or a hillside development; and
4. All required information for both preliminary and final plat is complete and in an acceptable form.
A request to combine both preliminary plat and final plat into one application shall be acted upon by the commission after receiving a
recommendation from the administrator.
C. Content Of Preliminary Plat Application: The subdivider shall submit to the development services department and administrator the following items
plus any additional data or maps deemed necessary by the administrator:
1. Copies Of Preliminary Plat: The developer or subdivider shall present the application and fifteen (15) copies of the preliminary plat of the
proposed subdivision, drawn in accordance with the requirements hereinafter stated, and shall show the drafting date and a north arrow. The
administrator shall refer a copy of the plat to the following agencies for review and comments prior to forwarding recommendations to the
commission:
a. City engineer.
b. City fire department.
c. Elmore County Central district health department.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 225/258
d. Development services department.
e. City building department.
f. City parks and recreation director.
g. Other governing bodies having joint jurisdiction.
h. Appropriate utility companies, irrigation districts.
i. Superintendent of schools.
j. Other agencies having an interest in the proposed subdivision.
The departments listed above will be allowed ten (10) working days to review the plats and return them to the development services department
and administrator;
2. Written Application: A written application requesting approval of the preliminary plat;
3. Details Of Proposed Development: Appropriate information that sufficiently details the proposed development within any special development
area, such as hillside, planned unit development, floodplain, cemetery, mobile home, large scale development, hazardous and unique areas of
development; and
4. Notification Of Property Owners: The subdivider shall certify to the development services department and administrator that he has notified all
property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the proposed subdivision. The administrator may require a larger
area be notified if the size or location of the subdivision justifies it. A list of the property owners notified will also be given to the development
services department. Such written notification shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the commission meeting. A list of the property
owners, a copy of the letter mailed and an affidavit of mailing shall be submitted to the development services department and administrator.
D. Preliminary Plat Requirements: The following shall be shown on the preliminary plat, or shall be submitted separately, together with any other
pertinent information requested by the administrator:
1. The name of the proposed subdivision, which does not duplicate the name of any other subdivision in Elmore County.
2. The names and addresses and telephone numbers of the subdivider(s), the engineer or surveyor who prepared the plat and any other
professional persons involved in the subdivision.
3. The names and addresses of all surrounding property owners both adjacent to and beyond any public thoroughfares from the subject property on
record in the county assessor's office.
4. The legal description of the subdivision by section, township and range.
5. A statement of the intended use for each lot in the proposed subdivision, and indicated on the preliminary plat map, such as: residential singlefamily,
two-family and multiple housing, commercial, industrial or recreational and showing of any sites proposed for parks, playgrounds, schools,
churches or other public uses.
6. A map of the entire area (1" = 100') scheduled for development if the proposed subdivision is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent
development.
7. A vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed plat to the surrounding area (covering at least a 1 square mile area).
8. The existing zoning of the proposed subdivision and the adjacent land. The zoning requested for each block, if not already zoned.
9. The street alignment, location, widths, and other dimensions of all existing or proposed platted streets, along with type of surface and the
existence of any curb-gutter and/or sidewalks and other important features such as railroad lines, watercourses, easements, and exceptional
topography, within and contiguous to the tract to be subdivided.
Right of way acquisition: No building or permanent structure shall be placed closer than sixty feet (60') to any section line or quarter section line
without approval of the city engineer and/or the board of commissioners of the highway district having jurisdiction, unless provided for otherwise in
this chapter, with the intent to provide area for future roadways.
10. Approximate location and length of the boundary lines of each lot, parcel or site, including the lot and block numbers, and the boundary lines of
the tract to be subdivided, which shall be accurate in scale and bearing. Approximate acreage enclosed by the subdivision.
11. A contour map of two foot (2') intervals to show the general topography of the tract. A preliminary grading plan as may be required.
12. When not connecting to city sewer and water, a soils and groundwater study shall be required by the city engineer where individual wells or
septic tanks are proposed within the area of impact.
13. Location, size and direction of flow, where applicable, of all existing utilities, including, but not limited to, storm and sanitary sewers, irrigation
laterals, ditches, drainage, bridges, culverts, water mains, fire hydrants, gas lines, power, telephone and streetlights. If utilities are not on or
adjacent to the property, indicate direction and distance to nearest ones that can serve the subdivision.
14. All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use and/or easements, both public and private, together with a statement of location,
dimensions and purpose of such on both the subject property and surrounding properties or reserved for the use of all property owners, with the
purpose indicated.
15. Location, right of way and name of all public or private trafficways and names, whether new or continuous, the location, right of way width and
use of any proposed public or private pedestrianways or special ways, and a statement of intended improvements to be made thereto.
16. A statement as to whether or not any variance will be requested with respect to any provision of this chapter describing the particular provision,
the variance requested, and the reasons therefor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 226/258
17. A statement as to what improvements will be made to existing utilities and what other on site improvements will be made.
18. Approximate lot corner and easement locations of all adjacent subdivisions.
E. Administrative Action: Upon receipt of a completed preliminary plat application and review, the administrator shall certify the application is complete
and shall affix the date of application acceptance thereon. The administrator shall prepare a recommendation to the commission and place the
preliminary plat on the commission's agenda for consideration.
F. Commission Review: At a regular meeting the commission shall review the preliminary plat, comments from the concerned persons and agencies
and the report from the administrator to arrive at a decision on the preliminary plat. In determining the acceptance of a proposed subdivision the
commission shall consider the objects of this chapter and at least the following:
1. The availability of public services to accommodate the proposed development;
2. The continuity of the proposed development with the capital improvement program, if applicable;
3. The public financial capability of supporting services for the proposed development; and
4. The other health, safety or environmental problems that may be brought to the commission's attention.
G. Commission Action On Preliminary Plat: The commission shall review and recommend to the council to approve, conditionally approve, disapprove
or table for additional information when acting on the preliminary plat. If tabled, approval or disapproval shall occur at the next regular meeting. The
action, and the reasons for such action, shall be stated in writing by the administrator and forwarded to the applicant. Upon granting or denying a
preliminary plat the commission shall specify:
1. The regulations and standards used in evaluating the application;
2. The reasons for approval or denial; and
3. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain plat approval.
H. Action Of Combined Preliminary And Final Plat: If the commission's conclusion is favorable to the subdivider's request for the subdivision to be
considered as both a preliminary plat and final subdivision, then a recommendation shall be forwarded to the council in the same manner as
specified in this chapter for a final plat. The commission may recommend that the combined application be approved, approved conditionally or
disapproved.
I. Council Action: Upon recommendation from the commission the council will then either reject the plat or approve it subject to conditions that may be
set forth. These conditions will be expressed in a written letter to the developer. The developer, after adding these conditions to the plat, will then
resubmit it to the administrator for his review and approval of technical data, placement of utilities, etc.
J. Approval Period: Failure to file and obtain the certification of the acceptance of the final plat application by the administrator within one year after
action by the commission shall cause all approvals of said preliminary plat to be null and void, unless a one year extension of time is applied for,
thirty (30) days before the expiration, by the subdivider and granted by the commission. A preliminary plat may be extended one time only, after
which it shall be resubmitted to the administrator and the commission.
K. Fees: A fee for processing and checking a preliminary plat shall be due upon submittal of the preliminary plat to the administrator. The amount of the
fee shall be established by the council. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-16-11: FINAL PLAT:
A. Application: After the approval or conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider may cause the total parcel, or any part thereof, to be
surveyed, and a final plat prepared in accordance with the approved preliminary plat. The subdivider shall submit to the administrator three (3)
copies of the final plat at least ten (10) working days prior to the commission meeting.
B. Content Of Final Plat: The final plat shall include and be in compliance with all items required under this chapter and title 50, chapter 13 of the Idaho
Code and shall be drawn at such a scale and contain lettering of such size as to enable the same to be placed on one sheet of eighteen inch by
twenty seven inch (18" x 27") drawing paper, with no part of the drawing nearer to the edge than one-half inch (1/2"), except the far left margin shall
be no less than three inches (3"). The reverse of said sheet shall not be used for any portion of the drawing. If, because of the size or complexity,
required information cannot be shown, additional sheets may be used provided they conform to this chapter. The final plat shall be in agreement with
the preliminary plat and include at least the following:
1. Ownership: Proof of current ownership of the real property included in the proposed final plat.
2. Location: The name and general location of the subdivision in bold letters at the top of the sheet.
3. North Arrow: The north point and scale of the plat.
4. Legal Boundaries: The boundaries must be accurately drawn showing the proper bearings and dimensions of all boundary lines of the
subdivision. These lines should not be heavier than street and lot lines.
All linear dimensions shall be calculated to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot (0.01') and all bearings shall be calculated to the nearest ten (10)
seconds of arc. All curves shall be defined by the radius, central angle, tangent, arc, and chord distances. The description and location of all
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 227/258
monuments shall be shown. Monuments of iron pipe, stone or concrete shall be set at tangent points or points of curves of streets, intersections of
property lines, at alley intersections and at such other points as may be necessary to make the retracing of the lines as shown on the plat
reasonably convenient.
In addition to the requirements of title 50, chapter 13 of the Idaho Code, the exterior boundary of the subdivision shall be tied to not less than two
(2) recognized county or city survey monuments.
5. Streets/Alleys/Easements: The names, widths, lengths, bearings, curve data for centerlines of proposed streets, alleys and easements desired or
necessary; also the boundaries, bearings and dimensions of all parcels within the subdivision to be dedicated to the use of the public. The size,
lines, dimensions, curve data and number of lots, blocks and/or parcels reserved for any reason within the subdivision.
6. Adjacent Streets/Alleys: The widths and names of abutting streets and alleys. The names and boundaries of all subdivisions which have been
previously recorded and adjacent thereto must be shown upon the final plat. These adjacent subdivisions will be shown in dotted lines to show
their relationship to the plat offered for record. If adjoining land is unplatted it should be indicated as such.
7. Lot/Block Numbering: All lots shall be numbered by progressive numbers in each separate block. Blocks shall also be numbered consecutively
throughout all adjoining plats of the same name.
8. Final Plat/Signature Sheet: Final plat shall contain the following: registered land surveyor's certificate of survey, owner's dedication certificate with
acknowledgement, the approval of the mayor and council as attested by the city clerk, approval by the city engineer, and other certificates
required by the Idaho Code and county ordinances.
9. Stormwater: Stormwater retention location.
10. Survey: All dimensions, both linear and angular, are to be staked in the field by accurate control survey which must balance and close within a
limit of one in ten thousand (10,000).
11. Intended Use: All lots shall be identified with the intended use of the lots such as: residential single-family, duplex, townhouse and multiple
housing, commercial, industrial or recreational and showing of any sites proposed for parks, playgrounds, schools, churches, or other public uses.
C. Fees: At the time of submission of an application for a final plat, a fee as established by the council shall be paid.
D. Submittal Of Final Plat: The same procedure followed for approval of the preliminary plat shall be used for approval of the final plat.
E. Administrative Review: Upon receipt of the final plat and compliance with all other requirements as provided for herein, the development services
department and administrator shall certify the application as complete and shall affix the date of acceptance thereon. If the administrator determines
that there is substantial difference in the final plat than that which was approved as a preliminary plat or conditions which have not been met, the
administrator may require that the final plat be submitted to the commission in the same manner as required in the preliminary plat process.
F. Approval Of Subdivision Plat: No plat shall be recorded or offered for recording with the Elmore County recorder until the plat has been reviewed by
the commission and approved by the mayor and council, and shall bear thereon the approval, by endorsement, of the city engineer and the clerk of
the city. The final plat shall not be approved by the mayor and council until all the proposed public improvements have been made according to the
approved development plans and specifications (see section 9-16-12 of this chapter) and the improvements have been approved by the
development services director/city engineer and accepted by the city council or suitable financial guarantees are provided (see section 9-16-14 of
this chapter). All plats located within the area of impact and/or one mile outside of the city limits must also meet the requirements of the area of
impact agreement with Elmore County.
G. Approval Period: Final plat shall be filed with the Elmore County recorder within one year after approval by the council; otherwise, such approval
shall become null and void unless thirty (30) days prior to said expiration date an extension of time is applied for by the developer. The commission
may recommend to the council a onetime extension, which shall be subject to review before recording, for a period of one year, which the council
may approve as presented, approve with conditions or deny.
H. Method Of Recording: Upon approval of the final plat by the council, the subdivider's prepayment of recording fees, posting of surety bond or other
acceptable guaranty and the inclusion of the following signatures on the final plat, the administrator shall submit the final plat to the county recorder
for recording:
1. Certification and signature of the city council verifying that the subdivision has been approved;
2. Certification and signature of the city clerk, if required, and the city engineer verifying that the subdivision meets the city requirements and has
been approved by the council;
3. Certification and signature of the sanitation restrictions on the face of the plat per Idaho Code;
4. Certification and signature of Elmore County treasurer that all taxes have been paid;
5. Certification and signature of approval of Elmore County surveyor;
6. Certification and signature of property owner/developer for deed of dedication;
7. Certification and signature of the surveyor who surveyed the property;
8. Owner's certification of acknowledgement;
9. Recorder's certification. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 228/258
9-16-12: DEVELOPMENT PLANS:
Prior to recording the final subdivision plat, the subdivider shall submit to the administrator checked copies of the final plans and specifications for
streets, water, sewer and other public improvements to be constructed. (See also section 9-16-13 of this chapter.)
A. Responsibility For Plans: It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider of every proposed subdivision to have prepared, by a registered engineer, a
complete set of construction plans, including profiles, cross sections, specifications, grading plans, and other supporting data, for all required public
streets, utilities and other facilities. Such construction plans shall be based on preliminary plans which have been approved with the preliminary plat,
and shall be prepared in conjunction with the final plat. Construction plans are subject to approval by the responsible public agencies. All
construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with the public agencies' standards or specifications.
The minimum construction requirements shall be the published standard city specifications. Three (3) sets of development plans showing all site
improvements, curb and gutters, sidewalks, water lines, sanitary and/or storm sewers or stormwater retention, parking, open space and landscaping
shall be filed with the city engineer. When approved, one set shall be returned to the subdivider with the engineer's written approval thereon.
Standards shall be established by the administrator.
B. Fees: At the time of submittal of development plans, a fee to defray costs and expenses of plan checking as provided for by the city council shall be
paid.
C. Required Public Improvements: Every subdivider shall be required to install the following public and/or other improvements in accordance with the
conditions and specifications as follows:
1. Monuments: Monuments shall be set in accordance with Idaho Code.
Monuments shall be placed at all section and quarter corners, and elsewhere as required by the city engineer. All monuments located in paved
streets, alleys or sidewalks will be encased in protective boxes approved by the city engineer.
2. Streets And Alleys: All streets and alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the council. (See
also section 9-16-13 of this chapter.)
a. Street excavation to finished subgrade and paved to final grade.
b. All service connections for sanitary sewer, domestic water and natural gas to a point in back of the proposed sidewalk line (on private property)
before placing base gravel for the street. All such improvements are to be installed under the specifications and inspections of the engineer.
c. Street name signs shall be installed in the appropriate locations at each street intersection in accordance with the local standards. Cost of street
signs shall be the responsibility of the developer and installed to the city engineer's specifications.
3. Curbs And Gutters: Curbs and gutters shall be constructed on all streets and service roads prior to placing of base gravel. All construction shall be
in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the council.
4. Sidewalks And Pedestrian Walkways: Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the street, except that where the average width of lots, as
measured at the street frontage line or at the building setback line, is over two hundred ten feet (210') sidewalks on only one side of the street may
be allowed.
Pedestrian walkways, when required and/or provided, shall have easements at least ten feet (10') in width and paved the entire width.
Sidewalks and crosswalks shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications as adopted by the council.
5. Driveways: All driveway openings in curbs shall be as specified by the administration, highway district or state highway department.
6. Public Water Supply And Sewer Systems: Connection to city water and sewer is required. Properties outside city limits, that are not on city
services, shall be required to install dry lines constructed to city standards for future hookup. (See section 9-16-13 of this chapter, and water and
sewer regulations, title 7 of this code.)
7. Fire Hydrants And Water Mains: Fire hydrants shall be required every three hundred feet (300') or as determined by the fire code and the city fire
chief and/or city engineer.
8. Stormwater Management: The management of stormwater for all subdivision development shall conform to established policies and practices
previously and currently being used by the city until such time as the city of Mountain Home stormwater management policy (performance
standards) is completed and adopted by the city council.
Storm sewers shall be required to drain all streets to an on site location(s) or an off site location as may be approved by the city engineer.
9. Installation Of Public Utilities: Underground utilities shall be required in all new subdivisions. Electrical wiring will include stubs and junction boxes
for streetlight(s).
10. Street Lighting: Streetlights shall be required to be installed at the intersections, and/or where deemed necessary by the city engineer,
throughout the subdivision. All costs to install streetlights and poles shall be borne by the developer. All ongoing cost for maintenance and
operation shall be borne by the city. Installations shall be conventional wood pole or better, high pressure sodium with overhead lamps. Other
types or configuration for lighting shall be approved by the city engineer and the cost shall be borne by the developer/subdivider.
11. Irrigation Ditches: Unless otherwise approved by the city engineer and city council, all ditches shall be replaced with buried conduit. The system
shall be constructed to meet the requirements of the Mountain Home irrigation district and the city engineer.
12. Buffer Yards/Landscaping And Open Space: Landscape screening may be required for the protection of residential properties from adjacent
collector and arterial streets, waterways, railroad rights of way or other incompatible land features. Subdivision plats shall show the location of any
buffer yards, landscape areas and/or open space. All such buffer areas shall conform to this title, for development. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 229/258
9-16-13: DESIGN STANDARDS:
All subdivision plats submitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and all subdivision improvements and facilities, done, constructed or made in
accordance with said provisions shall comply with the minimum design standards set forth hereinafter in this chapter (see also section 9-16-15 of this
chapter); provided, however, that any higher standards adopted by any highway district, state highway department or health agency shall prevail over
those set forth herein:
A. Street Specifications:
1. Dedications: All streets, alleys, easements and required sidewalks within the subdivision must be dedicated for public use. All streets and alleys
within the subdivision shall be required to be dedicated for public use, with the exception of PUDs and condominium type subdivisions, which may,
upon approval of the governing body, be private.
2. Street Location/Alignment: The alignment and width of previously platted streets when extended shall be preserved unless topographical
conditions make a modification advisable. Street and road location shall conform to the following:
a. Street Location And Arrangements: All street locations shall conform to the city of Mountain Home street plan where applicable. Collector type
streets may, for aesthetic reasons, curve and wind in accordance with these standards, but such trafficways shall maintain a grid type pattern
approximately one-fourth (1/4) of a mile square.
b. Relation To Topography: Streets shall be arranged in proper relation to topography so as to result in usable lots, safe streets and acceptable
gradients.
3. Street Right Of Way Widths: Street and road right of way widths shall conform to the adopted major street plan or comprehensive plan and rules
of the state department of highways and the highway district having jurisdiction; street right of way width is to be measured from property line to
property line; minimum right of way standards shall be in accordance with the following:
a. Streets:
Local or residential streets 52 feet
Collector or secondary streets 60 feet
Section line and quarter section line streets 70 feet
Arterial or major streets which may include some section or quarter section lines Conform to comprehensive plan
b. Roadway (Face To Face Of Curb):
Local or residential streets 39 feet
Collector or secondary streets 43 feet
Arterial or major streets, which may include some section or quarter section lines 64 feet or more
c. Stub Streets: Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall be such that said streets extend to
the boundary line of the tract to make provisions for the future extension of said streets into adjacent areas. A vehicular nonaccess reserve strip
may be required and held in public ownership.
d. Cul-De-Sac Or Dead End Streets: Shall be designed to be permanent, shall not be longer than five hundred feet (500') in length and shall be
provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a radius from the center of the circle to the right of way line of at least fifty feet (50') and a
radius from the center of the circle to the back of curb to be at least forty five feet (45'). Property line frontage shall not be less than forty five feet
(45'), measured as the chord length along the right of way line.
e. Bulb Streets: Any street or road having a deflection angle greater than or equal to ninety degrees (90) shall have a right of way circle at the
point of deflection. Said circle shall have a minimum radius of fifty feet (50'). Each lot shall have a street property line minimum frontage of forty
five feet (45'), measured as the chord length.
f. Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited, except where unusual circumstances make such necessary to the reasonable development of a
tract. Special justification shall be presented for a variance request to the commission. Whenever a tract to be subdivided borders on an existing
half or partial street, the other part of the street shall be dedicated within such tract. Whenever there is an existing half street right of way
adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the developer shall be required to improve, as a minimum, two (2) traffic lanes centered about at the
proposed center of the street and one parking lane contiguous with the curb and gutter and sidewalk.
g. Private Streets: Private streets and roads shall be prohibited within a subdivision, except as may be provided for elsewhere within this title.
Access from interior subdivision lots to public streets may be allowed by private drives which conform to the following:
PRIVATE DRIVEWAY LENGTH
Width 100 Feet 200 Feet 250 Feet 300 Feet
20 feet 1 - 2 units 1 - 2 units n/a n/a
25 feet 10 units 8 units 8 units n/a
30 feet 12 units 12 units 12 units 12 units
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 230/258
4. Lot Frontage Access/Arterial And Collectors: Subdivisions shall be designed such that individual lot ingress or egress is not directly onto an
arterial or collector street. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial or collector street, the developer shall be
required to provide interior street access. A fifteen foot (15') landscaped buffer strip shall be provided between the subdivision lots and the
collector or arterial street. Said buffer strip shall be designed to screen back yards and consist of an undulating berm with plantings and fence,
unless the berm in itself adequately screens the rear of a property which is adjacent to a collector or arterial street. Such double fronted lots shall
provide a one foot (1') nonaccess vehicular reservation strip along the arterial/collector street or such other treatment as may be necessary for
adequate protection of residential properties and to afford a buffer of noise and separation of through and local traffic. These buffer strips shall be
maintained by the developer or by a homeowners' association by agreement which shall be reviewed and/or approved by the city attorney and city
council.
5. Adjoining Property Owners: The street and alley arrangements must also be such as to cause no hardship to owners of adjoining property when
they subdivide and plat their land and seek to provide for convenient access thereto. This arrangement must also provide for continuing a
reasonable number of through utility lines.
6. Street Grades: Minimum street grades of twenty five one-hundredths percent (0.25%) will be required with the maximum grade being seven
percent (7%) for secondary and major streets and ten percent (10%) for local or minor streets. Where the observance of these standards is
impossible, the city engineer shall review the situation before an exception may be granted.
7. Street Cuts On Existing Constructed Streets: The developer must obtain a permit and shall repave, with like materials, any existing constructed
streets when numerous (more than 3 within 300 feet) pavement cuts are necessary for construction/hookups of his development.
8. Curbs And Gutters: Curbs and gutters at street intersections shall be rounded with curves paralleling the right of way line.
9. Reserve Strips/Street: Reserve strips on outer boundaries of a subdivision may be required to control access to a partial width street. The mayor
and council may require an agreement to accompany a subdivision plat agreeing to dedicate such strip or strips when sufficient ground is made
available for public use to permit widening of said strip to its normal width. Unless provided herein, no other reserve strips controlling access to
public ways shall be permitted, except when the control and disposition of land comprising such strips are placed with the jurisdiction of the city
under conditions specified by the mayor and council and attached to the plat.
10. Alleys:
a. Required Alleys: Alleys shall be provided in multiple dwelling or commercial subdivisions unless other provisions are made for service access
and off street loading and parking.
b. Width: The minimum width of any dedicated alley shall be twenty feet (20'). Alleys shall be required along the rear lines of commercial and
industrial property. Alleys may be required in residential areas.
c. Intersections: Alley intersections and sharp changes to alignment shall be avoided, but, where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to
permit safe vehicular movement.
d. Dead End Alleys: Dead end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at
the dead end as determined by the city engineer.
11. Street Names: The naming of streets shall conform to the following:
a. Street Name Duplication: Street names shall not duplicate any existing name within the limits of this title except where a new street is a
continuation of an existing street. Street names, if spelled differently but sound the same as existing streets, shall not be used.
b. Continuity Of Street Names: When any new subdivision contains any street which is a continuation of any street, such new street shall take the
name of such existing street. No new street not a continuation of an existing street shall be given the same or similar name of any existing
street. The city engineer shall have the power to change the name of any street on any map or plat submitted to make such map or plat conform
to the provisions of this section.
c. Street Name Signs: New streets shall not have the same name as any other street in the city. Street name signs shall be erected by the city in
accordance with city standard specifications. Any street names that do not follow an established grid system must be submitted to the city
council for approval.
12. Intersections:
a. Street Intersections: Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect any other
street at less than eighty degrees (80).
b. Block Alignment: Where street lines within a block deflect from each other at any one point more than five degrees (5) there shall be a
connecting curb. The radius of the curve for the inner street line shall be not less than seven hundred feet (700') for an arterial or major street,
two hundred fifty feet (250') for a collector or secondary street, and fifty feet (50') for a local or minor street.
B. Pedestrian Walkways:
1. Walkway Easements: Walkway easements for pedestrians shall be provided where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping areas, transportation or any other community facilities. Walkway easements shall have a minimum width of ten feet (10').
2. Walkway Width: Walkways shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') in width and shall be improved with a concrete walk over the full width of the
easement.
3. Sidewalk Required: Sidewalks are required contiguous with the public streets. They shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in width and shall be wider
in areas near shopping centers, schools or where pedestrian traffic may warrant a greater width. The sidewalk requirement for the purposes of this
chapter shall conform as a minimum to section 8-1B-1 of this code.
4. Sidewalks And Pedestrian Walkways: Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the street, except that where the average width of lots, as
measured at the street frontage line or at the building setback line, is over two hundred ten feet (210'), sidewalks on only one side of the street
may be allowed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 231/258
C. Mailbox In Sidewalk: Mailboxes located on the sidewalk shall provide a concrete walkaround.
D. Easements/Utility And Drainageway: Unobstructed utility easements shall be provided: along front lot lines, five feet (5'); rear lot lines, eight feet (8');
and side lot lines, five feet (5'). Easements of greater width may be required along lines across lots or along boundaries where necessary for surface
drainage or for the extension of main sewers or other utilities.
E. Lots/Blocks:
1. Blocks:
a. The length, width and shape of the blocks shall be determined with due regard to adequate sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use
contemplated; the zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions; the need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street
traffic; and the limitations and opportunities of topography.
b. Block length shall not be less than two hundred fifty feet (250') or exceed nine hundred feet (900').
2. Lots:
a. All lots shown on the subdivision plat must conform to the minimum requirements of any applicable zoning district.
b. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles or radial to the street lines unless a variation will give a better street and lot plan. All
corner lots shall have a minimum radius of twenty feet (20') on the property lines.
c. Double frontage lots are prohibited except when a collector or arterial street abuts the subdivision, unusual topography or other conditions make
it impossible to meet this requirement.
d. All remnants of lots below minimum size leftover after the subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots rather than allowed to
remain as unusable parcels.
e. At the time of platting, corner lots may be required to be larger to accommodate setbacks for two (2) street frontages.
f. Corner lots shall be twenty percent (20%) greater in size than the minimum lot size for the zoning district.
g. A variety of lot sizes as allowed by the zoning district is encouraged to accommodate a variety of housing units. In the configuration and
location of lots, consideration should be given to the ultimate dwelling type and use of the lot.
(1) Lots intended for duplex housing units should be double the minimum lot size required for the zoning district.
(2) Lots that will accommodate higher density should be located to avoid traffic and parking impacts on surrounding properties.
(3) Lots should be located to provide transition in density from the surrounding properties.
(4) The dimensions of lots should be varied to provide variety and avoid monotony in the future residential design and development.
F. Area Of Impact/Streets: Where parcels of land are subdivided into unusually large lots (such as when large lots are approved for septic tanks) the
parcels shall be divided, where feasible, so as to allow for future division into smaller parcels. Lot arrangements shall allow for the ultimate extension
of adjacent streets through the middle of wide blocks. Whenever such future subdividing or lot splitting is contemplated, the plan thereof shall show
proposed extension of streets and be approved by the commission prior to the taking of such action. New subdivision developments which are
contiguous to the city limits shall develop to city standards.
G. Utilities; Water/Sewer: Utilities shall be constructed according to standards and specifications as adopted by the city.
1. Water Lines: Water hookup shall be allowed only within the city limits. The extension of utilities shall be at the developer's expense and shall have
the capacity and placement necessary to serve land located farther out.
a. Size Of Mains: All water mains located in arterial or collector streets shall be a minimum of eight inches (8") in diameter. All water mains located
in a local street shall be a minimum of six inches (6").
b. Larger Main Required/Cost:
(1) If the development requires a larger main than is required by the city, the developer shall be responsible for the entire cost.
(2) If the city requires a larger water main to accommodate future development than the size of line required by the city for the subdivision, the
developer shall install the larger line size required by the city and may, prior to approval of the final plat or before a building permit is issued,
make a written agreement with the city for reimbursement of the difference in the cost between the required line size and the larger line
required by the city. This reimbursement shall be made in the current fiscal year only if there are sufficient funds in the development fund.
c. Dead End Mains: Dead end mains longer than two hundred feet (200') shall not be permitted.
d. Area Of City Impact: New subdivision developments, which are platted in less than five (5) acre lots that do not connect to public water facilities,
shall provide a central water system (may require dry lines), designed to city standards, so at the time of annexation connecting to the public
water system will be more cost effective and easily accomplished unless otherwise provided for herein. New subdivision developments that are
contiguous to the city limits shall develop to city standards with dry lines, etc.
e. Acceptance For Maintenance: The developer shall submit a letter requesting that the city council formally accept, by entry in the official minutes,
the water mains, which were constructed by private interest, to the city for continuous maintenance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 232/258
2. Sewer: Sewer hookups may be allowed outside the city limits with approval of the city council. If the property is contiguous to the city limits, the
developer shall annex prior to hookup. If the property is not contiguous, the developer shall sign a development agreement with the city to request
annexation as soon as the property becomes contiguous or within three hundred feet (300') of the city. This agreement shall be made part of the
public record for each parcel to be sold to ensure knowledge of this agreement by potential purchasers.
a. Size Of Sewer Mains: All sewer mains in arterial and collector streets shall be a minimum of ten inches (10") in diameter. Local streets shall
require a minimum eight inch (8") main in local streets. Developers shall install the sewer mains and stub the services to each lot at the
developer's expense.
b. Larger Sewer Main/Cost:
(1) If a development itself requires a main larger than is required by the city, the developer shall be responsible for the entire cost.
(2) If the city requires a larger sewer main to accommodate future development than the required line required by the city for the subdivision, the
developer shall install the larger line size required by the city and may, prior to approval of the final plat, make a written agreement with the
city for reimbursement of the difference in cost between the line required by his development and the larger line required by the city. The
reimbursement shall be made in the current fiscal year only if there are sufficient funds in the development fund.
c. Area Of City Impact: New subdivision developments which are contiguous to the city limits shall be developed to city standards. New
development shall provide a sewer utility system which is equivalent to the public sewer system, so, at the time of annexation, connecting to the
public sewer system will be more easily accomplished unless otherwise provided for herein.
d. Acceptance For Maintenance: The developer shall submit a letter requesting that the city council formally accept, by entry in the official minutes,
the sewer mains, which were constructed by private interest, to the city for continuous maintenance.
H. Buffer Yards And Reserve Strips: Fifteen foot (15') buffer yards which create a visual screen shall be required to be placed next to incompatible
features such as arterial, collectors, highways, railroads, commercial or industrial uses to screen the view from residential properties and shall not be
a part of the normal street right of way or utility easement. These fifteen foot (15') buffer yards and reserve strips shall be developed according to the
landscape ordinance of this title.
I. Public Sites And/Or Open Spaces: Public sites, amenities and open spaces shall be completed in the first or second phase of a project, unless
bonded for one hundred twenty percent (120%), and shall conform to the following:
1. Park/Open Space Requirement/Service Level: A standard of twelve (12) acres of park land per one thousand (1,000) people has been
established. A park development fee has been established to generate sufficient revenue to purchase twelve (12) acres of land for park
development or to develop twelve (12) acres of land already set aside for park development. This requirement shall comply to this title.
2. Public Uses: Where it is determined that a proposed park, playground, school or other public use is located in whole or in part within a proposed
subdivision, the commission shall notify the appropriate public agency concerning the land proposed to be acquired. Within thirty (30) days of the
date of notice, the public agency may request the governing body to suspend consideration on the subdivision for sixty (60) days. If an agreement
is not reached within sixty (60) days the commission shall resume consideration of the subdivision.
3. Natural Features: Existing natural features which add value to residential development and enhance the attractiveness of the community, such as
streets, watercourses, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision.
J. Stormwater Management: See chapter 8 of this title.
K. Development Maintenance: The developer shall be responsible for providing safety and maintenance of the site during construction and cleanup
upon completion of the project which will ensure that a nuisance or safety hazard is not created for the general public or the surrounding properties.
1. Trash dumpsters or other adequate manner of containment shall be used for refuse during any construction.
2. The developer shall be responsible for all construction safety signing and barricades.
3. Upon completion of construction of the site, homes, or structures the site shall be free of mounds/piles of dirt. All such material on the site, or if
accumulated on adjoining lots, shall be leveled out or removed.
L. Homeowners' Agreement And/Or Maintenance Agreement: The council and city attorney shall review the homeowners' agreement or initiate an
agreement with the developer for maintenance of common and/or open space areas within the subdivision. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-16-14: GUARANTEE OF COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Financial Guaranty Arrangements: In lieu of the actual installation of required public improvements, before any building permit is issued, the
development services director or city engineer may permit the subdivider to provide a financial guaranty of performance in one or a combination of
the following arrangements for those requirements which are over and beyond the requirements of any other agency:
1. Surety Bond:
a. Accrual: The bond shall accrue to the city covering construction, operation and maintenance of the specific public improvements.
b. Amount: The bond shall be in an amount equal to one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the total estimated cost for completing construction of
the specific public improvements, including engineering, as estimated by the developer's consulting engineer and approved by the development
services director or city engineer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 233/258
c. Term Length: The term length in which the bond is in force, for the duration of that phase of the project, shall be for a period to be specified by
the development services director or city engineer for the specific public improvements.
d. Bonding For Surety Company: The bond shall be with a surety company authorized to do business in the state of Idaho, acceptable to the city
council and city attorney.
2. Cash Deposit, Cashier's Check, Negotiable Bond Or Irrevocable Bank Letter Of Credit:
a. Treasurer, Escrow Agent Or Trust Company: A cash deposit, cashier's check, negotiable bond or an irrevocable bank letter of credit required
and such surety acceptable to the city clerk, shall be deposited with an escrow agent or trust company.
b. Dollar Value: The dollar value of the cash deposit, certified check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be equal to one
hundred twenty percent (120%) of the estimated cost of construction for the specific public improvement, including engineering costs, as
estimated by the developer's consulting engineer and approved by the development services director or city engineer.
c. Escrow Time: The escrow time for the cash deposit, certified check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be until completed
and accepted by the development services director or city engineer.
d. Progressive Payment: In the case of cash deposits or cashier's checks, an agreement between the city and the subdivider may provide for
progressive payment out of the cash deposit or reduction of the cashier's check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit, to the
extent of the cost of the completed portion of the public improvement, in accordance with a previously entered into agreement.
B. Penalty In Case Of Failure To Complete The Construction Of A Public Improvement: In the event the subdivider shall, in any case, fail to complete
such work within the period of time as required by the conditions of the guaranty for the completion of public improvements it shall be the
responsibility of the city, through the development services director or city engineer, to have such work completed. In order to accomplish this, the
city shall reimburse itself for the cost and expense thereof by appropriating the cash deposit, cashier's check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or
negotiable bond which the subdivider may have deposited in lieu of a surety bond, or may take steps as may be necessary to require performance
by the bonding or surety company and as provided in this section and the subdivision ordinances of the city, including all submittals and agreements
of the subdivider. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-16-15: SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT SUBDIVISIONS:
A. Purpose: This section provides additional design criteria for various types of special subdivision developments, i.e., floodplain, aquifer area (CDO)
and hillside, that normally pose special problems to the commission and elected officials when reviewing and acting upon subdivision requests. This
section outlines the plan submittal requirements and design standards that shall be taken into consideration when acting on special developments.
The provisions of this section are in addition to the plan requirements, design standards and improvement standards that are required by this
chapter.
B. Floodplain: See title 5, chapter 5 this code.
C. Subdivision Within An Area Of Critical Concern: Hazardous or unique areas may be designated as an area of critical concern by the council or by the
state. Special consideration shall be given to any proposed development within an area of critical concern to assure that the development is
necessary and desirable and in the public interest in view of the existing unique conditions. Hazardous or unique areas that are designated as areas
of critical concern are aquifer area/north and northeast of the city limits and the floodplain and shall comply to the following:
1. Plan Submission: The developer shall prepare and submit an environmental assessment along with the preliminary plan application for any
development that is proposed within an area of critical concern.
2. Content Of Environmental Assessment: The content of the environmental assessment shall usually be prepared by an interdisciplinary team of
professionals that shall provide answers to the following questions:
a. What changes will occur to the area of environmental concern as a result of the proposed development?
b. What corrective action or alternative development plans could occur so as not to significantly change the area of environmental concern?
c. What changes in the area of environmental concern are unavoidable?
d. What beneficial or detrimental effects would the development have on the environment such as animal life, plant life, social concerns, economic
conditions, noise, audio and visual impact? (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-16-16: SUBDIVISION WITHIN THE AREA OF IMPACT AND/OR ONE MILE A/PR AGRICULTURE/PROPOSED
RESIDENTIAL:
The purpose and intent of the comprehensive land use agriculture/proposed residential designation is to have land areas set aside that protect
agricultural land use until such time as expansion of urban development is desirable, to allow rural atmosphere hobby farm development and to protect
the aquifer recharge area which lies north and northeast of the city limits and is more particularly described and identified in the Elmore County
comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance and maps as the Mountain Home community development overlay (CDO). Also, to provide for residential
development of land which is projected to be annexed into the city in the near future.
When subdivision development in the A/PR zone occurs contiguous to city limits, it shall develop to city standards. When annexed, the property will be
given a zoning classification which shall be compatible with surrounding land uses and in accordance with the comprehensive plan.
A. A/PR (Agriculture): The "A" portion of this designation excludes commercial feedlots, dairies, commercial poultry and poultry products production, pig
farms, dairies, and similar intensive agriculturally related uses. The usual farm animals are allowed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 234/258
B. A/PR (Proposed Residential): The "PR" portion of this designation is to preserve and enhance predominantly single-family living areas at a low
density standard. Such transition areas must be prepared to utilize a full range of municipal services upon annexation into the city.
1. Subdivision lots less than five (5) acres/development standards:
a. Lot Size: The minimum lot area per dwelling structure shall be one-half (1/2) acre.
b. Lot Width: The minimum lot width shall be one hundred feet (100').
c. Water System: Subdivision development requires a community water system constructed in accordance with city, county and state standards
and which will be compatible with connection to city services upon future annexation. Dry lines may be required if the subdivision is in close
proximity to city limits.
d. Sewer System: One septic permitted per lot. Approval in accordance with county and state standards. Soils analysis required (see section 9-16-
10 of this chapter). Dry lines may be required if the subdivision is in close proximity to city limits.
e. Municipal Service: Full range of municipal services as per city standards required in preparation for annexation.
(1) Streets, sidewalks, curb and gutter which meet city standards. Streets shall be concrete or asphalt.
Where parcels of land are subdivided into unusually large lots (more than 1 acre lots), the parcels shall be divided, where feasible, so as to
allow for future division into smaller parcels. Lot arrangements shall allow for the ultimate extension of adjacent streets through the middle of
wide blocks. Whenever such future subdividing or lot splitting is contemplated, the plan thereof shall show proposed extension of streets and
be approved by the commission prior to the taking of such action.
(2) Dry lines for water and sewer.
(3) Underground power/telephone/gas/cable TV.
f. Storm Drainage: See section 9-16-12 of this chapter.
g. Future Annexation Agreements: Development agreements for future annexation and municipal city service hookups shall be required.
2. Subdivision lots five (5) acres or more and/or five (5) acre subdivision lots in the area of critical concern/Elmore County (CDO) development
standards: Regardless of the size lots, when the subdivision is contiguous with the city limits it shall be developed to city standards.
a. Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size shall be five (5) acres or more per dwelling structure.
b. Lot Width: The minimum lot width (5 acres) shall be three hundred feet (300').
c. Water And Sewer: One well and one septic allowed per five (5) acres. Soils analysis required (see section 9-16-10 of this chapter).
Any variance consideration of subdivisions with more than one dwelling unit per five (5) acres in the CDO or any area of critical concern shall,
as a condition of approval, be required to connect to a central water system and to a central sewer system, as approved by the city engineer,
prior to occupancy. If such a sewer is not available, development shall be served by sewage disposal systems that provide aquifer protection
equal to or greater than those listed below:
(1) A collection and treatment facility utilizing sealed lagoon(s); or
(2) A collection and treatment facility utilizing holding tanks and transport/disposal to a licensed disposal site.
d. Stormwater/Surface Drainage: As per stormwater management, section 9-16-12 of this chapter. Facilities in the CDO and/or area of critical
concern shall be designed so that surface waters or any spilled or leaked materials cannot infiltrate into the ground or irrigation systems.
e. Streets: All streets shall be constructed to city standards and paved with asphalt or concrete. No sidewalk, curb and gutter required.
Where parcels of land are subdivided into large lots, the parcels shall be divided, where feasible, so as to allow for future division into smaller
parcels. Lot arrangements shall allow for the ultimate extension of adjacent streets through the middle of wide blocks. Whenever such future
subdividing or lot splitting is contemplated, the plan thereof shall show proposed extension of streets and be approved by the commission prior
to the taking of such action.
f. Signs: Signs shall comply with chapter 13 of this title.
g. Future Annexation Agreement: Development agreements for future annexation and hookups may be required as a condition of the subdivision
approval. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-16-17: WAIVER:
A. General Requirements: Waiver of any of the requirements of this chapter may be granted by the council on a case by case basis upon the
recommendation of the commission. Application for such waiver(s) must be in writing and must show that there are special physical characteristics
or conditions affecting the property in question where literal enforcement of this chapter would result in undue hardship not the result of actions by
the subdivider, and that the waiver would not be detrimental to the public welfare, health and safety, nor injurious to property owners in the
immediate area.
B. Application For Waiver: Applications shall be made to the administrator in writing at the time of subdivision application. Such waiver, together with
such related data and maps as are necessary to fully illustrate the relief sought, shall be filed at that time. Such application shall be processed and
considered with the preliminary plat application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 235/258
C. Appeal: Any aggrieved party may appeal pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 9-6-5 of this title. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-16-18: REJECTION OF PLAT:
See chapter 6, appeals of this title. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
Chapter 17
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
9-17-1: CONDITIONAL USES:
It is the intent of this section to allow a procedure by which a special permit for a land use or structure, which may be prohibited or may tend to create
an impact within a specific zoning district, to be permitted or expanded by adding additional criteria and regulations when it is not in conflict with the
comprehensive plan. (See definition of "conditional use" in chapter 3 of this title.)
A. Conditional Use Application: An application shall be filed with the development services department and shall contain the following information:
1. Name, address, and phone number of applicant/owner.
2. Legal description of property.
3. Proof of ownership of subject property.
4. Description of existing use of subject property.
5. Proposed use of the subject property.
6. The zoning district that pertains to the subject property.
7. Three (3) copies of a vicinity map of a scale of one inch equals three hundred feet (1" = 300').
8. Payment of fee as established by the council.
9. A plot plan or survey, if applicable, of the proposed site for the special use showing the location of all buildings, number of off street parking
spaces and loading area, traffic access and traffic circulation, pedestrian walks, open spaces, landscaping, refuse and service areas, utilities,
signs, yards and such other information as the commission may require to determine if the proposed special use meets the intent and
requirements of this chapter. Any development agreements shall be presented with the final plat.
10. An objective narrative statement evaluating the effects on adjoining property; the effect of such elements as noise, glare, odor, fumes and
vibration on adjoining property; a discussion of the general compatibility with adjacent and other properties in the district; the plan shall not be
detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the public; and the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan.
11. A verification by the applicant and which shall state that he has read the contents thereof and verifies that the information contained therein is
true and correct.
12. A listing of the mailing addresses of all property owners or purchasers of record, obtained from authentic tax records of Elmore County, who are
within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land in question.
B. Procedure For Hearing And Notice: One public hearing required with notice published, posted and mailed to property owners within three hundred
feet (300') of the site.
C. General Standards Applicable To All Conditional Uses: Prior to granting a conditional use permit the commission and council shall review the general
standards of this chapter and may request studies from the applicant, planning staff or public agencies concerning the social, economic, fiscal or
environmental effects of the proposed conditional use. They shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each proposed conditional use in
terms of the following and shall find adequate evidence showing that such use at the proposed location:
1. Will, in fact, constitute an allowed conditional use in that zone, as determined by the use chart in chapter 7 of this title;
2. Will be in accordance with goals and objectives of the Mountain Home comprehensive plan and with all the applicable provisions of this zoning
ordinance;
3. Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be harmonious with the existing or the intended character of the general vicinity and
that such use and/or expansion will not change the essential character of the same area;
4. Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses;
5. Will be served adequately by existing essential public facilities and services such as highways, streets, schools, police and fire protection,
drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer or that the person responsible for the establishment of the proposed conditional use shall
be able to provide adequately any such services;
6. Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 236/258
7. Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment or conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property or the
general welfare by reason of the environment, or excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare, or odors;
8. Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public
streets; and
9. Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural or scenic feature of major importance.
D. Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards: In recommending and approving any conditional use, the commission and council, respectively, may
prescribe and/or require appropriate conditions, bonds, studies, reports, and safeguards in conformity with this title. Violations of such conditions,
bonds, or safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this title and
grounds to revoke the conditional use.
1. Conditions Attached To Conditional Use: Conditions may be attached to a conditional use permit including, but not limited to, those conditions
which:
a. Minimize adverse impact on other development;
b. Control the sequence and timing of development;
c. Control the duration of development (may be granted in perpetuity);
d. Assure that the development is maintained properly;
e. Designate the exact location and nature of the development;
f. Require the provision for on site public facilities or services;
g. Require more restrictive standards than those generally required in this title;
h. Require mitigation of effects of the proposed development upon service delivery by any political subdivision, i.e., schools, parks, fire protection,
highway, irrigation district or Elmore County;
i. Allow a change from required setbacks, off street parking, fence heights, landscaping and other standards particular to the development.
Applicants shall specify, in the conditional use applications, standards from which a change is requested. The commission shall review such
requests in accordance with variance procedures unless otherwise provided for herein.
E. Action By The Commission: Within forty five (45) days from the hearing, the commission shall transmit, to the city council, its recommendations to
approve, approve with conditions or to disapprove with supportive reasons. The commission may, however, continue the matter from meeting to
meeting if it finds that it does not have sufficient information to make a decision.
F. Action Of Council: Upon recommendation from the commission, the city council may or may not hold a second public hearing. A second hearing shall
be required to follow notice and hearing procedures provided in Idaho Code and this chapter. Prior to acting upon a conditional use permit
application, the council shall review the general standards and may request studies from the applicant, planning staff or public agencies concerning
the social, economic fiscal, or environmental effects of the proposed conditional use. The council may approve, approve with conditions or
disapprove with supportive reasons. The council's approval shall be subject to the ability of political subdivisions, including school districts, to provide
services as per Idaho Code.
Within ten (10) days after a decision has been rendered, the administrator shall provide the applicant with written notice of the action.
G. Application, Resubmittal: No application for conditional use permit which has been denied by the council shall be resubmitted in either the same or
substantially the same form in less than one year from the date of final action thereon.
H. Commencement Of Permits: Within one year from the date of issuance of the conditional use permit, the holder of the permit must:
1. Permit: Acquire construction permits and commence placement of permanent footings and structures on or in the ground. The definition of
"structures" in this context shall include sewer lines, water lines, streets, or building foundations; or
2. Commence Construction: Commence the use permitted by the permit in accordance with the conditions of approval; or
3. Platted Project: For projects which require platting, record the plat within this period.
4. Time Frame For Completion: The time or period within which the work shall be completed may be fixed. If the conditions of approval are not
completed or bonded within such period, said permit shall lapse.
I. Extensions: The council, upon written request by the holder, may grant a one year time extension to an unexpired conditional use permit.
J. Precedent Established: A conditional use permit shall not be considered as establishing a binding precedent to grant other conditional use permits.
K. Transfer Of Conditional Use: Conditional use permits may be transferred from owner to owner for the same use, but not from one site to another.
L. Revocation Of Conditional Use: All conditional use permits are subject to revocation by the city council. If the city council decides to revoke a
conditional use, either on its own action or upon complaint to the city council, the city council shall notify the permit holder of its intention to revoke
the conditional use permit and provide the permit holder with the opportunity to contest the revocation. The city shall hold a hearing on the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 237/258
revocation as required under public hearing procedures herein. The city council shall make findings of facts and conclusions of law supporting its
decision to revoke the conditional use permit. An aggrieved permit holder or complainant may appeal the decision of the city council under the
administrative procedure act of the state of Idaho, title 67, chapter 52, Idaho Code.
M. Expansion Of An Existing Conditional Use: Expansions shall be by conditional use.
N. Existing Conditional Use: Where a use is classified as a legal conditional use and exists as a legal conditional use on the date of the adoption hereof,
it shall be considered a legal conditional use without further action of the commission or council. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
Chapter 18
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
9-18-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A planned unit development (PUD) is a parcel or combination of parcels of land which is planned and developed as a unit under single ownership or
control. It may contain one or a mixture of uses, types of buildings, as well as common open space, clustered development and/or recreational facilities.
The purpose of the PUD process is to provide opportunity for land development that preserves and utilizes natural topographic, geologic and scenic
features; allows a more efficient pattern of residential and commercial uses; fosters innovative design concepts and promotes flexibility in site design;
and provides for common open space or other amenities not found in traditional lot by lot development. The PUD process allows the city to approve
modifications from the development standards of the underlying zoning designation in order to encourage creative design for land use development
than is generally available under conventional zoning regulations. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-18-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Every PUD requires a PUD permit. A PUD shall be subject to applicable development requirements set forth in this code. Whenever there is a conflict
or difference between the provisions of this code, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-18-3: OWNERSHIP REQUIREMENTS:
An application for approval of a PUD may be filed by a property owner(s) or a person having an existing interest in the property to be included in the
PUD. The PUD application shall be filed in the name of the recorded owner of property included in the development. However, the application may be
filed by the holder(s) of an equitable interest in such property. In all applications, sufficient proof that the record owner of the property consents to the
submission and processing of the application must be present prior to the zoning official reviewing the application for completeness. The zoning official
may require the applicant to submit a title report for the subject property to verify ownership. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-18-4: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Approval Standards: The council may approve a PUD in accordance with the following standards:
1. Density Formula: Density of residential areas of the PUD shall be computed apart from the nonresidential uses (including, but not limited to, office,
commercial and public uses) of the PUD. For purposes of establishing the density applicable to the residential portion of the PUD, actual density
of the residential area shall not exceed the number of dwelling units per acre specified in the zoning district. Residential density in a PUD shall be
calculated by multiplying the gross residential area (gross acreage less office, landscaped buffer strips or commercial use area) by the maximum
number of dwelling units per acre allowed for the zoning district in which the site is located. A variety of housing types may be included in
residential projects including attached units, detached units, single-family units and multiple units. Residential density shall not be provided for the
following uses: FEMA designated floodways; slopes over twenty five percent (25%) and public lands.
2. Open Space: Developed open space of at least twenty percent (20%) of the gross area is required. (Landscaped open space is mandatory for all
developments and minimum landscape ordinance requirements will not be counted as an amenity for the purposes of this provision.) In
nonresidential zoning districts, the applicant can request a waiver of the twenty percent (20%) open space requirement from the city council but
such waiver must require a minimum of ten percent (10%) of open space of the gross area exclusive of required street buffers and buffers
between incompatible land uses. Such a waiver is at the sole discretion of the city council.
3. Amenities: Two (2) or more of the following amenities shall be provided as part of each PUD to ensure a public benefit:
a. Active open space recreational facilities of a size suitable to meet the needs of the development. "Active open space" shall be defined as:
neighborhood areas that provide gathering areas for active recreation (e.g., such as a playground, picnic area, basketball or tennis court,
swimming pool, clubhouse, golf course, open fields, tot lot, and running/equestrian trails).
b. Passive open space including public pedestrian or bicycle circulation system within the project (exclusive of required sidewalks adjacent to
public right of way) and connecting to existing or planned pedestrian or bicycle routes outside the project, designed and constructed in
accordance with standards set forth by the city of Mountain Home. "Passive open space" shall be defined as: neighborhood areas that provide a
combination of linear open space and scenic features (e.g., ponds, berms and provision of view corridors).
c. Other amenities appropriate to the size and uses of the proposed development, as may be proposed by the applicant and approved by the city
council (e.g., natural or preserved areas).
d. Construction and maintenance of all amenities shall be specified by the applicant prior to approval of the preliminary plat/final development
plan. Thereafter such maintenance and operation responsibilities of these facilities shall be undertaken by a homeowners' association or by the
city or other governmental entity if dedicated to and officially accepted by the city or other governmental entity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 238/258
4. Setbacks: Along the periphery of the PUD, setbacks shall be provided as required by regulation of the district in which the development is located
unless an exception is provided. Where development already exists at the periphery, the setbacks shall be aligned, where practical. Setbacks for
buildings within the interior of the site may be less than required in the designated zoning district. Special landscape buffers between differing
uses as set forth in the landscape ordinance shall apply to PUDs. Attached structures may be permitted in PUDs with strict compliance with the
building code requirements for party and fire separation walls. The minimum separation between detached structures shall be ten feet (10') unless
fire or building codes require modified separation.
5. Driveways, Streets And Pathways: Driveways to one- and two-family dwellings shall not be less than twenty feet (20') in width. Service driveways,
drive-through lanes and escape lanes shall have a minimum width of twelve feet (12') per lane, without parking on either side. Publicly dedicated
streets shall be designed and constructed to city or applicable highway district standards. Private streets may be utilized within the project with
standards that are less than public street standards subject to applicable laws and regulations, if approved by the city council and set forth in a
development agreement.
6. Housing Types: A variety of housing types may be included within a single PUD including, for example: attached units (townhomes, duplexes),
detached units (patio homes, single-family and multi-family units), regardless of the underlying zoning classification of the site such that the overall
density limit of the zone is maintained.
7. Off Street Parking: Off street parking shall comply with the parking requirements of the underlying zone. No common parking or maneuvering
areas shall be allowed within twenty feet (20') of the boundary of the PUD. All common parking or maneuvering areas shall be buffered from
adjacent properties. The buffer area may include natural features, but must be landscaped (and may include fencing or screen walls) with the
objective of minimizing adverse impacts to surrounding properties. In addition to the above requirements, where on street parking is prohibited, at
least one-half (1/2) additional parking space per dwelling unit shall be provided either in approved parking bays along the street or in an off street
parking area.
8. Signs: Signs shall comply with the sign requirements of this code.
9. Stormwater Management: The management of stormwater shall conform to the Idaho department of environmental quality and standard
engineering best management practices and any applicable stormwater management policies adopted by the city.
10. Other Uses: Other types of uses, in addition to residential, may be permitted within a single PUD (e.g., commercial or industrial) in compliance
with the provisions of this code and with the approval of the city council.
11. PUD: The PUD must meet the general objectives of the comprehensive land use plan adopted by the city.
12. Utility: Existing and proposed streets and utility services must be suitable and adequate for the proposed development.
13. Development Agreement: If the PUD involves a rezone, a development agreement shall be required between the developer and the city which
delineates commitments of the developer to the city and of the city to the developer.
14. Public Hearing Requirement: The PUD is subject to the public hearing requirements of this code.
15. Concurrent Review: Concurrent review of other applications may be required. In cases where a subdivision is being proposed or would be
required, concurrent review of the detailed PUD and subdivision plat is required.
B. Area Size: A PUD shall have a minimum area size of eight thousand (8,000) square feet. All land within the development shall be contiguous as
defined under Idaho Code section 50-222. Parcels that are not contiguous due to intervening streets are discouraged. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-18-5: DEVELOPER/APPLICANT INCENTIVES AND BENEFITS:
PUDs are intended to provide particular benefits to the public and to the developer through a mixture of uses and integrated nature of the projects.
Public benefit is ensured by the provision of public improvements and the amenities required by this code, and, for infill developments, by the increased
efficiency of the use of land and public services. Deviations from the development standards and/or area requirements of the underlying zone may be
approved if the proposed uses are not detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses and are not detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of the public. Any variation from the basic zoning district requirements must be warranted by the design and amenities incorporated in the
preliminary plat and/or final development plan. The commission and council may consider lands that include intervening streets on a case by case
basis. To provide the developer with an incentive to utilize the PUD process, the following deviations from conventional development standards may be
incorporated into a PUD proposal:
A. Variety Of Housing Types: A variety of housing types may be included in the planned development.
B. Reductions: The minimum lot size for each building and setbacks for buildings within the project may be reduced below those normally required for
the zoning district.
C. Uses Not Normally Permitted: Twenty percent (20%) of the site may include uses not normally permitted in the designated zoning district.
D. Clusters: Buildings may be clustered to preserve scenic, historic, aesthetic or environmentally sensitive areas in the natural state, or to consolidate
small open spaces into larger, more usable areas for common use and enjoyment.
E. Conditions Of Approval: The conditions of the approval established for a PUD shall be consistently applied to all phases of the development, unless
specifically agreed to otherwise during the approval process.
F. Residential Density Bonus: A residential density bonus may be given for dedications of land for public use such as: school, park, library, public utility,
fire station or recreational facility, which are provided to the public entity by donation or at a cost less than, or equal to, the applicant's
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 239/258
predevelopment cost for that land.
G. Increased Residential Density: The commission may recommend, and the council may authorize, an increased residential density of up to five
percent (5%) of the allowable number of residential dwelling units that are allowed in the designated zoning district for each of the following:
1. Landscaping, street design and streetscape, open spaces (active and passive uses) and plazas, use of required landscaping, pedestrian walkway
design and distribution, and recreation uses.
2. Siting visual focal points; use of existing physical features such as topography, view, sun and wind orientation; motorized and nonmotorized
vehicle circulation pattern; physical environment; variation in building setbacks and building clustering.
3. Design features; street sections (e.g., frontage and backage roads), architectural styles, harmonious use of materials; parking areas augmented
by landscape features; and varied use of housing styles and housing options (e.g., estate homes, townhouses).
4. Permanent protection of significant natural features, view sheds and historic sites and structures.
H. Bonuses May Not Exceed Allowable Dwelling Units: Residential density bonuses for all incentives listed in subsection G of this section may not
exceed twenty percent (20%) of the allowable number of residential dwelling units that are allowed in the designated zoning district. (Ord. 1628, 1-
12-2015)
9-18-6: OPEN SPACE/COMMON AREA AMENITIES:
A minimum of twenty percent (20%), unless otherwise approved, of the gross land area developed in any residential PUD project shall be reserved for
common open space and recreational facilities.
A. Construction And Maintenance: The required amount of common open space land reserved under a PUD shall either be held in corporate ownership
by owners of the project area for the use of each owner who buys property within the development or be dedicated to the public and retained as
common open space for parks, recreation and related uses. Public utility and similar easements and rights of way for watercourses and other similar
channels are not acceptable for common open space dedication unless such land or right of way is usable as a trail or other similar purpose and
approved by the city council.
The responsibility for the maintenance of all open spaces shall be specified by the developer before approval of the final PUD plan. The
development must have a perpetual agreement to maintain the open space and cannot dissolve this clause in the master declaration or covenants,
conditions and restrictions.
B. Open Space: Unless otherwise approved, not less than twenty percent (20%) of the total gross area of a residential PUD shall be retained as
permanent open space and shall not include strips of less than fifteen feet (15') in width unless designed to accommodate a water feature such as a
pond or stream. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of land area of a PUD devoted to multiple-family residential uses shall consist of open space. A
waiver of the open space requirement may not be granted for a PUD devoted to multiple-family residential uses. Of this required open space,
portions may be "common area" used for recreational or other collective enjoyment by occupants of the development, privately owned properties
dedicated by easements to assure that open space will be permanent, and lands developed as active recreational areas or preserved in their natural
state when such areas contain unique natural assets such as groves of trees, ponds, rivers or streambeds.
C. Dimension: In order to be functionally usable, open space should exist in quantities of some minimum dimension. Therefore, the areas of each parcel
of open space to be used for active recreational use shall have a size and shape consistent with the planned use.
D. Location: Open spaces shall be distributed within projects in locations near the dwelling units of the people they are intended to serve. A minimum of
fifty percent (50%) of dwelling units shall be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of designated open space within the planned unit
development.
E. Open Space Shared Or Public: Land indicated as open space, common areas, amenities (tennis courts, playgrounds, swimming pool, etc.), streets
and sidewalks shall be shown on the preliminary plan and provide on the plan that they be permanently maintained as such either by a homeowners'
association which provides private covenants, an agreement with the developer, or if suitable and mutually agreeable, by public dedications.
F. Easements: Easements for pedestrian/bicycle/equestrian pathways in accordance with the city's comprehensive plan.
G. Amenities: Amenities shall be provided as a part of each planned unit development. A minimum of two (2) amenities shall be provided within a
development. As the project size increases the number and/or size of the amenities shall also increase proportionally. These amenities may include,
but not be limited to, any of the following:
1. Private recreational facilities such as a swimming pool, tennis court, barbecue area or playground of a size appropriate to meet needs of the
development.
2. Provision for public access to any public open space, park or lake/river greenbelt.
3. Publicly dedicated land in a PUD for facilities such as school, fire station, well site, public park, and public recreational facility.
4. Additional open space for parkways, boulevards, or other features designed to mitigate vehicle/traffic impact.
5. Other amenities as approved by the council. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 240/258
9-18-7: UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
Underground utility distribution and service facilities, including, but not limited to: telecommunications, water, sewer, irrigation, cable, and electrical
systems, are required within the limits of all planned unit developments, appurtenances to these systems which must be effectively screened. (Ord.
1628, 1-12-2015)
9-18-8: ARRANGEMENT OF USES:
The plan of the PUD project shall provide for the integrated and harmonious design of buildings, and for adequate and properly arranged facilities for
internal traffic circulation, landscaping and such other features and facilities as may be necessary to make the project attractive and efficient from the
standpoint of the adjoining and surrounding noncommercial areas. All areas designed for future expansion or not intended for immediate improvement
or development shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained in a neat and orderly manner. Guidelines for commercial and residential PUDs are as
follows:
A. Commercial: When proposed within a nonresidential area the plan of the project shall provide for the integrated and harmonious design of buildings,
and for adequate and properly arranged facilities for internal traffic circulation, landscaping and such other features and facilities as may be
necessary to make the project attractive and efficient from the standpoint of the adjoining and surrounding noncommercial areas. A twenty foot (20')
wide buffer area should be used along the exterior boundary of a PUD when abutting residential areas or uses.
B. Residential: When residential projects include commercial uses as allowed in this chapter and are located within a residentially designated area the
commercial uses should be designed and scaled to primarily serve the residential portions of the project in which they are located and focus
internally to the development. Planting screens or fences shall be provided on the perimeter of the commercial areas abutting residential areas.
Commercial areas shall not be located on the exterior of the project site so as not to abut existing residential uses. A twenty foot (20') wide buffer
area should be used along the exterior boundary of a PUD when similar uses or like sized lots are not provided. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-18-9: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF A PUD:
A. Prior to the submission of an application for a PUD, the applicant shall contact the zoning official or their designee and arrange for a preapplication
conference. The purpose of this conference is to provide guidance to the developer in preparing the application. Therefore, the developer should
request the meeting well before preparing the application materials. A draft site plan and preliminary plat map (if required) shall be available at the
preapplication meeting.
B. A PUD application may be submitted and processed as a concept plan. The applicant must specify the application and site plan for which approval is
being requested. A concept approval is a statement by the city of Mountain Home that a general development plan including the arrangements of
uses, density, location of major streets, open spaces, utilities, etc., is acceptable. A concept review allows the applicant to obtain approval of a
general development plan without incurring the expense of detailed building plans until after concept approval. It provides the developer and the city
with guidelines for the design of each phase of the project. Supporting information may be required by the zoning official on issues of major
importance for the project prior to deeming the application complete.
Each phase of a concept approval requires detailed subdivision plat approval through a new application, fee and public hearing. The only exception
to the detailed subdivision plat requirement is single-family dwellings proposed as the primary use within a development. The single-family dwelling
portion of the project shall be reviewed in detail under subdivision requirements of this code.
C. Every PUD requires an application, including all plans and information required by this code. Phasing plans shall be included if the project is to be
phased. The application is subject to the public hearing requirements of this code.
D. Concurrent review of other applications may be required as determined by the zoning official or their designee. In cases where subdivision platting
would be necessary, concurrent review of the PUD application may be required. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-18-10: APPLICATION FOR A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
A. General Application Requirements: An application for approval of a proposed PUD shall be made to the city clerk and shall include all information
specified in this chapter. An application shall not be accepted until the zoning official determines that the application is complete.
B. Preliminary PUD Development Plan: Ten (10) copies of the preliminary PUD development plan, which shall consist of drawings and supplementary
written material adequate to provide the following information:
1. Statement of how the purpose and intent will be achieved by the planned unit development, including sketches or illustrations of the proposed
character of the development, a description of how the planned unit development will relate to surrounding land uses and identified key
neighborhood features, if any, and whether a zone change, comprehensive plan amendment, variance, floodplain permit, preliminary plat is also
requested.
2. An outline of the proposed planned unit development stating: land use allocation by type, including the amount of land for housing, density, open
spaces, roadways and parking, the number and type of housing units, and how necessary services will be provided and whether services are
publicly or privately owned and operated.
3. Preliminary drawings at a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'). The preliminary drawings shall display the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 241/258
a. The name of the proposed planned unit development.
b. Date, north point and scale of drawing.
c. Legal description of the planned unit development other than metes and bounds, sufficient to define its location and boundaries.
d. Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owners, designer of the PUD, and engineer, planner and surveyor, if any, and the date of the
survey.
e. Appropriate identification of the drawing as a preliminary plan.
C. Natural Features And Existing Utilities Map: Ten (10) copies of a natural features map showing an inventory of existing site features including:
1. Ground elevations shown by contour lines at two foot (2') intervals or less.
2. General soil types as documented by a soils engineer or engineering geologist, if necessary.
3. Fish and wildlife habitats, and special status plants and animals, if any.
4. Existing stormwater facilities.
5. Water features, such as ponds, wetlands and watercourses.
6. Areas subject to flooding.
7. Natural features, such as trees, watercourses, historic sites, and similar irreplaceable amenities.
8. Existing on site or abutting sanitary sewer, storm drainage and water supply facilities. If such facilities are not on or abutting the site, an indication
of the direction and distance to the nearest ones.
9. Width, location and purpose of all existing easements of record on and abutting the site.
10. Information on land areas contiguous and adjacent to the proposed planned unit development and existing adjacent areas, including zoning
classifications, land uses, densities, circulation systems, public facilities, traffic study, unique natural features of the landscape, and approximate
locations of nearby structures.
D. Conceptual Site Plan: Ten (10) copies of a proposed conceptual site plan showing:
1. The general locations of residential and nonresidential uses.
2. Location of major streets.
3. The proposed yard requirements for residential and nonresidential uses.
4. The existing and proposed traffic circulation system serving the PUD.
5. The existing and proposed pedestrian and bicycle circulation system.
6. Conceptual plans for all necessary services including their location and whether the services will be publicly or privately owned and maintained.
Location of utilities as would tie into the project.
7. Proposed location and treatment of any public or private common areas or structures including open spaces, park or recreation areas, and school
sites.
8. The approximate amount, location and type of buffering and/or landscaping.
9. Proposed architectural styles.
10. Identification of the location and configuration of open space (active and passive).
11. Identification of hazard areas.
12. An economic feasibility study.
E. Traffic Impact Analysis: All subdivisions containing more than twenty (20) lots shall provide a traffic impact analysis based on information that reflects
current traffic conditions. A traffic impact analysis may be required of any development as deemed necessary by the zoning official (or designee) on
a case by case basis.
F. Development Schedule: A development schedule indicating to the best of applicant's knowledge the approximate date on which construction of all
phases of the entire project can be expected to begin, the anticipated rate of development, and completion date. The schedule, if approved by the
city council, shall become a part of the final development plan and shall be adhered to by the owner of the property in the planned unit development
and his successors in interest.
G. Additional Information: Any additional information required by the zoning official (or designee), city engineer, city attorney or city council.
H. Approval: Approval of the preliminary development plan does not constitute approval of the final development plan/preliminary plat. If the applicant is
requesting preliminary subdivision plat approval concurrently with the preliminary PUD approval, a preliminary subdivision plat shall be submitted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 242/258
I. Verification: Verification that all outstanding taxes and assessments levied by political subdivisions have been paid on the property included in the
application. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-18-11: RECOMMENDATION BY ZONING OFFICIAL OR COMMISSION AND DECISION BY THE CITY COUNCIL:
The zoning official (or designee) shall review the preliminary development plan application and draft a written recommendation for the city. On any PUD
application, the city council shall submit the application to the commission for a recommendation from the commission. Within sixty (60) days after
receipt of the zoning official's or commission's recommendation on a PUD application, the council should hold a public hearing on the application and
either approve the application with or without supplementary conditions or give reasons for its disapproval.
The council should find that the facts submitted with the application and presented to them establish that:
A. The proposed development shall be initiated within two (2) years of the date of approval.
B. Each individual unit of the development, as well as the total development, can exist as an independent unit capable of creating an environment of
sustained desirability and stability or that adequate assurance will be provided that such objective will be attained; the uses proposed will not be
detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses, but will have a beneficial effect which would not be achieved under standard district
regulations.
C. The streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and adequate to carry anticipated traffic, and increased densities will not generate traffic in such
amounts as to overload the street network outside the PUD.
D. Any proposed commercial development can be justified at the intensity and locations proposed.
E. Any exception from standard district requirements is warranted by the design and other amenities incorporated in the final development plan, in
accordance with the planned unit development and the adopted policy of the council.
F. The area surrounding said development can be planned and zoned in coordination and substantial compatibility with the proposed development.
G. The PUD is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan.
H. The existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the population densities and nonresidential uses proposed.
I. The reasons for approval or denial; and the actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a permit if the application is denied. If the application
is either approved or approved with conditions, the council shall direct the zoning official (or designee) to issue zoning permits only in accordance
with the approved PUD plan, and preliminary plat and the supplementary conditions attached thereto. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-18-12: EXTENSION OF PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL:
The applicant may request one extension of the two (2) year time limit not later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the preliminary
development plan one year limit. Any extension requested beyond the two (2) years requires approval of city council. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-18-13: FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
A. Application For Approval: Upon approval in principle of a preliminary development plan, an application for approval of the final development plan
shall be filed with the zoning official (or designee) by at least one property owner or person having a presently existing interest in the property for
which the PUD is proposed. Each application shall be signed by the owner or lessee, attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied
on the application for final development plan. Each application shall clearly state that the approval shall expire and may be revoked if construction on
the project has not begun within one year from the date of issuance of the approval. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following
information:
1. A survey of the proposed development site showing the dimensions and bearings of the property lines, area in acres, topography and existing
features of the development site, including major wooded areas, structures, streets, easements, utility lines and land uses;
2. All the information required on the preliminary development plan, the location and sizes of lots, location and proposed density of dwelling units,
nonresidential building intensity and land use considered suitable for adjacent properties;
3. A schedule for the development of units to be constructed in progression and a description of the design principles for buildings and streetscapes;
tabulation of the number of acres in the proposed project for various uses; the number of housing units proposed by type; estimated residential
population by type of housing; estimated nonresidential population; anticipated timing for each unit and standards for height, open space, building
density, parking areas, population density and public improvements proposed for each unit of the development whenever the applicant proposed
an exception from the standard zoning districts or other ordinances governing development;
4. Engineering feasibility studies and plans showing, as necessary, water, sewer, drainage, electricity, telephone and natural gas installations; waste
disposal facilities; street improvements and nature and extent of earthwork required for site preparation and development;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 243/258
5. Site plan, showing buildings, various functional use areas, circulation and their relationship;
6. Preliminary building plans, including floor plans and exterior elevations;
7. Landscaping plans;
8. Environmental assessment, traffic study, grading plan or other study necessary for the proposed site to substantiate the preliminary development
plan approval, including, but not limited to: habitat and wildlife mitigation; fiscal mitigation agreements; design guidelines; approvals from
jurisdictional entities and service providers; hydrology studies and water rights; and final site plans; and
9. Deed restrictions, protective covenants and other legal statements or devices to be used to control the use, development and maintenance of the
land, and the improvements thereon, including those areas which are to be commonly owned and maintained.
B. Recommendation By Commission: Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the final development plan, the commission shall recommend to the council
that the final development plan be approved as presented, approved with supplementary conditions or disapproved. The commission shall then
transmit all papers constituting the record and the recommendations to the council.
The commission shall find that the facts submitted with the application and presented to them establish that:
1. The proposed development can be initiated within two (2) years of the date of approval.
2. Each individual unit of the development, as well as the total development, can exist as an independent unit capable of creating an environment of
sustained desirability and stability or that adequate assurance will be provided that such objective will be attained; the uses proposed will not be
detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses, but will have a beneficial effect which would not be achieved under standard district
regulations.
3. The streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and adequate to carry anticipated traffic, and increased densities will not generate traffic in
such amounts as to overload the street network outside the PUD.
4. Any proposed commercial development can be justified at the intensity and locations proposed.
5. Any exception from standard district requirements is warranted by the design and other amenities incorporated in the final development plan, in
accordance with the planned unit development and the adopted policy of the council.
6. The area surrounding said development can be planned and zoned in coordination and substantial compatibility with the proposed development.
7. The PUD is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan.
8. The existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the population densities and nonresidential uses proposed.
9. The reasons for approval or denial; and the actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a permit if the application is denied. If the
application is either approved or approved with conditions, the council shall direct the zoning official (or designee) to issue zoning permits only in
accordance with the approved PUD plan, and preliminary plat and the supplementary conditions attached thereto.
C. Action By The Council: Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the final recommendations of the commission, the council shall either approve, approve
with supplementary conditions or disapprove the application as presented. Upon granting or denying the application, the council shall specify:
1. The ordinance and standards used in evaluating the application;
2. The reasons for approval or denial; and
3. The actions, if any, that the application could take to obtain a permit.
If the application is either approved or approved with conditions, the council shall direct the zoning official (or designee) to issue zoning permits
only in accordance with the approved final development plan and the supplementary conditions attached thereto.
D. Expiration And Extension For Approval Period: The approval of a final development plan for a planned unit development shall be for a period not to
exceed two (2) years to allow for preparation and recording of the required subdivision plat and the development of the project. If no construction
has begun within two (2) years after approval is granted, the approved planned unit development plan shall be void. All phases of the planned unit
development shall be completed within five (5) years of the date of approval, or as otherwise specified in the development agreement; approval of
any uninitiated phases will lapse after that time unless a time extension is granted by the council. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-18-14: IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES:
A. Prior to final plat approval, the applicant shall either install and complete all private service improvements, including streets, pedestrianways, utilities,
landscaping and buffering, or file an improvement guarantee for these items.
B. The improvement guarantee is an agreement between the applicant and city specifying a development schedule setting forth when service
improvements will be made.
C. The agreement shall be in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, and shall be filed with the city clerk.
D. The applicant shall file with the agreement one of the following to assure his full and faithful performance:
1. A certified check or checks;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 244/258
2. A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state of Idaho;
3. Other surety acceptable to the city.
E. Assurance of full and faithful performance shall be for the amount of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated costs of improvements
approved by the city engineer, including related engineering and city inspections.
F. At the discretion of the city, the improvement guarantee may be in the form of separate bonds or checks covering individual portions or specific types
of improvements, rather than one bond or check covering the work.
G. Occupancy permits shall not be issued unless all improvements and conditions of approval have been fulfilled to the satisfaction of the building
official.
H. The city council shall not authorize the city clerk to return the improvement guarantee or guarantees until the improvements related to the guarantee
are complete to the satisfaction of the city council. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-18-15: AMENDMENTS TO THE FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
Any subsequent amendment to the final development plan changing location, siting, and height of buildings and structures may be authorized by the
city council without additional public hearings, if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final plan was approved. In
no case shall the city council authorize changes which may cause any of the following without undertaking a public hearing process as required by
Idaho law and this code.
A. A change in the use or character of the development, or an increase in the overall coverage of structures.
B. An increase of the intensity of use.
C. An increase in the problems of traffic circulation and public utilities.
D. A reduction of off street parking and loading space.
E. A reduction in required pavement widths.
F. All other changes in use, rearrangement of lots, blocks and building tracts, or in the provision of common open spaces and changes other than those
listed above which constitute substantial alteration of the original plan shall require a public hearing and approval by the council. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-
2015)
Chapter 19
DESIGN STANDARDS
9-19-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these standards and guidelines is to produce development that meets a number of objectives. These include:
A. Ensure housing design is based on a consistent, compatible, and aesthetic architecture.
B. Ensure that new housing is designed with sensitivity to the site, as well as pedestrian scale, and reflects a strong residential character for the
neighborhood and community.
C. Ensure that new homes use building materials and architectural finishes in a manner that exemplifies quality, durability and encourages innovative
and imaginative architecture.
D. Support and define safe pedestrian, transit, bicycle and vehicular circulation.
E. Maintain the scale, context and texture of existing neighborhoods.
F. Encourage creative designs for sites and buildings.
G. Allow for infill development that is sensitive to its context. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 245/258
9-19-2: INTENT:
The standards and guidelines in this chapter intend to promote orderly community growth which will both protect and enhance property values for the
community as a whole. In order to protect the existing environment of the city of Mountain Home and to reduce potential impacts of new development
and infill development, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all multi-family development, residential planned unit development (PUD), duplexes
and single-family developments proposing lots (in R-3 and R-4 zones). Each development project shall be evaluated with regard to how it achieves an
overall design that meets the intent and direction of the design standards and guidelines. Each standard includes examples and illustrations of ways in
which the intent of the standard can be achieved. The graphic examples are meant to be examples, and are not the only acceptable means toward
accomplishing the intent and purpose of the standards. Applicants are encouraged to consider designs, styles and other techniques not pictured in the
examples provided that they fulfill the intent of the design standard. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-19-3: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
The standards in this chapter use the word "shall" while the guidelines use the word "should". Regardless of which term is used, each standard and
guideline must be addressed by an applicant. The city will expect to see how the design of a project has responded to each standard and guideline. The
"shall" statements, with such wording, indicate requirements and offer relatively little flexibility unless choices are provided within the statements
themselves. All projects must include these elements as described unless determined by the design review authority that an alternative design
proposed by the applicant meets the general intent and purpose of the design standards and guidelines. However, the guidelines that use the word
"should" are meant to be applied with flexibility. They indicate that the city is open to design features that are equal to, or better than, those stated, so
long as the intent is satisfied. The applicant assumes the burden of proof to demonstrate how a proposed design meets the standards and guidelines
and determination will be made by the design review authority. Applicant has the right to appeal the decision of the design review authority. Appeals will
be decided by a subcommittee of the city council. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
ARTICLE A. MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT
9-19A-1: SITE DESIGN:
9-19A-1-1: FRONT YARDS/ENTRANCES:
A. Intent: The intent is to provide transition and separation between proposed housing and the public pedestrian and vehicular systems where the front
yard functions are usable outdoor space and provide a clear, welcoming, and safe arrival and entry for pedestrians from the sidewalk and streets to
the multi-family buildings.
B. Standards Required:
1. When there are common entries, they shall be clearly identifiable and visible from the street, with well defined walkways from pedestrian routes to
building entries.
2. Front yards shall include an entrance sequence between the sidewalk and the building including elements such as trellises, site furnishings,
landscaped materials and special paving.
3. Building entries should face primary pedestrian access points. If the doorway does not face the street, a clearly marked walkway shall connect the
entry to the sidewalk.
4. Lighting shall be provided to create a condition of personal security which may include yard lighting, parking lot lighting and perimeter security
lighting.
5. Four (4) or more of the following elements shall be used to highlight the main entrance to multi-family buildings:
Architectural details and accents.
Artwork near the entry.
Changes in paving. The use of stamped/colored concrete, pavers, or other alternatives to standard concrete pavements, if appropriate to the site
conditions, is encouraged.
Fencing, arbors, trellis.
Functional, accent lighting, materials, textures, colors:
Colors
Landscaping
Lighting.
Open space, plaza, or courtyard.
Ornamental gate and/or fence.
Planters.
Porches.
Seating.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 246/258
Water features.
6. Landscaping shall be used to enhance the site, building elevations and/or screen elements such as adjacent commercial or industrial
development, utility boxes, outdoor storage areas, and dumpsters. Fencing and other architectural features may be used in addition to or in lieu of
landscaping.
7. Buildings and the major pedestrian entries shall be oriented toward the primary pedestrian street or parking area or if in clusters, toward a
common open space with pedestrian connection to primary pedestrian street.
C. Guidelines Encouraged:
1. If high back curb is used, curb cuts shall be limited to one per one hundred fifty feet (150') of street frontage or as required.
2. Landscape planting should consider the use of native shrubs, trees and ground covers where and when available or feasible.
3. Accent lighting should be used to highlight special focal points, building/site entrances, public art and special community features, if applicable.
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-19A-1-2: COMMON SPACES/USABLE RECREATION AREAS:
A. Intent: The intent is to provide a friendly pedestrian environment through the creation of a variety of usable and interesting open space(s) within multifamily
developments and residential planned unit developments.
B. Standards Required:
1. The standards for common open space apply to all new single-family, duplex, manufactured home, and multi-family developments of five (5) acres
or more. The total land area of all common open space shall equal or exceed five percent (5%) of the gross land area of the development.
2. Where provided, public pedestrian walkways and open spaces shall be connected and accessible to the residents. Private open spaces may not
be included in this requirement.
3. At least one on site common outdoor space shall provide at least two (2) of the following amenities to accommodate a variety of ages and
activities. Amenities include:
Accent paving, such as colored or stained concrete, stone, brick or other unit pavers.
Gardens.
Open lawn with trees.
Patios or courtyards.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 247/258
Pedestrian scaled accent lighting.
Picnic areas, tables, lawn areas.
Play areas.
Public art.
Site furnishings (benches, tables, bike racks).
Special interest landscaping.
Sports courts.
Water feature(s) such as fountains, streams, ponds, etc.
4. Low impact development: Landscaped swales with bioinfiltration designed as part of a stormwater system is counted toward open space and
landscaping minimums.
C. Guidelines Encouraged:
1. Location of outdoor spaces should take advantage of sunlight.
2. Outdoor seating opportunities such as overlook benches, seat walls, ledges, perches, boulders, artwork, etc., should be provided near building
entries, along walkways, and other pedestrian routes outside of parking areas (see subsection 9-19A-1-1B2 of this article).
3. Landscape accent features, such as trellises, arbors, hanging baskets, site furniture, and container planting are encouraged within open spaces,
along pedestrian circulation routes and to define building and/or residential entrances.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 248/258
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-19A-1-3: INDIVIDUAL OUTDOOR SPACES:
A. Intent: The intent is to provide outdoor space that encourages use and a sense of ownership by residents.
B. Standards Required:
1. Individual private outdoor spaces such as yards, decks, terraces, porches, verandas and patios shall be visually and partially screened from each
other and delineated from the street. Shielding may consist of walls, fences, berms, hedges, trellises, arbors and landscaping.
2. Outdoor spaces shall not be located adjacent to dumpster enclosures, loading/service areas, or other incompatible uses without screening and
sight obscuring landscaping provided.
3. Minimum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet of attached private open space for rear or front facades of each unit, inclusive of decks, patios,
other pedestrian only areas. These areas should have a minimum of thirty (30) square feet (5 foot by 6 foot porch and entry or landing).
C. Guidelines Encouraged:
1. Planting areas are encouraged to use hardy natives where and when feasible. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-19A-1-4: LOCATION OF PARKING:
A. Intent: The intent is to maintain a contiguous, active pedestrian realm along street fronts by locating and screening parking lots to the side or behind
buildings. The intent of these guidelines is to locate the parking areas away from the street frontage in a manner which screens and reduces the
appearance of the parking areas from the viewpoint of the adjacent street frontages.
B. Standards Required:
1. In situations where there is one building on a property, the intention of the guideline is to encourage the resident and guest parking for that
building to be located primarily behind or to the side of the building.
2. In situations where one or more larger primary buildings are located on a property, multiple parking areas located adjacent to street frontages are
discouraged.
3. Front yard setbacks may be reduced to no less than fifteen feet (15') for an R-4 or twenty feet (20') for an R-3 when parking is provided at the rear
or side of the building and screened.
C. Guidelines Encouraged:
1. Access to multi-family parking lots located behind buildings should be provided from rear alleys and/or other internal drives.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 249/258
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-19A-1-5: PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING:
A. Intent: The intent is to reduce the visual impact of parking lots through landscaping, screening and/or architectural features that complement the
overall design and character of development.
B. Standards Required:
1. Small Parking Lots: Parking lots with fewer than ten (10) spaces shall be encouraged to consider alternative landscaping options, i.e., container
landscaping.
2. Trees Required: There shall be at least one deciduous tree for every five (5) outdoor parking spaces.
3. Planter Requirements: All interior planters shall:
a. Have curbing or wheel restraints sufficient to prevent cars from overhanging into landscaped areas.
b. Have no tree planting area less than five feet (5') wide in any dimension.
4. Amount Of Landscaping: The amount of landscaping required is based on the total number of parking spaces.
C. Guidelines Encouraged:
1. Existing trees should be retained unless they are unhealthy, cause public safety hazards, or cannot be reasonably retained due to site specific
limits. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-19A-1-6: PARKING LOT LIGHTING:
A. Intent: The intent is to maintain a safe and secure pedestrian environment through the use of adequate lighting.
B. Standards Required:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 250/258
1. Lighting used in parking lots shall not exceed a maximum of thirty feet (30') in height or as deemed appropriate by the reviewing authority.
2. The parking lot lighting should be appropriate to create adequate visibility at night and evenly distributed to increase security.
3. All lighting should be glare free and shielded from the sky and adjacent residential properties and structures, either through exterior shields or
through optics within the fixture.
C. Guidelines Encouraged:
1. Pedestrian scale lighting shall be a maximum of sixteen feet (16') in height, when deemed appropriate by the design review authority. (Ord. 1628,
1-12-2015)
9-19A-1-7: SCREENING OF TRASH AND SERVICE AREAS:
A. Intent: The intent is to reduce the visual impact of trash storage areas.
B. Standards Required:
1. All trash collection areas shall be screened by the use of one or more of the following:
Landscape planting areas.
Masonry.
Wood.
C. Guidelines Encouraged:
1. Use of trellis, arbors or other architectural elements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 251/258
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-19A-2: BUILDING DESIGN:
9-19A-2-1: ROOF PITCH (MINIMUM/MAXIMUM):
A. Intent: The intent is to maintain the residential scale and character of neighborhoods.
B. Standards Required:
1. Structures shall incorporate pitched roof forms having slopes between three to twelve (3:12) and twelve to twelve (12:12) or greater, or flat roofs
with parapets that provide compatible character.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 252/258
C. Guidelines Encouraged:
1. Gables or other roofline variations (i.e., parapets, dormers, etc.) facing the street are encouraged.
2. Dormers, chimneys and other architectural elements may be incorporated to break up long lengths of roof. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-19A-2-2: DIFFERENTIATION OF STRUCTURES:
A. Intent: The intent is to provide differentiation to large residential structures, with a single front facade, shared entries and elevation options for
common side and/or rear entries with two (2) or more units per building. The following standards and guidelines shall apply to all building elevations.
B. Standards Required:
1. When the building floor plans or shapes are repeated in a project, the architectural components shall be changed on each building to add variety.
Examples: front facade treatments, porches and decks, bay windows, trim details.
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-19A-2-3: WINDOWS:
A. Intent: The intent is to maintain a residential character and varied streetscape and building elevation.
B. Standards Required:
1. Windows shall be provided in building facades facing streets.
C. Guidelines Encouraged:
1. Windows should have visually prominent trim and accent elements, at least 1.5 inches in width.
2. Decorative window features are encouraged, such as:
a. Sun shading devices.
b. Planter boxes and trellises.
c. Accent trim.
d. Window shapes that contribute to an overall composition. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-19A-2-4: MODULATION OF EXTERIOR WALLS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 253/258
A. Intent: The intent is to provide residential/pedestrian character along the streetscape.
B. Standards Required:
1. Buildings shall include modulation along the facades. Special attention shall be given to street/publicly viewed areas. Flat blank walls are
discouraged.
2. Horizontal facades longer than thirty feet (30') shall be articulated into smaller units of the residential scale. At least two (2) of the following
methods shall be included:
a. Distinctive roof and wall forms or elements.
b. Changes in materials or patterns.
c. Windows (shape, pattern, trims and/or details).
d. Color differentiation.
e. Recesses/offsets/cantilevers. Architectural features (bay, bow windows; chimneys; lower roofs and awnings).
3. Street facing facades shall be modulated with recesses at least four feet (4') deep at every thirty feet (30') of maximum length. Rooflines shall be
modulated at every seventy five feet (75') of maximum length through the use of varied roof heights five feet (5') or more.
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
ARTICLE B. RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)/DUPLEX AND R-3
AND R-4
9-19B-1: SITE DESIGN:
9-19B-1-1: FRONT YARDS/ENTRANCES:
A. Intent: The intent is to provide distinction, transition and separation between buildings and the public pedestrian and vehicular systems where the
front yards function as usable outdoor space and provide a clear, welcoming, and safe entry for pedestrians from the public sidewalk and streets to
the single-family residences.
B. Standards Required:
1. Primary building entries shall be clearly identifiable and visible from the street, with well defined walkways from public pedestrian and vehicular
systems to residential entries.
2. Developments which utilize a clustered arrangement shall orient buildings around a common open space with a common pedestrian/vehicle
entrance onto the primary street.
3. When the doorway does not face the street, a clearly marked and well maintained walkway shall connect the entry to the sidewalk.
4. Landscaping shall screen undesirable elements such as views to adjacent commercial or industrial development and dumpsters.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 254/258
C. Guidelines Encouraged:
1. Front yards should include an entrance sequence between the public way and the residence which may include elements such as: trellises, site
furnishings, low hedges, landscaped borders, site lighting, and accent paving.
2. Accent lighting should be used to highlight special common area focal points, building/site entrances, public art and special landscape features.
3. Signage identifying building address should be visible from the street and public pedestrian walkway and be a minimum of three inches (3") and a
maximum of six inches (6"). (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-19B-1-2: LANDSCAPING:
A. Standards Required:
1. Landscaping and landscape plans are required for all new structures, except additions to single-family homes.
B. Guidelines Encouraged:
1. Front yards should be planted with drought tolerant plants. Native vegetation is encouraged when and where available and feasible. Native
vegetation must be landscaped and maintained. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-19B-1-3: DRIVEWAYS AND CURB CUTS:
A. Standards Encouraged:
1. Driveways which access onto public streets shall be spaced to minimize access points and to increase the amount of on street parking available.
2. If alley access is available or is provided within the development, vehicle access shall be from the alley with no curb cuts (if applicable).
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-19B-1-4: INDIVIDUAL OUTDOOR SPACES:
A. Intent: The intent is to provide private, outdoor space as distinct from common space that encourages use and reinforces a sense of ownership by
residents.
B. Standards Required:
1. Outdoor spaces shall be screened when located adjacent to dumpster enclosures, loading/service areas, or other incompatible uses.
2. All outdoor spaces shall be landscaped.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 255/258
C. Guidelines Encouraged:
1. Walls, hedges, and fences used to define outdoor private spaces should incorporate visually permeable elements, such as open rails, ironwork, or
trellis treatment to encourage interaction between neighbors.
2. Outdoor spaces such as yards, decks, terraces, porches, verandas and patios shall be delineated from common space. Delineation may consist
of walls, fences, berms, hedges, and landscaping. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-19B-2: BUILDING DESIGN:
9-19B-2-1: HOUSE SIZE IN RELATION TO LOT SIZE:
A. Intent: The intent is to ensure that single-family developments with small lot sizes are compatible with land use goals.
B. Standards Required:
1. Except as permitted under the city's PUD ordinance, lot coverage shall not exceed thirty five percent (35%).
2. The following are exempted from floor area calculations:
a. Uncovered decks less than eighteen inches (18") above grade.
b. Decks shall respect setback requirements per the IRC.
c. Accessory buildings or structures less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet and under six feet (6') in height (limit 1 per lot). (Ord. 1628, 1-
12-2015)
9-19B-2-2: ROOF PITCH (MINIMUM/MAXIMUM):
A. Intent: The intent is to maintain the residential scale and character of neighborhoods.
B. Standards Required:
1. Structures shall incorporate pitched roof forms having slopes between two to twelve (2:12) and fifteen to twelve (15:12) or greater (not applicable
to porches and dormers). Flat roofs with parapets shall also be allowed.
C. Guidelines Encouraged:
1. Gables or other roofline variations (i.e., parapets, second roof, dormers, etc.) facing the street are encouraged.
2. Dormers, chimneys, bay windows and other architectural features may be incorporated to break up long lengths of roof. (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-19B-2-3: WINDOWS:
A. Intent: The intent is to maintain a residential character and varied streetscape and building elevation.
B. Standards Required:
1. Windows shall be provided in building facades facing streets.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 256/258
C. Guidelines Encouraged:
1. Windows should have visually prominent trim and accent elements, at least 1.5 inches in width.
2. Decorative window features are encouraged, such as:
a. Sun shading devices.
b. Planter boxes and trellises.
c. Accent trim.
d. Window shapes that contribute to an overall composition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 257/258
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-19B-2-4: MODULATION OF EXTERIOR WALLS:
A. Intent: The intent is to provide visual residential/pedestrian character and variety along the streetscape.
B. Standards Required:
1. Buildings shall include modulation along the building facades facing and visible from public rights of way and private access driveways and roads.
Flat blank walls are discouraged.
2. Horizontal facades longer than thirty feet (30') shall be articulated into smaller units, of the residential scale. At least two (2) of the following
methods shall be included:
a. Distinctive roof forms and wall forms or elements.
b. Changes in materials or patterns.
c. Windows (shape, trim, pattern and/or details).
d. Color differentiation.
e. Recesses/offsets/cantilevers. Architectural features (bays, bow windows and awnings or lower roofs). (Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)
9-19B-2-5: LOCATION OF GARAGES:
A. Intent: The intent is to ensure that garage doors and automobiles do not dominate the street facing building facades or overshadow pedestrian
entryways and that adequate parking is provided for duplexes and multi-family dwellings.
B. Standards Required:
1. When garage doors are facing the street or private driveways, they shall be set back at least twenty feet (20') from the property line or sidewalk or
edge of pavement of private street.
2. The garage shall not project more than ten feet (10') from the face of the main structure for duplex and multi-family dwellings.
3. Where alleys exist, access to garages shall be primarily off the alley.
4. Where street parking is limited or restricted, each lot shall provide for a minimum of two (2) parking spaces with a driveway area that can
accommodate a minimum of two (2) vehicles.
5. Consideration shall be given to the location of garage door setbacks in relation to street frontage and neighboring properties. Until such time that
subdivision plats are designated with garage setbacks, even numbered lots shall have a minimum setback of twenty feet (20') and odd numbered
lots shall have a minimum setback of twenty two feet (22').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=520 258/258
a. The design review authority shall give consideration to lots in subdivisions that are already under construction, such that new buildings do not
create discord in existing neighborhoods.
C. Guidelines Encouraged:
1. When feasible, garages are to be located away from the street frontage of building facades or architecturally treated.
(Ord. 1628, 1-12-2015)