6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 1/410
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed, but
have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are
any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 4427
AN ORDINANCE ENACTED BY THE NAMPA CITY COUNCIL AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER 9, SECTION 4, SUBSECTION 14, NAMPA CITY
CODE, PERTAINING TO LOCAL LIMITS FOR PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS; PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE; PROVIDING FOR
SEVERABILITY; AND REPEALING ALL ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, ORDERS AND PARTS THEROF, IN CONFLICT HEREWITH.
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Council of the City of Nampa, County of Canyon, State of Idaho:
Section 1. That Title 8, Chapter 9, Section 4, Subsection 14, pertaining to local limits for pretreatment regulations, be amended as follows:
8-9-4 Regulations:
14. Any waters or wastes containing heavy metals and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such a degree that any such material received in the composite
sewage at the point of discharge exceeds the limits as follows. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. The
superintendent may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration based limitations below. Where a user is subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard and a local limit for a given pollutant, the more stringent limit shall apply.
DAILY MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMITS
Arsenic 0.09 mg/l 0.05 mg/l
Cadmium 0.26 mg/l 0.26 mg/l
Chromium 2.26 mg/l 2.26 mg/l
Copper 1.04 mg/l 0.40 mg/l
Cyanide 0.23 mg/l 0.23 mg/l
Lead 0.43 mg/l 0.43 mg/l
Mercury 0.003 mg/l 0.001 mg/l
Nickel 1.20 mg/l 1.20 mg/l
Silver 0.24 mg/l 0.24 mg/l
Zinc 0.99 mg/l 0.99 mg/l
Section 2. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval, and publication, according to law.
Section 3. This ordinance is hereby declared to be severable. If any portion of this ordinance is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect and shall be read to carry out the purposes of the ordinance before the declaration of partial invalidity.
Section 4. All ordinances, resolutions, orders and parts thereof in conflict herewith are repealed.
PASSED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF NAMPA, IDAHO, THIS 15TH DAY OF APRIL, 2019
APPROVED BY THE MAYOR OF THE CITY OF NAMPA, IDAHO, THIS 15TH DAY OF APRIL, 2019
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 2/410
Approved:
By _____________________________
Mayor
Attest:
__________________________
City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 4428
AN ORDINANCE ENACTED BY THE NAMPA CITY COUNCIL AMENDING TITLE 6, CHAPTER 2, SECTION 6-2-20, PERTAINING TO CANINE
LICENSING; AMENDING TITLE 7, CHAPTER 2, SECTION 7-2-16, PERTAINING TO STOPPING OR PARKING PROHIBITIONS IN CERTAIN
PLACES; AMENDING TITLE 9, CHAPTER 1, SECTION 9-1-9, PERTAINING TO RESIDING ON A PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY; AMENDING TITLE 10,
CHAPTER 1, SECTION 10-1-2, PERTAINING TO CERTAIN DEFINITIONS; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 1, SECTION 10-1-5, PERTAINING TO
CONTENT OF APPLICATIONS; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 1, SECTION 10-1-18, PERTAINING TO TABLES RELATING TO VISION
CLEARANCE; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 1, SECTION 10-1-19, PERTAINING TO MINI-STORAGE FACILITIES; AMENDING TITLE 10,
CHAPTER 2, SECTION 10-2-10, PERTAINING TO REQUESTS FOR RECONSIDERATION; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 3, SECTION 10-3-2,
PERTAINING TO PERMITTED USES; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 4, SECTION 10-4-5, PERTAINING TO DIMENSIONAL AND BULK
REQUIREMENTS; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 4, SECTION 10-4-9, PERTAINING TO LANDSCAPING; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 4,
SECTION 10-4-10, PERTAINING TO DESIGN STANDARDS; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 8, SECTION 10-8-5, PERTAINING TO ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 8, SECTION 10-8-6, PERTAINING TO SETBACK REQUIREMENTS; AMENDING TITLE 10,
CHAPTER 15, SECTION 10-15-6, PERTAINING TO DOWNTOWN HISTORIC SUBDISTRICT; REPEALING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 15, SECTION 10-15-9;
AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 16, SECTION 10-16-11, PERTAINING TO DESIGN STANDARDS; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 21, SECTION
10-21-3, PERTAINING TO AGRICULTURAL ANIMALS; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 22, SECTION 10-22-4, PERTAINING TO
COMMON/SHARED PARKING FACILITIES; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 22, SECTION 10-22-5, PERTAINING TO PARKING AREA
IMPROVEMENTS; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 22, SECTION 10-22-6, PERTAINING TO SPECIAL PARKING AND LANDSCAPE CORRIDOR
DISTRICTS; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 22, SECTION 10-22-7, PERTAINING TO LOADING SPACES; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 23,
SECTION 10-23-2, PERTAINING TO CERTAIN DEFINITIONS; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 23, SECTION 10-23-8, PERTAINING TO
PROHIBITED SIGNS; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 23, SECTION 10-23-20, CONTAINING REFERENCE TABLES; AMENDING TITLE 10,
CHAPTER 24, SECTION 10-24-2, PERTAINING TO CERTAIN VARIANCE ACTIONS; REPEALING AND REPLACING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 25,
SECTION 10-25-15, PERTAINING TO CONDITIONAL USE EXPANSIONS AND MODIFICATIONS; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 27, SECTION 10-
27-2, PERTAINING TO PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATIONS; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 27, SECTION 10-27-4, PERTAINING TO SPECIAL
SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENTS; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 27, SECTION 10-27-6, PERTAINING TO GENERAL DEVELOPMENT AND
IMPROVEMENTS; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 27, SECTION 10-27-12, PERTAINING TO CORRECTING, VACATING, AND AMENDING
PLATS; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER 29, SECTION 10-29-3, PERTAINING TO DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS; AMENDING TITLE 10, CHAPTER
33, SECTION 10-33-4, PERTAINING TO CORRIDOR LANDSCAPING; PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY;
AND REPEALING ALL ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, ORDERS AND PARTS THEREOF, IN CONFLICT HEREWITH.
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Council of the City of Nampa, County of Canyon, State of Idaho:
Section 1. That Title 6, Chapter 2, Section 6-2-20, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Canine Licensing, be amended as follows,
6-2-20: LICENSING:
Canine License Required; Application:
1. Licenses:
…
h. Kennel License: It is unlawful to keep, maintain or possess upon the premises of any one dwelling unit more than two (2) dogs over the age of six (6) months or
two (2) potbellied pigs as described in section 10-21-3 of this Code, unless the owner or person in charge thereof obtains a kennel license and any conditional use
permit required according to the City of Nampa, Idaho, zoning ordinance. If a kennel license is issued, the holder shall pay to the City an annual license fee
established by Council resolution. Such kennel license shall only be permitted and issued in accordance with the terms and provisions of this section as hereafter
noted:
…
Section 2. That Title 7, Chapter 2, Section 7-2-16, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Stopping or Parking Prohibitions in Certain Places, be amended as follows,
7-2-16: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
A. Exceptions: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions
of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 3/410
…
18. Within ten-feet (10’) of a free-standing mailbox or blocking the same from postal vehicle access.
Section 3. That Title 9, Chapter 1, Section 9-1-9, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Residing on a Public Right of Way, be amended as follows,
9-1-9: RESIDING ON A PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY:
It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to reside or stay more than seventy-two (72) hours fourteen (14) days in an "unauthorized dwelling unit" on public rights-ofway.
"Unauthorized dwelling units" are and shall include: vehicles (i.e., cars, trucks, trailers [office, camp, horse, vehicle transport and utility types, etc.], buses,
RVs, towed pop tents, camper shells, fifth wheels, boats) and other portable and temporary shelters including, but not limited to, tents and boxes. (Ord. 3807, 7-21-
2008)
Section 4. That Title 10, Chapter 1, Section 10-1-2, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Certain Definitions, be amended as follows,
10-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
…
APPROPRIATE HISTORIC HUES: Muted and a limited number of colors, usually not more than two (2) accent colors used in any one building. See guidelines
for specific color pallet.
…
AS BUILT ROOF: The roof pitch and style constructed when the structure was originally constructed.
…
BUILDING EXPANSION: See section 10-1-6 of this title.
…
CONGREGATE RESIDENCE: Single-family dwelling unit (usually a rental situation) wherein not more than four (4) persons over age eighteen (18), who are not
related by blood or marriage, live together as a single housekeeping unit.
…
EARLY TWENTIETH CENTURY ARCHITECTURE: Architectural styles used in downtown Nampa between 1900 and 1941. See guidelines for further
definition.
…
FACADE IMPROVEMENTS: Any alteration of an existing building facade including repainting, etc.
…
FOSTER DAILY CARE HOME: See definition of day nursery.
…
HISTORIC STOREFRONT PATTERN: A storefront which exhibits proportion and regular patterns in the relationship of windows, walls and doors, and is
characterized by recessed entries, vertical and horizontal elements, and transparency.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is: a) listed individually in the national register of historic places or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the
interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; b) certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic
district; c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places that have been approved by the secretary of interior; or d) individually listed on the city's
inventory of historic places.
…
ORIGINAL ARCHITECTURAL CHARACTER: The architectural style or elements of an architectural style that existed when the building was originally
constructed.
ORIGINAL BUILDING: The building that was located on a site prior to any major remodel, rehabilitation or expansion.
…
PEDESTRIAN AMENITIES: Brick sidewalk pavers, benches, landscaping planters, landscaping walls, trash and recycling receptacles, bollards, pedestrian scale
lighting, fountains, bike racks, public art, kiosks, way finding, interactive public art, seat walls, etc.
…
PHOTOMETRIC TEST REPORT: A report that analyzes the intensity, location, and distance that a light source emits.
…
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 4/410
RECREATIONAL (HOBBY) VEHICLE/TRAILER: A vehicular unit primarily designated as temporary living quarters or used for recreational purposes
including general recreation, fishing, camping, or travel which either has its own power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. Examples of such vehicles
include, but are not limited to, the following: travel trailers, camping trailers, truck campers, motor homes, fifth wheels, RVs, etc. Other recreational vehicle types
for purposes of this definition shall include, but not be limited to: boats and boat trailers, transport trailers (e.g., used to haul motorcycles, jet skis, snowmobiles, 4-
wheelers), and other vehicles including, but not limited to: sandrails, mudder trucks, race cars, etc.
REHABILITATION: The process of returning a structure to a state of utility through repair or alteration while preserving those portions or features which are
significant to its architectural, historic, or cultural value.
REMODEL: Any change to the exterior surfaces or external appearances of a building including, but not limited to, renovation, rehabilitation, reconstruction,
restoration, replacement, or rearrangement of structural parts or elements; or any change that affects the plan configuration of walls, spaces, or bulk of a building.
…
RESIDENTIAL INFILL SUBDIVISION: A single-family subdivision, platted within a RS zone, for the purpose of facilitating the establishment of building lots
intended to have constructed thereon attached or detached residential living/dwelling units (i.e., houses or townhomes). In order to qualify for residential infill
status, certain code controls apply (see Section 10-27-4).
…
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor above, except that the topmost story shall be
that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling above. See definitions of Basement and Cellar.
…
STRUCTURE, CONTRIBUTING: A building, site or structure that adds to the historic architectural qualities, historic association, or cultural values of the district
through location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, or association.
STRUCTURE, NONCONTRIBUTING: A building, site or structure that does not add to the historic architectural qualities, historic association, or cultural values
of the area because: a) it was not present during the period of significance; or b) it does not relate to the documented significance of the property due to alterations,
disturbances, additions, or other changes; or c) it no longer possesses historic integrity nor is capable of yielding important information about the period.
…
TRADITIONAL BUILDING MATERIALS: Brick, masonry, stucco, wood, accents of metal, ceramic, etc.
TRADITIONAL BUILDING WIDTH: Buildings in the subdistrict were originally built on lots twenty five feet (25') to fifty feet (50') in width.
…
TRANSPARENCY: The amount of visibility allowed through a building plane as provided by windows and other openings.
…
VISION CLEARANCE: Vision clearance in districts where front yards are required shall be: A term referring to theoretical triangles imposed by code (to enhance
safety) at every street intersection corner; every alley to street, or, alley to alley intersection; every service drive to street intersection; and every driveway to street
intersection. The effect of the vision clearance triangles is to cause obstacles that obstruct clear vision that are in the triangles’ areas to be either absent, or, both
minimal in mass (e.g., no thicker/wider than a 4’ x 4’ post) and short (i.e., below 2.5’ in height) or high enough (i.e., 9’ or more) to not impede vehicle drivers’
view(s) around/through intersection corners.
The triangles of land are defined on any intersection corner property by measuring from the intersection of the curb [or absent curbing from a future curb location
or edge of asphalt travel-way] of two intersecting private or public rights-of-way (e.g., streets, alleys, service drives, driveways, etc.) a specified distance as
illustrated in Section 10-1-18, Figures 7a and 7b.
A. That triangle of land defined on any corner lot by measuring from the intersection of the curb lines of the two (2) adjacent streets, forty feet (40') along
each curb line and connecting the two (2) points with a straight line. See section 10-1-18, figure 7 of this chapter.
B. That triangle of land defined adjacent to any alley or driveway intersecting a street by measuring along the alley or driveway edge and the back of
sidewalk of the adjacent street seven and one-half feet (71/2') and connecting the two (2) points with a straight line.
Where curbs or sidewalks do not exist, or a street improvement project is anticipated, the measurement shall be taken from the projected future
curb/sidewalk lines.
…
Section 5. That Title 10, Chapter 1, Section 10-1-5, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Content of Applications, be amended as follows,
10-1-5: CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE STATED IN APPLICATIONS:
A. Plans, Permits, And Certificates Of Occupancy: Building permits or certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the
building official authorizes only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement or
construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement or construction at variance with
that authorized via zoning entitlement or a certificate of occupancy shall be deemed a violation of this section and shall be, and is, punishable as provided in
section 1-1-7 of this code. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
Section 6. That Title 10, Chapter 1, Section 10-1-18, of the Nampa City Code, be amended by the replacement of 10-1-18, Figure 7, with the following,
Figure 7a:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 5/410
Figure 7b:
Section 7. That Title 10, Chapter 1, Section 10-1-19, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Mini-Storage Facilities, be amended as follows,
10-1-19: PROFESSIONAL, PUBLIC MINI-STORAGE FACILITY DESIGN REGULATIONS:
The following site and building design standards shall be made to apply to any and all public self-/mini-storage facilities ("storage facility" or "project"
hereinafter) proposed to be newly constructed or otherwise developed or converted on or from open ground, an existing private storage facility or from another use
already on an RP or BN zoned property within the city of Nampa shall comply with the following regulations in order to be able to lawfully operate:
These site and building design standards shall apply, on RP or BN zoned land, to any and all newly proposed or developed mini-storage facilities, and to any
private storage facilities converted into public storage facilities:
A. Locations Allowed: All public storage facilities shall be constructed/located on a property that has direct access to/from a public street and also abuts/fronts
the same.; although the service Service drive(s) in the storage facility may remain private; and shall not be extend farther than three hundred feet (300') from the
main access road(s) that provide ingress/egress to the property upon which a storage facility rests. a collector or arterial street in any event; and
B. Structure Appearance Requirements:
1. Any portions of a building wall visible from a public street and longer than one hundred feet (100') shall include facade changes such as bases, fenestration,
offsets, or wall plane jogs built into the same; and
2. 1. External building materials on walls visible from a public street shall be limited to masonry (e.g., brick, stone, quality concrete, quality concrete block),
glazing, and EIFS systems. No vinyl, metal, or wooden material shall be used except that o Overhead doors may be metal; and
3. 2. Exterior finish materials used on/for buildings in a storage facility shall be non-reflective and shall include use of at least three (3) colors and three (3)
material textures or three (3) different materials in exterior wall composition; and
4. 3. All Shall on all buildings made a part of a facility shall feature a residential roof structure with a, minimum threetwo to twelve (32:12) pitch. Any roof
mounted vents (e.g., on the office building) shall be painted to match the color of the roof; and
5. 4. Exterior paint colors shall be earth tone with no white, black or reflective/fluorescent coloring allowed; and
6. 5. Storage facility offices shall, in addition, have at least twenty five percent (25%) glazing on their primary facade(s); and
7. 6. Storage buildings shall be limited to ten feet (10') in height at the edge of eaves.
…
Section 8. That Title 10, Chapter 2, Section 10-2-10, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Requests for Reconsideration, be amended as follows,
10-2-10: REQUESTS FOR RECONSIDERATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 6/410
Service And Office Land Use/
Building Occupancy Type
U
AG
RA
RS
HC
RD
RML
RMH
RP
BN
DB
DV
DH
BC
BF
GB1
GB2
GBE
IP
IL
IH
…
Medical/dental (or similar) clinic and related services P P P P P P P P P P P C
…
Non-Professional, non-medical, non-construction /trade related, general
office
P P P P P P P P P P P P C C
…
Professional office P P P P P P P P P P P P CP C
…
A. On any application brought before the city council affecting the use, occupancy or development of real property, including, but not limited to, those matters
governed by the Idaho local land use planning act, found at Idaho Code 67-6501 et seq., or the Nampa comprehensive zoning ordinance, found in this title, a party
may request that the city council reconsider a decision pursuant to the terms of this section. Decisions and recommendations of the planning and zoning
commission are not subject to reconsideration but may be appealed to the city council as provided in this title.
To make such a request for reconsideration, the following criteria must be met:
…
4. The request must demonstrate either: a) the party requesting reconsideration has relevant information, the relevant information was not previously
presented and is in response to something brought up at the previous hearing, and the information was not previously available; or b) the request for
reconsideration is made pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6535(2)(b), as amended. either include new and relevant information challenging claims made during
the Council’s prior deliberation or be made pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6535(2)(b).
…
Section 9. That Title 10, Chapter 3, Section 10-3-2, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Permitted Uses, be amended as follows,
10-3-2: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT/ZONE LAND USE CONTROLS:
…
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 7/410
…
Section 10. That Title 10, Chapter 4, Section 10-4-5, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Dimensional and Bulk Requirements, be amended as follows,
10-4-5: PROPERTY DIMENSIONAL AND BULK REQUIREMENTS:
Construction of on-site parking or structures shall comply with the following minimum requirements, except where duly increased by the city in conjunction with
issuance of a conditional use permit, or decreased in accordance with granting of a variance or planned unit development permit:
…
Minimum Property Area Required Per
Dwelling Unit(s):
The first two (2) units require six thousand (6,000) square feet and additional units require one thousand three hundred
fifty (1,350) square feet of additional land per unit.
Minimum property area per multiresidential
unit
6,000 square feet for first 2 units and 1,350 square feet required per unit thereafter
…
Section 11. That Title 10, Chapter 4, Section 10-4-9, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Landscaping, be amended as follows,
10-4-9: LANDSCAPING:
All landscaping shall be established in accordance with the requirements of chapters 22 and 33 of this title; in addition, the following standards shall apply:
SECTION 10-4-9, Sections A through D, including the figure contained therein, and SECTION 10-4-9, Section F, are hereby repealed.
…
E. A. Landscaping Adjacent To Residential Uses: All non-residential development sites having a common boundary line with a residentially used property shall
have erected and maintained a view obscuring wall, fence or coniferous hedge not less than five feet (5'), nor more than six feet (6') in height for screening
purposes and access control controlling access. This screening provision shall not eliminate the requirement to provide pedestrian pathways or neighborhood street
connections within the GB district to provide access of residential areas to schools, parks, shopping areas, public lands, transportation or other community
facilities.
However, where the wall of a pre-existing non-residential building (i.e., already on site and incorporated into a new development plan and/or use for the property)
is on such common property line, no separate wall or fence need be installed along that portion of the boundary occupied by the building. Public utility
installations need only fence and screen with appropriate materials such as base planting of coniferous shrubs or trees and climbing coniferous plant materials on
the fences to minimize the industrial character of such installations, with the area surrounding the fenced and screened enclosure landscaped and planted to create a
park-like atmosphere.
Section 12. That Title 10, Chapter 4, Section 10-4-10, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Design Standards, be amended as follows,
10-4-10: DESIGN STANDARDS:
…
Fencing/Screening: Fencing of anything other than mechanical or maintenance related equipment or stored inventory or trash receptacles is prohibited. Trash receptacles
shall be screened from view by durable enclosures resembling the related building's façade.
…
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 8/410
Section 13. That Title 10, Chapter 8, Section 10-8-5, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Accessory Structures, be amended as follows,
10-8-5: DETACHED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
Shall comply with standards in section 10-3-2 of this title and, in addition, the following regulations apply:
A. Detached accessory structures shall not be taller than the height of the principal building on the property or twenty-two feet (22'), whichever is greater.
B. Detached accessory structures over two hundred (200) square feet (201+) in footprint area shall comply with required front and interior yard setbacks that
apply to principal buildings and require a building permit.
C. Detached accessory structures two hundred (200) square feet or under and twelve feet (12') or lower in height may be built to within five feet (5') of any
property line provided they are: at least three feet (3') from any primary structure wall (unless a building permit is obtained from the city to locate closer to the
house), do not interfere with provision of at least ten feet (10') of clear, uninterrupted access from the front yard to the back of a home.
D. In no case shall any portion of an accessory structures be located closer to the front property line/street line than any covered part of the house to which they
are accessory. In other words, they shall not be placed or built in front of home.
E. As noted in subsection 10-1-7D3 of this title, only two (2) accessory structures per property are permitted in the RS zone, and only one of those may be a
detached guesthouse or in-laws quarters. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
Section 14. That Title 10, Chapter 8, Section 10-8-6, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Setback Requirements, be amended as follows,
10-8-6: PROPERTY AREA, WIDTH, DEPTH, FRONTAGE AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
In order for a property to be eligible for development the following requirements shall be adhered to:
RS Zoning
District/Zone
Maximum
Number Dwelling
Units Per Acre
Required
Property Area1
Required
Property
Width
Required
Mean Property
Depth
Required
Street
Frontage2
RS 4
9.18
4,000 50 feet
50 feet
22 feet
RS 6 7.26 6,000 50 feet 60 feet 22 feet
RS 7 6.22 7,000 50 feet 70 feet 22 feet
RS 8.5 5.12 8,500 70 feet 80 feet 22 feet
RS 12 3.63 12,000 80 feet 80 feet 22 feet
RS 15 2.90 15,000 100 feet 80 feet 22 feet
RS 18 2.42 18,000 100 feet 80 feet 22 feet
RS 22 1.98 22,000 100 feet 80 feet 22 feet
Notes:
1. All single-family residential lots/parcels developed/built out (or proposed to be developed/built out) with either attached or detached single-family residential
dwelling units (i.e., houses or townhouses) thereon, shall have/maintain at least 22 feet of public street frontage.
Exception A: RS 4 zoned properties shall only be allowed within single-family detached subdivisions platted after <date of enactment of code amendment
ordinance> and in accordance with rules set forth in section 10-27-4 of this title.
Exception B: Building lots established in accordance with subsection 10-27-4A of this title during the platting process may enjoy smaller than normal minimum
lot sizes as stated in that section. However, terms of a development agreement or entitlement instrument/permit may require otherwise.
…
Section 15. That Title 10, Chapter 15, Section 10-15-6, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Downtown Historic Subdistrict, be amended as follows,
10-15-6: DH DOWNTOWN HISTORIC SUBDISTRICT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 9/410
…
B. Applicability:
1. The provisions of this section shall apply to all forms of building and site improvements within the DH subdistrict including building expansion, facade
improvements, new construction, rehabilitation, remodel, exterior site improvements, and signs. The specific provisions that apply to the various categories of
development activities are as follows:
Type Of Project Applicable Code Sections
Expansion over 25 percent 10-1-6 and 10-15-6
Exterior site improvements 10-1-6, 10-1-18, 10-15-6, and 10-22
Facade improvements; includes painting or repainting 10-15-6 and definitions as found in 10-15-9
New construction 10-1-6 and 10-15-6
Rehabilitation 10-1-6 and 10-15-6
Remodel 10-1-6 and 10-15-6
Signs 10-15-6 and 10-23
2. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to preexisting buildings that are expanded less than twenty five percent (25%) unless a change of occupancy is
determined as defined in section 10-1-6 of this title.
…
Section 16. That Title 10, Chapter 15, Section 10-15-9, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Certain Definitions, is hereby repealed,
Section 17. That Title 10, Chapter 16, Section 10-16-11, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Design Standards, be amended as follows,
10-16-11: DESIGN STANDARDS:
…
C. Fencing/Screening: Fencing of anything other than mechanical or maintenance related equipment or stored inventory or trash receptacles is prohibited.
Trash receptacles shall be screened from view by durable enclosures resembling the related building’s façade with durable materials as found on the related
building's façade).
…
Section 18. That Title 10, Chapter 21, Section 10-21-3, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Agricultural Animals, be amended as follows,
10-21-3: AGRICULTURAL ANIMALS AS PETS:
…
D. A residence may have a maximum of two (2) potbellied pigs, and the aggregate number of pigs and dogs they are allowed shall not exceed two (2).
In the case of potbellied pigs kept as pets, the number allowed (maximum of 2) shall be in lieu of and not in addition to the number of dogs allowed in the city, two
(2), and kept by an owner or claimant as pets. (Thus, if a person has a dog, they may only have 1 potbellied pig.) If they have two (2) pigs they may not keep dogs
unless a conditional use permit is first obtained to have a kennel.
…
Section 19. That Title 10, Chapter 22, Section 10-22-4, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Common/Shared Parking Facilities, be amended as follows,
10-22-4: COMMON/SHARED PARKING FACILITIES FOR MIXED USES AND OFF-SITE PARKING ALLOWANCE:
In the case of determining the number of required parking spaces for mixed uses (e.g., a shopping center, office complex, etc.), or for shared spaces in a multistructure
development [like an apartment complex], the total requirements for off street parking spaces shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 10/410
Off street parking facilities for a particular use shall not be considered as providing parking facilities for any other use except under the following conditions:
…
Section 20. That Title 10, Chapter 22, Section 10-22-5, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Parking Area Improvements, be amended as follows,
10-22-5: PARKING AREA IMPROVEMENTS AND PLANS:
…
C. Site Improvement Permit: A site/landscape development plan shall be submitted with the application for the permit to the city building department with a
copy to the city planning and zoning department and to the city engineer prior to actual development. The plan shall indicate the proposed design including
location, size, shape, design, curb cuts, lighting, landscaping, drainage, and construction details, accessible spaces and ramps along with any other features and
appurtenances deemed necessary by the city engineer. The City shall have thirty (30) days to process the permit. Upon issuance of the permit, development plans
may be executed. Any improvements in the right of way, including curb and gutter, sidewalk, driveway approaches or cuts in existing curbs, etc., shall require
application for an issuance of a right of way permit from the city engineer's office prior to actual construction. The permit fee shall be set/established by council
resolution. The permit shall be valid for a period of six (6) months unless extended by consent of the planning and zoning, and engineering departments.
D. Surfacing: In any zoning district, all areas where any kind of vehicles may/will traverse, be parked or stored (e.g., new principal/primary residential
driveways, drive aisles and/or service drives, private or public roads, display areas, drive-throughs, loading dock areas, parking lot areas, parking pads, turnaround
areas, vehicle storage areas, etc.), emplaced subsequent to April 11, 2011, shall be required to be paved (via asphalt or concrete) except secondary/auxiliary
residential dwelling unit driveways and/or parking pads for recreational vehicles, and, certain parking lots as noted hereafter:
…
2. Certain Permanent Parking Lots Exempted: Certain types of permanent parking lots may be established in the city without having to be paved, striped or even
landscaped, but only in accordance with the following conditions/situations:
a. That the parking lot is used or intended for use by/for vehicle salvage/wrecking yard areas, and/or used by/regularly parked on by semitrucks or other
trucks of equivalent GVW (gross vehicle weight unloaded) heavy or construction/mining type vehicle/machinery or RV storage lots [within storage unit complexes
or subdivisions or as stand-alone commercial ventures] and/or are used as contractor's storage yards in which case:
…
Section 21. That Title 10, Chapter 22, Section 10-22-6, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Special Parking and Landscape Corridor Districts, be amended as
follows,
10-22-6: SPECIAL PARKING AND LANDSCAPE CORRIDOR DISTRICTS AND SPACES REQUIRED:
A. Special Parking/Landscape Corridor Overlay District(s): Provision for special parking and landscape corridor overlay districts is hereby established in order to
accommodate the need for off street parking ratio and parking and landscape strip design alternatives in specific city areas above and beyond what is normally
allowed. Origination of such areas results from various causes including: legal nonconformities in landscape strip, parking area, service drive, landscape area and
even setback areas introduced by the city or state doing street improvements (including widening), implementation of special plan studies, enactment of local
improvement districts, and so forth.
The following regulations, in addition to the general regulations of this chapter, shall apply to all land classified as being and sited in a P district. If any of the
parking or chapter 33 of this title landscape corridor regulations specified in this title differ from the corresponding
…
2. Garrity Boulevard Special Parking/Landscape Corridor District (P-2):
…
b. Requirements Of The P-2 District: Landscape corridor provision, parking layout/design, parking setback and provision of spaces shall adhere to requirements
set forth in section 10-1-18, figure 1 of this title, this section, and section 10-33-4 of this title. Expansion of site/structural improvements or property
redevelopment/new construction that would normally require updating of site improvements in accordance with section 10-1-6 of this title shall still be therein
required. Exceptions to such standards, where necessitated because of the property being legally nonconforming, may be allowed without requiring a variance.
Structures destroyed by fire or other calamity may be rebuilt within the same footprint as previously occupied by the same but are exempt from having to update
site improvements at that time to establish parking in accordance with this chapter. Additionally, as indicated in chapter 33 of this title, private properties within
the P-2 district that have frontage abutting Garrity only have to install four feet (4') of landscaping along Garrity when such is required to be emplaced instead of
fifteen feet (15'). Also, it shall be unlawful to place any form of temporary or portable sign on or in the landscape strips that lie along and abutting any section of
Garrity Boulevard which is in the P-2 district.
b. Requirements of the P-2 District:
(1) Landscape corridor provision, parking layout/design, parking setback and provision of spaces shall adhere to requirements set forth in section 10-1-18, figure 1
of this title, this section, and section 10-33-4 of this title; and,
(2) Expansion of site/structural improvements or property re-development/new construction that would normally require updating of site improvements in
accordance with section 10-1-6 of this title shall still be required for properties within the P-2 District. Exceptions to such standards, where necessitated because of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 11/410
the property being legally nonconforming, may be allowed without requiring a variance. Structures destroyed by fire or other calamity may be rebuilt within the
same footprint as previously occupied by the same but are exempt from having to update site improvements at that time to establish parking in accordance with
this chapter; and,
(3) Private properties within the P-2 district that have frontage abutting Garrity shall install but four-feet (4’) of landscaping along Garrity when such is required to
be emplaced instead of twenty-feet (20’) or other metric as determined by a zone.
…
B. Number Of Spaces Required: The number of off-street/on-property [site] parking spaces required and/or provided for land and structure uses shall be no less than as set
forth as follows for all zones save the DH and GBE districts. Where fractional number results, round to the next highest whole amount. Thus, 2.6 spaces needed for a
project means that three (3) spaces are/will be actually required. Required spaces do not apply to uses in the DH or GBE zones. (Ord. 4281, 9-19-2016)
Property's/Structure's
Principal Use Type Parking Spaces Required
Barber and beauty shops 1 per 75 square feet of gross floor area
Churches, clubs, lodges 1 per every 4 fixed seats or every 8 feet of bench length or every 28 square feet
Dwelling, single-family 2 per dwelling unit on a single lot property (note: at least one space shall be covered or
covered and enclosed in RS Zoned areas
Dwelling, (to be) converted into a commercial business/office Shall be in accordance with other requirements in this section (e.g., for small item
retail 1 per 250 square feet of net floor area) or the maximum number of parking
spaces that will/can be made to fit on the property without needing to obtain a variance,
whichever standard is less restrictive
Dwelling, two-family or multiple 2 per dwelling unit (plus 1 extra per building [for use as an ADA space] when a
fourplex or higher density residential building is served/developed) by itself on a
property; when ADA parking is to be commonly shared amongst two or more
properties in the same development, ANSI code shall be used to determine the number
of required ADA parking stalls to be provided
Elderly housing 1 per 2 dwelling units
…
Offices:
Medical offices (e.g., doctor,
dental, optometrist, chiropractic,
etc.)
1 per 150 square feet of usable/used net floor area
Standard/professional business/
accessory to industrial use (i.e.,
all but medically related types)
1 per 400 300 square feet of usable/used net floor area
…
…
Section 22. That Title 10, Chapter 22, Section 10-22-7, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Loading Spaces, be amended as follows,
10-22-7: LOADING SPACES:
Each off street loading space [open air or dock] shall measure not less than thirty five feet by twelve feet (35' x 12') and shall have an unobstructed height of fifteen
feet (15') and shall be made permanently available for parking and shall be surfaced, improved and maintained as required in section 10-22-5 of this chapter.
Required loading spaces shall be in conformance with the following:
…
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 12/410
Section 23. That Title 10, Chapter 23, Section 10-23-2, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Certain Definitions, be amended as follows,
10-23-2: DEFINITIONS:
…
LIGHTING, DIRECT: Illumination of a sign via one or more internal fixture(s) -- including those that produce a halo effect.
LIGHTING, INDIRECT: Illumination of a sign via an external light source (e.g., floodlighting). As stated in the definition of a “floodlighted sign” it may be, “A
sign illuminated only by devices which reflect or project light upon it.”
…
ILLUMINATED, HALO: Illumination of a sign from a light source that is not visible and is concealed or contained within the sign or located between the sign and
the structure/wall. Illumination from the source of the light becomes visible in darkness when the light is reflected off of the structure/wall upon which the sign is
attached. See also the definition for “LIGHTING DIRECT”.
ILLUMINATED, INTERNAL: Illumination of a sign from a light source that is concealed or contained within the sign and becomes visible in darkness through a
translucent surface. This includes illumination by gas filled luminous tubes, such as neon, argon or fluorescent. See also the definition for “LIGHTING DIRECT”.
…
Section 24. That Title 10, Chapter 23, Section 10-23-8, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Prohibited Signs, be amended as follows,
10-23-8: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs are prohibited:
…
J. "Billboard Type" Outdoor Advertising Signs:
…
3. In order to relocate a billboard within the city, application shall first be made to the planning and zoning department. A relocated billboard must meet/comply
with requirements listed in this chapter in order to be allowed. Not more than one billboard sign shall be allowed per property. Minimum spacing between poster
type billboard signs on the same side of a right of way shall be no less than one thousand (1,000) linear feet, measured along the centerline of the roadway.
Minimum spacing between painted type billboard signs on the same side of a right of way shall be no less than three thousand (3,000) linear feet, measured along
the centerline of the right of way. Minimum spacing between a poster type or painted type billboard sign on the other side of a right of way from another such sign
shall be no less than three hundred (300) linear feet, measured along the centerline of the right of way. No grouping of signs on a single pole shall be allowed. If a
proposal for relocation of a billboard sign is deemed to meet applicable codes, the city shall permit relocation of the sign. (Ord. 4178, 5-18-2015)
4. The allowance to relocate billboards shall not be deemed or construed to permit painted billboard signs existing along Interstate 84 prior to the effective date
hereof to be moved to other parts of the city away from the interstate.
5. Abandonment: If a billboard is removed from a property, and it is nether relocated (nor is an application for its relocation filed) within 30 days, the right to
maintain said billboard will be deemed abandoned.
5. 6. Other types of outdoor advertising signs are permitted in accordance with this chapter.
…
Section 25. That Title 10, Chapter 23, Section 10-23-20, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Tables, be amended as follows,
…
TABLE 10-23-20(E)
PERMANENT SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE GB1/GB2/GBE ZONES1
Type Of Sign Number
Allowed
Maximum
Allowable
Height
Maximum
Display
Surface Area
Per
Spacing
And
Location1
Illumination3
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 13/410
Above
Grade
Establishment
…
Wall, marquee,
anopy or awning
1 or
more2
1' above
building for
single story;
5' for
buildings
>30'
20% of
building or
tenant wall (as
pertinent)
Indirect or internal
for wall; also direct
for others
…
TABLE 10-23-20(K) PERMANENT SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE RS6, RS7, RS8.5, RS12, RS15, RS18, RS22, RA, AND RD ZONES1
Type of Land Use Type of Sign
Number Allowed
Maximum
Allowable
Height Above Grade
Maximum Display Surface
Area Illumination4
…
Residential
subdivision
Subdivision identification (e.g.,
monument)
12 per entry 8' 64 sq. ft. Indirect or internal
…
…
Section 26. That Title 10, Chapter 24, Section 10-24-2, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Certain Variance Actions, be amended as follows,
10-24-2: ACTIONS:
…
B. Waiver: The Council may grant variance permits for the waiver of required front and/or street side yard setbacks, or for fence, walls or hedge heights. In
order to approve such variances, the Council must conclude that a request is acceptable based on the conclusions listed in subsection A of this section and also
accept a substitute plan, which provides equal safety or aesthetics qualities by other means. The substitute plan must:
…
Section 27. That Title 10, Chapter 25, Section 10-25-15, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Conditional Use Expansions and Modifications, be repealed and
replaced with the following,
10-25-15: CONDITIONAL USE EXPANSIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
Holders of valid conditional use permits may apply to Expand or Modify the nature or conditions of their CUPs.
A. Expansions To CUP Authorized Uses and/or Structures: Expansions to uses and/or structures that were originally approved via a conditional use permit
may be allowed in accordance with the following provisions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 14/410
1. Scope of Increase to Facility or Use Less than 10%: Proposed physical expansions that do not exceed ten percent (10%) of the square footage (whether related
to 1 or more structure's size(s) and/or a use's area coverage on a property) of an approved conditional use shall be allowed without formal Planning Commission
approval via hearing provided that they: 1) Conform to all zoning regulations of this title, 2) any needed permits (e.g., building, right of way, variances, etc.) for
such change are obtained from the city as appropriate, 3) will not advisedly impact the surrounding neighbors, and 4) will not increase residential dwelling unit
density.
2. Scope of Increase to Facility or Use Greater than 10%: Proposed physical expansions to uses and/or structures exceeding ten percent (10%) of the square
footage (whether related to one or more structure(s)’ size(s) and/or a use's area coverage/footprint on a property) of a use previously approved via a conditional use
permit shall require commission approval via the public hearing process before any such expansion may occur.
B. Modifications to Conditions of CUP Authorized Uses and/or Structures: The commission may revoke or modify CUP conditions if acting upon a request as
applied for by a true representative of the CUP holder. Modifications to approval conditions imposed by the city council shall only be modified/changed by order
of the council.
Modifications to approval conditions may be allowed provided that: 1) the modification will not result in unjustifiable negative impacts on surrounding properties,
2) the modification will comply with all zoning regulations, and 3) the modification will not unjustifiably burden adjacent roadways.
Changes that meet any of the following criteria shall require commission approval via the public hearing process (or council approval if they approved the original
CUP request):
1. A modification to a specifically approved or required open space area or amount (excepting those made a part of a subdivision plat or PUD); and/or,
2. A change in elevation(s) of one or more structures where the elevation was once specifically required to be in a certain form or was proposed and accepted to be
in a particular style or of a specified height; and/or,
3. A change in the site layout of a project including relocation of pads, streets, structures, or parking areas when such were specifically approved or required as
part of an earlier CUP approval; and/or,
4. A request to delete one or more conditions of approval originally imposed on a CUP project; and/or,
5. A request to change the nature of the use(s) the original CUP sanctioned provided that the new use(s) proposed are at least allowed via a new CUP issuance…
…
Section 28. That Title 10, Chapter 27, Section 10-27-2, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Preliminary Plat Applications, be amended as follows,
10-27-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION FORM, CONTENT AND PROCESS:
…
B. Application: Every person seeking to subdivide land shall file with the planning and zoning director appropriate application materials including a completed
subdivision application package including fifteen (15) copies of the preliminary plat (with supporting data as required in this section). One reduced copy eleven
inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17") and one reduced copy eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11") of the preliminary plat together with
requisite review fees shall also be concurrently submitted. An electronic copy of all preliminary plats shall be filed in AutoCAD format, version 14 or higher. An
application for a proposed plat must be accompanied by written consent from all property owners whose land(s) are to be made a part of the plat. Any application
to re-plat a subdivision’s common areas shall also require the consent of the HOA board of said subdivision (if the HOA is active and on file with the Idaho
Secretary of State).
…
Section 29. That Title 10, Chapter 27, Section 10-27-4, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Special Subdivisions and Developments, be amended as follows,
10-27-4: SPECIAL SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENTS:
A. Master Community Subdivisions, Infill Homes (see Section 10-1-2.Definitions) Developments/Lots, Condos, Townhouses, Urban Neotraditional, Planned
Unit And Other "Special" Developments:
…
3. Reduced Sized Lots Within Residential Subdivisions Within In RS Districts: Within a subdivision developed in an RS zone, building lots sized below
normal minimum required size (termed "infill lots") may be developed in accordance with the standards listed hereafter. Detached homes built on said lots
are termed "infill homes", though they might not be smaller than homes on regular sized lots in the same development. Furthermore, two-unit townhouses
may be allowed without requiring a conditional use permit to preauthorize emplacement of the same in a subdivision, in accordance with the standards
listed hereafter:
…
f. …
…
(1) In no case shall garages or carports be allowed closer than twenty feet (20') to the street giving access to a lot, although, the living space (non-parking)
part of the home may be within fifteen-feet (15’) of the street line closer than twenty feet (20') to the street. (Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
…
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 15/410
4. Reduced Sized Lot RS Zoned Subdivisions:
A. Master Community, Not PUD or Infill: When a subdivision intended for development as a “master community subdivision” is platted in an RS 4 zone, building
lots 4,000 sq. ft. or larger in area may be platted throughout said subdivision in accordance with the standards listed hereafter:
a. Dwelling units shall comply with parking requirements of the RS 4 zone;
b. Dwelling units shall be subject to architectural controls as administered by a homeowners’ association using their CCRs and any related policies;
c. RS 4 building lots are, and shall be, exempt from the subdivision minimum lot size average and periphery compatibility requirements stated in subsection 10-
27-6F2a of this chapter;
d. Front, side and rear yard setbacks, and minimum lot width pertaining to master community building lot(s), shall be [as] per pertinent RS district standards unless
approved otherwise by action of the city council.
e. Open Space Requirements:
(1) Open spaces required shall be:
aa. Those required by Chapter 33 corridor beautification standards for those areas that abut external collector or arterial rights-of-way; and,
bb. Those that may be required as part of deed and dedication of land and placement of a City required and standards compliant master pathway;
and,
cc. At least 500 sq. ft. per building lot to be made a part of a continuous permanent, “functional” common open space privately held and maintained
by the subdivision’s property owners and formed to establish a parkway/pathway area located behind and between parallel rows of what would
normally be back-to-back building lots that abut two separate and roughly parallel internal roadways; at least 30% of building lots shall be designed
to be adjacent to, or at a minimum, have direct access to common area open space. The term “direct access” means all building lots are to be
located at least 250’ away from a micro-pathway that connects to a common area open space lot; and,
dd. At least 700 sq. ft. per building lot of open space permanent, common open space privately held and maintained by the subdivision’s property
owners shall be made a part of a larger micro park or tot lot within the master community and shall be required to be “functional” as specified
hereafter….
(2) Functional Open Space: Open space in master community subdivisions may, and shall, only be constituted by, or as, land area within an infill
subdivision that:
aa. Is not covered by buildings, parking structures, or accessory structures (except commonly held recreational structures);
bb. Is not enclaved inside individual, privately held building lots;
cc. Is not a part of any proposed or existing street, common driveway, private driveway or parking pad, alley, or exclusive easement;
dd.Is not fully or partly proposed as part of a water channel, exclusive waterway easement, swamp or high-water table (2’ or less to static), retention
basin deeper than one-foot (1’);
ee. Is not proposed to be platted into lots arranged in such oddly dimensioned, unusable shapes, as to be considered realistically unusable, as
determined by the Director or his designee, for groups of people engaged in passive or active recreation;
ff. Is not land not made a part of a school site (including all lands inside a school's property boundaries including its playground(s));
gg. Is not land not necessarily allocated to street frontage landscape strips via common lots or in easements in order to satisfy requirements of
chapter 27 or 33 of this title.
hh. Which is distributed equitably throughout the subdivision, as determined by the Planning Commission, in relation to the dwelling units of the
people open space lots are intended to serve.
B. Infill, Not PUD Subdivision: When a subdivision intended for development in a non-RS 4 zone qualifies as a “residential infill subdivision”, building lots sized
below normal minimum required size (termed "infill lots") may be platted throughout said infill subdivision in accordance with the standards listed hereafter:
a. The minimum lot size per individual infill home or each two-unit townhouse shall be at least two-thirds (2/3) [of] that normally required in the RS zone within
which the residential structure is proposed,
b. Dwelling units constructed within a residential infill subdivision shall comply with parking requirements of the respective zone within which the subdivision
lies,
c. Reduced lots are, and shall be, exempt from the subdivision minimum lot size average and periphery compatibility requirements stated in subsection 10-27-6(F)
(2)(a) of this chapter,
d. Front, side and rear yard setbacks, and minimum lot width pertaining to infill home building lot(s), shall conform to RS district standards unless approved
otherwise by action of the city council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 16/410
Should the city council authorize reductions in required setbacks for infill developments during review of a plat wherein the units will be located, the following
conditions shall control:
(1) In no case shall garages or carports be allowed closer than twenty feet (20') to the street giving access to a lot, although, the living space (non-parking)
part of the home may be within fifteen-feet (15’) of the street line.
(2) If the council approves reduced setbacks in the plat review stage, then building envelopes reflecting the council's reduced setback allowance shall be
depicted graphically or referenced by note on the final plat.
(3) Any "developer proposed" building envelopes shall be depicted on preliminary plats and shall likewise be noted on final plats (or portions of final plats
where the provision for dwelling units was made).
e. Open Space Requirements:
(1) Any differential (i.e., reduced area vs. the minimum building lot square footage normally required in RS Zone within which an infill subdivision is
proposed) in building lot sizes proposed for an infill subdivision plat shall be transferred to another part of the plat as open space. Open space required
shall be 2/3rds of the amount of differential between the minimum lot size normally required by the zone within which the subdivision is proposed to be
developed and the actual building lot sizes planned therein.
(2) Qualifying (i.e., “Functional”) Open Space: Unless otherwise approved, not less than five percent (5%) of the total gross area of any residential infill
subdivision shall be retained as permanent, common open space privately held and maintained by the subdivision’s property owners.
(3) Functional Open Space: Open space in residential infill subdivisions may, and shall, only be constituted by, or as, land area within an infill subdivision
that:
aa. Is not covered by buildings, parking structures, or accessory structures (except commonly held recreational structures);
bb. Is not enclaved inside individual, privately held building lots;
cc. Is not a part of any proposed or existing street, common driveway, private driveway or parking pad, alley, or exclusive easement;
dd.Is not fully or partly proposed as part of a water channel, exclusive waterway easement, swamp or high-water table (2’ or less to static), retention
basin deeper than one-foot (1’);
ee. Is not proposed to be platted into lots arranged in such oddly dimensioned, unusable shapes, as to be considered realistically unusable, as
determined by the Director or his designee, for groups of people engaged in passive or active recreation;
ff. Is not land not made a part of a school site (including all lands inside a school's property boundaries including its playground(s));
gg. Is not land not necessarily allocated to street frontage landscape strips via common lots or in easements in order to satisfy requirements of
chapter 27 or 33 of this title.
hh. Which is distributed equitably throughout the subdivision, as determined by the Planning Commission, in relation to the dwelling units of the
people open space lots are intended to serve.
(4) Exceptions: An exception to open space requirements may be granted for residential infill subdivisions meeting any of the following criteria:
a. Is bounded by a public walk way, drain, canal, trail, or nonresidential improved property.
b. Requires the installation of a sewer lift station.
c. Has topography that inhibits its full use and platting.
d. Is surrounded by properties or plats having no open space.
e. Provides a benefit to the City such as providing for a continuity of utility services, street right-of-way or other benefit deemed needed.
f. Residential Infill Subdivision Qualifications: A residential subdivision shall be required to comply with the following criteria in order to qualify for “infill”
status (and be correspondingly entitled to development under the regulations associated therewith):
(1) Said subdivision is located in an “enclaved” area as designated on the City’s official zoning map or GIS land use map, or, is surrounded on at least three
(3) sides by properties within the city’s incorporated limits; and,
(2) Said subdivision shall be deemed to be serviceable with full city utilities (i.e., sewer, potable water and irrigation [pressurized or otherwise] water); and,
(3) Said subdivision is deemed to be of no or low impact on the abutting and adjoining street network(s) by city engineering or may be accommodated by
system improvements as defined by a traffic impact study where required by city engineering; and,
(4) Said subdivision shall comply with all street, landscaping and fencing standards/requirements associated with standard residential subdivision plats;
and,
(5) Dwelling units proposed within residential infill subdivisions that are proposed to have building lots not fronting a standard public street shall have their
garages or carports at the back of the house [may be attached or detached structures] where they shall access either a city approved alley or common
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 17/410
driveway in order to promote an improved residential, “new urban” subdivision character. In such cases, a public or approved private street shall still be
used to provide road frontage to said lots, but such street may be of reduced width as allowed by the City’s engineering design and specification manual.
Street frontage in between home fronts shall allow solely for two-way traffic flow.
aa. Two (2) parking spaces shall be required of each home site at the alley/common drive.
…
F. Short Plats: Proposed land divisions wherein either it is proposed to create three (3) properties or more from a parent lot or parcel, or, wherein a simple property split
is no longer deemed to be available to a property may be executed by filing for a short plat permit in accordance with the following standards:
1. The short plat shall be for no more than seven (7) building lots (partitioned from an original lot or parcel or (8) individual [derived from four (4) “master”
townhouse lots]; and
2. Short plat’s proposed/developed in RS 6 or RS 7 zones shall be exempt from the lot compatibility (averaging and periphery check) requirements (found in
10-27-6.F) associated with those zones; and,
3. A short plat's drawings shall portray all features required to be shown on standard preliminary and final plat drawings; and
4. Short plats will be processed as combination preliminary and final plats requiring a public hearing before the City's Planning and Zoning Commission and
approval by the City Council. The time frame for review and processing of short plats shall be the same as for standard preliminary plats. Short plat
approvals shall be valid for 18 months. (Ord. 4189, 7-20-2015)
…
Section 30. That Title 10, Chapter 27, Section 10-27-6, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to General Development and Improvements, be amended as follows,
10-27-6: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT AND IMPROVEMENTS; REQUIREMENTS:
…
F. RS6 And RS7 Zones; Residential Lot Compatibility:
1. Subdivisions Within City Limits: Any newly proposed single-family subdivision that is proposed to be located within city limits or proposed for
annexation into the same with an RS6 or RS7 zone designation, and that is abutting or within eighty five feet (85') of the property line(s) of a recorded
single-family residential city subdivision or one that has at least still valid preliminary plat approval, or an approved county subdivision recorded after June
14, 1977, shall meet the compatibility requirements listed within this section, except as hereinafter exempted:.
A newly proposed subdivision's lots (typically the periphery ones) need not meet the requirements of this section if either:
a. A signed waiver is obtained from the developer(s) of the "pre-existing subdivision" and all the impacted property owners of lots within that "preexisting
subdivision" that abut the newly proposed subdivision; and/or
b. Proposed lot(s) would abut a planned unit development (PUD) lot (or when a proposed PUD lot would abut a standard lot), then lot compatibility review
is not required between the PUD and the subdivision. Average building lot area of an RS6 or RS7 zoned subdivision shall be determined by dividing the
total land area of a subdivision development by the acreage of all new (newly proposed) building lots (exclusive of unusable parts of lots devoted to
waterway easements, rights of way dedications, pedestrian paths) proposed within that same development; and/or,
c. Proposed lot(s) are comprised of two-unit townhouse master lots…
…
H. Pedestrian/Cyclist Pathways/Trailways: The city may require the placement of bikeways, pathways [including micro-paths], or trailways to encourage nonmotorized
forms of travel and to provide safe, convenient and aesthetic alternative travel routes to common destinations such as schools, parks and shopping
centers. Pathways shall be required, located, and designed per the city master trail plan, the manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-1.F of this chapter, or as
required by the city staff or council.
1. Master planned pedestrian/cyclist pathways/trailways may be located on common lots or deeded lots to be owned and maintained by the city.
1. Pedestrian/cyclist pathways/trailways, provided in conformance to Nampa bicycle and pedestrian master plan, shall be located on properties deeded and
dedicated to the city.
2. Intra-subdivision (including PUDs) pedestrian/cyclist pathways/trailways, shall be designed and laid out in such fashion as to provide linkage to Nampa City
path/trailways and to adjoining subdivision paths or undeveloped parcels as required by the City.
2. 3. Maintenance of pedestrian pathways and surrounding common area grounds shall be by a subdivision homeowners' association, or in the case of a single
parcel or lot by that property owner; alternatively, those paths and adjoining property on land owned by the city shall be maintained by the city.
3. 4. Any common areas associated with this section shall be open to the general public.
…
Section 31. That Title 10, Chapter 27, Section 10-27-12, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Correcting, Vacating, and Amending Plats, be amended as follows,
10-27-12: CORRECTING/VACATING/AMENDING PLATS:
…
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 18/410
B. Amending A Preliminary Plat After It Is Approved But Prior to Final Plat Approval Of Any Portion Thereof: An amended plat design, application materials and
method of filing shall be executed in accordance with the regulations established in this chapter in order to have the changes become valid and recognized.
Nevertheless, design changes to approved preliminary plats made prior to final plat approval and recording and incorporated within a final plat design shall not
require rehearing of the original preliminary plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission (or City Council if they already reviewed the preliminary plat) if the
proposed design change(s), does(do) not:
…
D. Correcting Plats:
1. Affidavits Of Correction: Affidavits of Correction may be used to execute corrections to plats that are strictly/truly scriveners errors (i.e., typos, minor changes
to mapping, etc.) and thus do not have the effect of changing a plat's exterior boundaries, a recorded plat's notes, common area provision or boundaries, or, the
numbering scheme used for lots and/or blocks in a subdivision.
…
4. Re-Platting Of Original Plat: Re-platting shall be required in order to execute a material or substantive change to a plat (i.e., to a plat's exterior boundaries,
changes to a recorded plat's notes, or, alteration of plat notes or common area designation, or, a change to the numbering scheme used for lots and/or blocks in a
subdivision). As allowed by subsection 10-27-4.E of this chapter, property lines internal to a subdivision may be adjusted or receive the effect of being erased, by a
record of survey property line adjustment or density reduction survey. (The City acknowledges that a record of survey line adjustment or density reduction does
not actually move or delete the original subdivision line(s) being affected thereby; however, the City treats the action as if a plat amendment moving or erasing the
lines had been executed.)
a. Land, exclusive of public right-of-way, that has been subdivided and platted in accordance with City law need not be vacated in order to be re-platted.
b. Any re-plat(s) shall conform to current engineering plat language requirements in effect at the time of re-platting.
c. A re-plat may be handled as a "short plat" if it involves seven (7) or fewer lots, unless a substantive or material change is being proposed to the plat notes
or conversion of a common lot to or from a privately held lot (e.g., building lot) in which case the plat amendment will be processed as a “full plat”
application; and, must be accompanied by written consent from all property owners whose land(s) are to be made a part of the plat and, if applicable, the
consent of the HOA board of the subdivision (if the HOA is active and on file with the Idaho Secretary of State).
Section 32. That Title 10, Chapter 29, Section 10-29-3, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Development Standards, be amended as follows,
10-29-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The use of a multi-sectional (e.g., "double" or "triple wide") manufactured [not “mobile”] home as a permanent residential dwelling on an individual lot shall be
permitted in any zoning district of the chapter which permits installation of a single-family site-built dwelling provided the following standards are met:
A. It is multi-sectional and at least twenty-feet (20') wide. was built after 1976 and confirmed to meet HUD standards applicable to manufactured home
construction;
B. Has a minimum floor area of one thousand (1,000) nine hundred (900) square feet.
C. Has roofing materials which are generally acceptable for site-built housing, and which have. Any roofing materials may be used provided it has the
appearance of a nonmetallic shingle, shake or tile roof. Roofs shall also have a minimum slope of twenty five percent (25%) (3:12) and overhanging eaves.
D. Has siding materials which are generally acceptable for site-built housing, and which have. Any siding materials may be used provided it has the
appearance of wood, masonry or horizontal metal siding. Reflection from horizontal metal siding shall be no greater than that from siding coated with white, gloss
enamel.
E. Has a foundation of concrete or other material allowed by the International Building Code for site-built homes which is aesthetically compatible with the
manufactured home having the appearance of site-built construction. This means the fascia shall be an extension of the siding or be of materials having the
appearance of site-built foundations such as brick, concrete or concrete block.
F. Is permanently affixed per manufacturer's instructions. Footings shall be of poured masonry extending twenty-four inches (24") below grade.
G. Has a crawl space with the following minimum measurements: 1) eighteen inches (18") of clearance; 2) twelve inches (12") of clearance under beams; and
3) an eighteen inch by twenty-four inch (18" x 24") door.
H. Complies with all applicable lot size, setback, and other requirements of the zoning district in which it is to be located.
I. Provides two (2) off street parking spaces.
J. When placed in a RS Zone, Hhas a single car garage, or a carport with an attached, enclosed storage room.
K. Provides right of way improvements in the same manner as site-built construction, in accordance with city policy.
L. Manufactured homes shall not be allowed in subdivisions where they are prohibited by restrictive covenants.
M. Manufactured homeowners or purchasers shall own or be purchasing the land upon which their home is to be placed. The owner or purchaser shall record
with the county recorder a non-revocable option declaring the manufactured home as real property. These requirements shall not apply within any duly approved
mobile home park or to lands having mobile homes legally placed and resting on them prior to June 7, 2004. Exceptions may also be granted as a part of a planned
unit development approval.
N. Manufactured homes shall meet the requirements of the 1995 edition of the model energy code as adopted in section 4-2-1 of this code, or other equivalent
standard approved by the city.
O. Manufactured homes shall be provided with smoke detectors as required in the International Building Code, section 1210, "smoke detectors and sprinkler
systems", before final inspection and occupancy. Smoke detectors required in addition to those provided for in the department of housing and urban developments,
part 3280 of 24 CFR, "manufactured home construction and safety standards", may be of the battery-operated type.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 19/410
P. Manufactured homes not meeting standards in subsection A, B, E, J, N or O of this section shall not be allowed. Placement of manufactured homes not
meeting standards in subsection A, B, E, J, N or O of this section may be considered by the planning commission on a case by case basis in all other residential use
districts in accordance with the conditional use permit provisions of chapter 25 of this title. (Ord. 3354, 6-7-2004)
…
Section 33. That Title 10, Chapter 33, Section 10-33-4, of the Nampa City Code, pertaining to Corridor Landscaping, be amended as follows,
10-33-4: CORRIDOR LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS:
…
B. Landscape Plan:
1. A landscape plan is required for all developments.
a. A landscape plan (or set of plans as may be needed and/or required by city staff) shall be submitted in conjunction with an application for a building
permit for a new structure or an off- street parking design permit. The city arborist/forester shall review and comment on development applications when
such applications are submitted to the City. (Ssubdivision plat, planned unit development plan and conditional use permit applications all have their own
landscape plan submittal requirements, and, shall also require that landscape stripping be emplaced via imposing appropriate conditions of approval.)
…
Section 34. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval, and publication, according to law.
Section 35. This ordinance is hereby declared to be severable. If any portion of this ordinance is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining
provisions shall continue in full force and effect and shall be read to carry out the purposes of the ordinance before the declaration of partial invalidity.
Section 36. All ordinances, resolutions, orders and parts thereof in conflict herewith are repealed.
PASSED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF NAMPA, IDAHO, THIS 15TH DAY OF APRIL, 2019.
APPROVED BY THE MAYOR OF THE CITY OF NAMPA, IDAHO, THIS 15TH DAY OF APRIL, 2019.
Approved:
By _____________________________
Mayor
Attest:
__________________________
City Clerk
Disclaimer:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 20/410
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO.4434
AN ORDINANCE ENACTED BY THE NAMPA CITY COUNCIL REPEALING TITLE 2, CHAPTERS 3 AND 4 OF THE NAMPA CITY CODE,
RESERVING SAID CHAPTER 3 FOR FUTURE CODIFICATION AND ENACTING A NEW CHAPTER 4 PERTAINING TO APPOINTED OFFICIALS,
AND DEPARTMENT AND DIVISION HEADS; PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; AND REPEALING ALL
ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, ORDERS AND PARTS THEREOF, IN CONFLICT HEREWITH.
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Council of the City of Nampa, County of Canyon, State of Idaho:
Section 1. That Title 2, Chapter 3, pertaining to the City Attorney is hereby repealed in its entirety with said Title 2, Chapter 3 being designated “[Reserved]” for use
in connection with future codification of ordinances as follows:
2-3-1: CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is an office of city attorney. The attorney shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of the mayor, to be confirmed by the council. (Ord. 2073)
2-3-2: DUTIES:
As the legal advisor to the mayor and council in all matters pertaining to municipal affairs, the attorney's duties shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Commence, prosecute and defend all suits and actions necessary to be commenced, prosecuted and defended on behalf of the corporation, or that may be
ordered by council,
B. Attend council meetings, unless excused by the mayor,
C. Prosecute cases arising from municipal violations, and
D. Upon requests, give advice or opinions, written or oral as may be required, to officials and city department heads on matters relating to official duties or
municipal affairs. (Ord. 2073)[Reserved]
Section 2. That existing Title 2, Chapter 4, pertaining to City Officers is hereby repealed in its entirety as follows:
2-4-1: APPOINTIVE OFFICERS; DUTIES:
Officers shall perform, in relation to the office, all duties now and hereafter required by state law or city ordinance, as well as perform such other duties as may be
assigned to the office from time to time by the mayor and council. (Ord. 2073)
2-4-2: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
The mayor shall have the authority to appoint and the council to confirm appointed officers as necessary. (Ord. 2073)
2-4-3: DESIGNATION OF APPOINTED OFFICERS:
The following are appointed positions, however, the number of appointed positions may be modified at any time at the discretion of the mayor and council: director of
finance, public works director, chief of police and fire chief. The positions of treasurer, city clerk, and city attorney are appointed as required by state law. (Ord. 4211, 12-
7-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 21/410
2-4-4: APPOINTIVE OFFICERS; TERM OF OFFICE:
Appointed officers serve at the will and pleasure of the mayor and council and in no circumstance shall an appointed position serve for longer than two (2) years at which
time he may be considered for reappointment. (Ord. 2073)
Section 3. A new Title 2, Chapter 4 is hereby enacted as follows:
Chapter 4
APPOINTED OFFICIALS; DEPARTMENT AND DIVISION HEADS
2-4-1: APPOINTED OFFICIALS:
2-4-2: DUTIES OF APPOINTED OFFICIALS:
2-4-3: APPOINTED OFFICIALS TERM OF OFFICE:
2-4-4: DEPARTMENT AND DIVISION HEADS:
2-4-1: APPOINTED OFFICIALS:
The mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall appoint the following officials: a City Clerk, a Finance Director to serve as City Treasurer, a City Attorney, a Fire
Chief, a Police Chief, a Public Works Director, and a Workforce Development Director.
2-4-2: DUTIES OF APPOINTED OFFICIALS:
Appointed officials shall perform, in relation to the office held, all duties now and hereafter required by state law or city ordinance, as well as perform such other duties as
may be assigned to the officer from time to time by the mayor. In addition to these general duties, the following specific duties shall apply to each office:
The City Clerk is the head of the City Clerk's Office is the keeper of the official permanent records of the city and serves as the center for information for the public as
well as assisting city departments and divisions whenever and however necessary.
The Finance Director/City Treasurer is the head of the Finance Department and shall be responsible for payroll, accounts payable, annual audit, preparing and monitoring
the city budget, keeping and investment of city funds, and preparing financial reports for the mayor and city council.
The City Attorney shall act as the civil legal advisor to the mayor and city council in all matters pertaining to municipal affairs, commence, prosecute and defend all civil
suits and actions necessary to be commenced, prosecuted and defended on behalf of the city, attend council meetings, give advice or opinions to officials and city
department heads on matters relating to municipal affairs.
The Public Works Director shall serve as the head of the Department of Public Works and provide leadership in the sustainable development of public works
infrastructure. He or she shall oversee the Airport, Building, Engineering, Environmental Compliance, Fleet Services, Street, Wastewater and Waterworks operational
divisions of the Public Works Department.
The Fire Chief shall serve as the head of the Nampa Fire Department.
The Police Chief shall serve as the head of the Nampa Police Department.
The Workforce Development Director shall provide oversight to organizational structure, succession planning, leadership development and review for all departments and
divisions in the city, as well as oversee the Human Resources and Risk Management divisions.
2-4-3: APPOINTED OFFICIALS TERM OF OFFICE:
Appointed officials shall serve at the will and pleasure of the mayor and council, may be removed from office by them at any time as provided in state law, and in no
circumstance shall an appointment last longer than two (2) years at which time the official may be considered for reappointment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 22/410
2-4-4: ADDITIONAL DEPARTMENT HEADS:
The mayor shall have the authority to hire additional department heads, who shall not be considered appointed officials, as approved in the city budget.
Section 4. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval, and publication, according to law.
Section 5. This ordinance is hereby declared to be severable. If any portion of this ordinance is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining
provisions shall continue in full force and effect and shall be read to carry out the purposes of the ordinance before the declaration of partial invalidity.
Section 6. All ordinances, resolutions, orders and parts thereof in conflict herewith are repealed.
PASSED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF NAMPA, IDAHO, THIS 6TH DAY OF MAY, 2019.
APPROVED BY THE MAYOR OF THE CITY OF NAMPA, IDAHO, THIS 6TH DAY OF MAY, 2019.
Approved:
By _____________________________
Mayor
Attest:
__________________________
City Clerk
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Nampa, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 4424, passed March 4, 2019. Ordinances of the
City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
Title 1
GENERAL CODE PROVISIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-1-1: DESIGNATION AND CITATION OF CODE:
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated NAMPA CITY CODE and cited as such. (Ord. 2072)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE OF CODE WITHOUT PROOF:
All ordinances proved by a certificate of the city clerk under the city seal, when printed or published by authority of the city, shall be read and received in
evidence in all courts and places without further proof. (Ord. 2072)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 23/410
1-1-3: DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the city, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise:
CITY: The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if followed by the words "of Nampa".
CODE: The words "the code" or "this code" means Nampa city code.
COMPUTATION OF TIME: The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless
the last day is a holiday and then it is also excluded.
COUNCIL: Whenever the word "council" is used in this code, it shall be construed to mean the city council of the city of Nampa.
DAY: The period of time between sunrise and sunset.
GENDER: The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
NIGHTTIME: The period of time between sunset and sunrise.
OCCUPANT: When applied to a building or land, the term shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS, ETC.: Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees of the city of Nampa, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land the words shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, developer, occupant or
lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Includes any natural person, firm, association, corporation partnership or organization of any kind.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which
any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
PREMISES: Any land and all buildings and structures thereon including, but not limited to, single-family or multi-family dwellings, rooming houses,
apartment houses, hospitals, convalescent and nursing homes, hotels and motels, restaurants, industrial or manufacturing establishments, drive-in
establishments, schools (academic, trade or industrial, and kindergarten) and any other place of habitation, office, shop or establishment or place of
conducting a business, trade or occupation.
STATE: The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to refer to the state of Idaho.
STREETS: The term includes alleys, lanes, courts, bike paths, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
Words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words in the plural number include the singular number.
Words prohibiting anything being done, except in accordance with a license or permit or authority from a board or officer, shall be construed as giving such
board or officer power to license or permit or authorize such thing to be done. (Ord. 2072)
1-1-4: EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES:
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance
shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal effect; nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for
any offense committed under the ordinance repealed. (Ord. 2072)
1-1-5: CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections,
including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (Ord. 2072)
1-1-6: SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable, and if any
phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a
court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or
sections of this code. (Ord. 2072)
1-1-7: GENERAL PENALTY; CONTINUING VIOLATION:
A. In this code or in any other ordinance of the city any act or omission that is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, the same
shall be a misdemeanor, unless otherwise specifically provided; and shall be punished by applicable fines and jail time in accordance with currently
adopted state law. Every day of any violation of this code, or any ordinance of the city, shall constitute a separate violation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 24/410
B. Unless otherwise specifically provided, and exempting civil infraction penalties and procedures set forth in sections 1-1-7-1 through 1-1-7-6 of this
chapter, a violation of any code provision for which the penalty is an infraction shall be punished as follows:
1. A first violation within three (3) years is subject to a fine in the amount as may be prescribed in Idaho infraction rule 9, or in the event it is not so
prescribed, by one hundred dollars ($100.00).
2. A second violation within three (3) years is subject to a fine in the amount as may be prescribed in Idaho infraction rule 9, or in the event it is not so
prescribed, by two hundred dollars ($200.00).
3. A third violation within three (3) years is subject to a fine in the amount as may be prescribed in Idaho infraction rule 9, or in the event it is not so
prescribed, by three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 4165, 3-2-2015)
1-1-7-1: CIVIL INFRACTION; APPLICABILITY:
The procedures for notification and enforcement set forth in sections 1-1-7-1 through 1-1-7-6 of this chapter are intended to apply in addition to any other
procedures or courses of action provided by law. The use of the procedures set forth herein shall not require or preclude the use of any other procedures
allowed by this code or state law. (Ord. 4036, 10-1-2012)
1-1-7-2: NOTICE OF CIVIL INFRACTION; GENERAL:
The city may cause a notice of civil infraction to be issued for any of the following titles and sections of this code, in either of the following circumstances.
Such infraction is in addition to any other abatement procedures as listed within this code or any other ordinance. Every day of any violation of this code,
or any ordinance as listed herein, shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Upon discovering a violation of any of the following titles and sections of this code or other ordinances;
B. If, after the time specified in a notice of violation, the activity, conditions, structure, or use cited in the notice of violation still does not conform to the city
codes or ordinances.
3-4-3 Dumping Unlawful
3-4-8 Weeds To Be Destroyed
3-4-12 Dead, Defaced, Broken, And Dangerous Trees; Removal And Failure To Trim
3-4-13 License Required
3-4-14 Damage To Trees; Unlawful
3-4-15 Ice, Snow, Debris On Sidewalks
5-2-7B Trees On Private Property - Routine Tree Maintenance
5-2-21 Dead, Defaced, Broken, Diseased, And Dangerous Trees
5-2-24 Damaging, Destroying Or Mutilating Public Trees
9-1-2 Premises Identification
9-1-3 Directional Designation Required
9-1-8 Curbs, Gutters And Sidewalks
10-1-8 Fences And walls
10-1-10 Home Occupations
Title 10, chapter 21 Animal Zoning Regulations, in its entirety
Title 10, chapter 23 Signs, in its entirety
(Ord. 4036, 10-1-2012)
1-1-7-3: CIVIL INFRACTION; ISSUANCE:
The notice of civil infraction will be issued to the owner of the property, the occupant, and/or the person in charge of the property and/or any other person
causing or allowing the activity, conditions, structure or use to exist or occur. (Ord. 4036, 10-1-2012)
1-1-7-4: CIVIL INFRACTION; SERVICE OF NOTICE:
A. A notice of infraction may be served either by:
1. The code enforcement officer serving the notice of infraction on the person named in the notice of infraction at the time of issuance; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 25/410
2. The code enforcement officer mailing a copy of the notice of infraction by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to such person at
his/her last known address; or
3. The code enforcement officer affixing the notice of infraction to the property, or posting the notice of infraction on the property, in a conspicuous
location on the property, if the offense is occurring on that property at the time of issuance.
B. The code enforcement officer shall have the authority to require those receiving infractions to identify themselves by giving their name, address, and
date of birth, and shall further have the authority to require the presentation of a driver's license or other reliable identification. If a defendant refuses to
identify himself or herself, the code enforcement officer shall request assistance from the police. (Ord. 4036, 10-1-2012)
1-1-7-5: CIVIL INFRACTION; PENALTY:
A. Civil Penalty: Any person violating or failing to comply with the applicable provisions of this code shall be subject to an infraction penalty, punishable as
provided in Idaho Code sections 18-111 and 18-113, as may from time to time be amended.
1. A first violation within five (5) years of any provision herein, not specifically exempted, is hereby declared subject to a fine in such amount as may be
prescribed in Idaho infraction rule 9, or in the event it is not so prescribed, by twenty five dollars ($25.00).
2. A second violation within five (5) years of any provision herein, not specifically exempted, is hereby declared subject to a fine in such amount as may
be prescribed in Idaho infraction rule 9, or in the event it is not so prescribed, by fifty dollars ($50.00).
3. The code enforcement officer shall issue a misdemeanor citation to those with a third violation within five (5) years of any provision herein. (Ord.
4036, 10-1-2012)
1-1-7-6: CIVIL INFRACTION; FAILURE TO SATISFY PENALTY:
A person who wilfully fails to pay a monetary penalty as required by provisions of this chapter may be found in civil contempt of court. (Ord. 4036, 10-1-
2012)
1-1-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A license previously issued to a person may be revoked upon conviction of a violation of the ordinance under which the license was issued. (Ord. 2072)
1-1-9: DENIAL OF LICENSE:
The issuing authority may refuse to issue a license if prescribed requirements are not met by the applicant. (Ord. 2072)
1-1-10: HEARING; LICENSE DENIAL OR REVOCATION:
Upon denial or revocation of any license or application for license as prescribed in this code the applicant or the licensee shall be granted hearing before
the council at a regular council meeting. The applicant or licensee shall be presented with a written decision and/or reasons for the denial or revocation.
(Ord. 2072)
1-1-11: CORPORATE SEAL:
The corporate seal of the city shall consist of two (2) concentric circles between which shall appear the words "The Seal Of The City Of Nampa, Idaho",
and the center shall be in substantially the same form as the facsimile herein set forth1:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 26/410
(Ord. 2072)
1-1-12: DESIGNATION OF OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER:
The Idaho Press Tribune, a newspaper in, and of general circulation in the city of Nampa, is hereby established as the official newspaper of the city2. (Ord.
2072)
1-1-13: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; CONTENTS:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever a section of this code requires notice to be given by the city, the notice shall state, in addition to the order to comply:
A. The grant of authority of the city to enforce the violation,
B. The nature of the violation, including its statutory basis,
C. The time allowed to correct the situation before penalties may be imposed,
D. The penalties which may result from failure to comply, and
E. Any appeal procedure available to the recipient. (Ord. 2072)
1-1-14: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; SERVICE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 27/410
Unless otherwise provided, service of notice may be made by delivery of a copy to the affected person or his agent, or, if neither is to be found within the
city, by mailing a copy of the notice to the affected person at his last known post office address. Service by mail shall be deemed complete upon the
expiration of five (5) days from the date of mailing such notice. For the purposes of this provision, affected person shall include any owner, user, or other
person entitled to be a recipient of such a notice under this code. (Ord. 2072)
1-1-15: ASSESSED VALUATION:
The method of determining the actual value of real property shall be by use of the assessed valuation by the Canyon County assessor3. (Ord. 2072)
Chapter 2
ELECTIONS
1-2-1: PRECINCTS ESTABLISHED:
There are hereby established within the corporate limits of the city, election precincts, which precincts shall conform to the election precincts established
by Canyon County; the Canyon County election precincts as they apply to the corporate limits of the city of Nampa are hereby adopted and incorporated
by reference. (Ord. 2072)
1-2-2: PRECINCT NAMES:
The name of each such election precinct as hereby established shall conform with the names established for the Canyon County election precincts. (Ord.
2072)
1-2-3: PRECINCT BOUNDARIES:
The official precinct boundaries shall be defined and set forth as determined by the official records of Canyon County which are hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference. The city clerk is directed to maintain an official map for the city of Nampa in conformance with the Canyon County records. Said
map is to be kept on file with the city and open for inspection to the public and shall clearly set forth all election precinct names and boundaries within the
corporate limits of the city of Nampa. (Ord. 2072)
1-2-4: VOTING IN DESIGNATED PRECINCT:
Thereafter, at all municipal elections and at all special municipal elections such election precincts as hereby created and established shall be the places
wherein all qualified electors living in the area thereof respectively shall vote at such municipal elections, regular or special; provided that such electors are
qualified as such pursuant to Idaho Code. (Ord. 2072)
1-2-5: ELECTION BOARDS; APPOINTMENT BY CITY CLERK:
Election judges and clerks shall be appointed by the city clerk and confirmed by the council. (Ord. 2072)
Chapter 3
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
(Rep. by Ord. 4182, 6-15-2015, eff. 7-1-2015)
Chapter 4
RECORDS MANAGEMENT POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
1-4-1: DEFINITION OF CITY RECORDS:
All papers, correspondence, memoranda, accounts, reports, maps, plans, photographs, sound and video recordings, files, microform, electronic imaging,
magnetic or paper tape, punched card, electronic mail, also known as e-mail, or other documents, regardless of physical form or characteristic, which have
been or shall be created, received, filed, or recorded by any city office or department or its lawful successor, or officials thereof in pursuance of law or
ordinance or in the conduct, transaction, or performance of any business, duty, or function of public business, whether or not confidential or restricted in
use, are hereby declared to be records of the city of Nampa, and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. Materials acquired solely for reference, exhibit, or display and stocks of publications shall
not constitute records for purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 3880, 9-8-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 28/410
1-4-2: CITY RECORDS DECLARED PUBLIC PROPERTY:
All "city records" as defined in section 1-4-1 of this chapter are hereby declared to be property of the city of Nampa. No city official or employee has, by
virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The
unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or private use of such records is prohibited. (Ord. 2656)
1-4-3: POLICY:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city of Nampa to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution,
organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of
records from their creation to their ultimate disposition. Electronic mail, also known as e-mail, whether created or received, shall be retained for a period of
two (2) years and then automatically removed from the city's exchange server. Electronic mail that is related to pending or threatened litigation will be
retained until the litigation is concluded or the applicable statute of limitations has expired. Electronic mail that is the subject of a "litigation hold" shall be
retained for such time as indicated in such "hold". Department directors, and heads of divisions, may designate certain electronic mail as semipermanent
or permanent records and must retain those records in a format and location separate from the exchange server. Periodically the city archivist shall review
or examine other filing systems in each department/division, make transfers of records, arrange for disposition of outdated records and otherwise assist
city officers in complying with the city records policy. (Ord. 3880, 9-8-2009)
1-4-4: RECORDS MANAGEMENT DIVISION ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a records management division. The city clerk is responsible for directing the division and coordinating records management
operations among the city departments. (Ord. 2656)
1-4-5: OFFICE OF ARCHIVIST ESTABLISHED:
The city clerk shall designate a city archivist, who shall be responsible for citywide files management and the direction and control of the city's records
disposition program. (Ord. 2656)
1-4-6: DUTIES OF ARCHIVIST:
The archivist shall have the following duties, and others as assigned by the city clerk:
A. Plan, formulate, and prescribe basic files management and records disposition policies, systems, and standards and procedures.
B. Prepare records retention and disposition schedules in cooperation with department heads for all city departments; define and identify vital, historical
and/or permanent records; and establish retention periods for all records. Retention periods shall be no shorter than desired by the originating office,
but shall be as long as deemed necessary by the archivist, city clerk, finance director and city attorney.
C. Review schedules annually and update or amend as needed.
D. Coordinate the citywide files management and records disposition programs and report annually to the city clerk on program effectiveness in each city
department.
E. Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments, by preparation of a policies and procedures manual and by on site
consultation.
F. Develop, disseminate, coordinate files maintenance, records disposition procedures, and computer assisted retrieval programs including, but not limited
to, those prescribed by this chapter, in order to meet the current and long term information needs of the city.
G. Train departmental records coordinators and other personnel in the fundamentals of records management and their duties in the records management
programs.
H. Implement at the proper time such actions as destruction, and transfers that are required by records schedules.
I. Develop a citywide forms design and control system.
J. Establish in cooperation with other responsible city officials a disaster plan for each city department and the archivist to ensure maximum availability of
records for reestablishing operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense.
K. Develop procedures to ensure the preservation of the historically valuable records of the city. (Ord. 2656)
1-4-7: RESPONSIBILITIES OF CITY DEPARTMENT HEADS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 29/410
All city department heads are responsible for the implementation and operation of effective file operations, records transfers and dispositions, and other
activities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within their areas of responsibility. They shall designate records coordinators within their
departments and provide the archivist the names of such designees. (Ord. 2656)
1-4-8: RESPONSIBILITIES OF RECORDS COORDINATORS:
The records coordinator in each office and/or department is responsible for providing coordination between the archivist and personnel in his or her office
to ensure compliance with the provision of this records management chapter. This responsibility shall include supervising the application of records
schedules within the office or department. (Ord. 2656)
1-4-9: CITY OFFICES TO USE RECORDS SCHEDULES:
All city departments shall adopt records retention and disposition schedules and destroy, transfer, or otherwise dispose of records in accordance with
policies set forth by the records schedules. (Ord. 2656)
1-4-10: DEVELOPMENT OF RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSITION SCHEDULES:
Retention periods to be included in records schedules shall be submitted by the archivist to the city clerk, finance director, and city attorney, who shall
notify the archivist within ten (10) working days of the approval or of any objection to a retention period. At the expiration of the ten (10) day period, if no
objection has been submitted, the records schedule shall be adopted and shall have full force as sufficient authorization for records destruction or other
action. If objection is made, the archivist shall determine a retention period satisfactory to the office or department concerned, to the city clerk, finance
director and the city attorney.
When a records retention and disposition schedule is adopted, it shall constitute full authority to transfer, microfilm/image prepare for destruction or take
other actions, with respect to city records. The city council hereby directs that such action be taken by the archivist or under his or her supervision. The
archivist shall notify in writing the department and the city council of intended destruction. (Ord. 2656)
1-4-11: ONE TIME DESTRUCTION OF OBSOLETE RECORDS:
Prior to the implementation of the records management program for a department, a one time destruction of obsolete records of that department may be
made by the department, under the supervision of the archivist. Obsolete records shall include those no longer created by the office or department and no
longer are needed for administrative, legal, fiscal, or other research purposes. (Ord. 2656)
1-4-12: ARCHIVES:
The archival operation shall utilize one or more buildings to store inactive records; to ensure the security of such records from deterioration, theft, or
damage during the period of storage; to permit fast, efficient retrieval of information from stored records and to provide facilities for a centralized
micrographics and/or electronic imaging program. (Ord. 2656)
1-4-13: PRESERVATION OF PERMANENT RECORDS:
The archivist shall develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city. The archivist shall provide
housing for such records in a municipal facility and in such manner that the records, unless their use is restricted by law or regulation, are open to the
public for research purposes. In no circumstances shall the permanent records of the city be transferred to private individuals, to private historical societies
or museums, or to private or public colleges or universities. (Ord. 2656)
1-4-14: NONCURRENT RECORDS NOT TO BE MAINTAINED IN OFFICE FILES:
Records no longer required to support current operations of the city shall be transferred to less costly off site storage at the archives, or be destroyed,
when such action is indicated by an approved records schedule. Such records shall not be maintained in active office files or equipment. (Ord. 2656)
1-4-15: MICROGRAPHICS/IMAGING PROGRAM ESTABLISHED:
A centralized micrographics/imaging program shall be designed and implemented by the archivist to service all city offices and departments. (Ord. 2656)
1-4-16: RECORDS TO BE MICROFILMED OR ELECTRONIC IMAGED:
The archivist shall determine the length of time the various records of the city could be stored before the cost of storage during their retention periods
would exceed the cost of preserving them in microform. Records determined to be more economically stored on a microform shall be microfilmed and/or
imaged and shall include the following types of records:
A. Those which the archivist determines are of historical value and whose preservation is best ensured by microfilming or imaging.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 30/410
B. Those which because of the nature of the information they contain are indispensable to the continued operations of an office and, therefore, should be
microfilmed/imaged to provide a security copy.
C. Those which because of high volume retrieval require frequent and/or large numbers of copies to be made and which could be made more efficiently or
economically through microfilm or image. (Ord. 2656)
1-4-17: ACCESSIBILITY OF RECORDS ON MICROFILM:
The public is given identical access to record in microform to which they would be entitled under law if the records were in any other medium. A
reasonable fee is to be charged for reproduction of copies from record in microform. (Ord. 2656)
Title 2
ADMINISTRATION, COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
Chapter 1
MAYOR
2-1-1: MAYOR'S JOB FULL TIME POSITION:
The mayor shall devote his full time and attention to the affairs of the city, and shall not, during his term of office, operate, keep, maintain or be employed
at or in any business, establishment, profession, concern or enterprise that shall in any way conflict with his duties as mayor of the city as herein set forth.
(Ord. 2073)
2-1-2: MAYOR'S WORKING HOURS:
The mayor's working hours shall conform to those required for other city officers. (Ord. 2073)
2-1-3: DIRECT ELECTION AND TERM OF MAYOR:
In the event the voters of the city approve the city manager plan of government, the mayor shall be elected by direct election of the voters, for a two (2)
year term1. (Ord. 2073)
2-1-4: COMPENSATION:
A. Commencing January 1, 2008, the mayor shall receive a biweekly salary in the sum of two thousand eight hundred sixty two dollars seventy eight cents
($2,862.78). (Ord. 3727, 8-6-2007; amd. Ord. 4194, 8-3-2015)
B. Commencing January 1, 2017, the mayor shall receive an annual salary, paid biweekly, in the amount of seventy seven thousand five hundred fifty eight
dollars forty four cents ($77,558.44).
C. Commencing January 1, 2018, the mayor shall receive an annual salary, paid biweekly, in the amount of eighty one thousand two hundred eighty one
dollars twenty five cents ($81,281.25).
D. The mayor shall also be eligible for all other benefits available to any full time employee of the city, with the exception of the accrual of personal leave.
(Ord. 4194, 8-3-2015)
2-1-5: DEATH OR RESIGNATION OF MAYOR:
In the event of death, resignation, or disability of the mayor, the president of the council shall not succeed to the office of the mayor, but a mayor shall be
elected by the council in the manner prescribed by Idaho Code section 50-608. (Ord. 2073)
Chapter 2
COUNCIL
2-2-1: MEETINGS:
2-2-1-1: REGULAR TIME AND PLACE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 31/410
The regular meetings of the council shall be held at the city hall on the first and third Mondays of each and every month. When a holiday recognized by the
city falls on either the first or third Monday the regular meeting will be held on the next immediate Tuesday1. (Ord. 2073)
2-2-1-2: CHANGE OF MEETING PLACE:
If for any reason, the city hall shall be an unsuitable or unfit place for holding the regular meetings of the council, the same may be held at any place in
said city designated by the mayor in writing. Notice of said place of meeting shall be posted by the city clerk on the front door of the city hall at least twenty
four (24) hours before the time of the meeting. (Ord. 2073)
2-2-1-3: SPECIAL:
When the mayor or any three (3) members of the council desire to call a special meeting, the mayor or council members shall give notice to the city clerk,
stating the time and object of the special meeting. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to notify all members of the council and the mayor; and the notice
given by the city clerk shall be at least twenty four (24) hours before the time of the said meeting. The call and object as well as the disposition thereof,
shall be entered upon the journal thereof2. (Ord. 2073)
2-2-1-4: RECORD OF MEETINGS:
The city clerk shall keep a minute book, recording a full account and record of the proceedings of council meetings. (Ord. 2073)
2-2-2: COUNCIL:
2-2-2-1: OFFICE OF PRESIDENT:
A. There shall be a president of the council, who shall be a qualified member of the council.
B. The president of the council shall preside at all meetings of the council in the absence of the mayor. If both the president of the council and the mayor
are absent, the council shall elect one of the council members, who shall be called acting president of the council, to act temporarily in place of the
president.
C. When occupying the place of the mayor, the president and acting president of the council shall have the same privileges as other members of the
council, and while so acting, the acts of the president and acting president shall be binding upon the council and upon the city as if done by the mayor.
D. The president of the council shall be elected by members of the council for biennial term as long as such person remains a council member, at the first
meeting of the biennial term.
E. In the event of death, resignation or disability of the mayor, the president of the council shall not succeed to the office of mayor, but a mayor shall be
selected pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-608. (Ord. 2073)
2-2-2-2: CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT IN EVENT OF DISASTER OR EMERGENCY:
In event of an emergency or disaster, if there is a vacancy in the office of the mayor only, the council member having the greatest years of tenure as an
elected official shall assume that office. If, in addition to the mayor, there are also vacancies on the council, the mayor shall be elected from, and by the
new council who shall be determined as follows: The members of the planning commission succeed to the vacancies on the council in the order of their
tenure as members. For expediency all ties shall be determined by lot. (Ord. 2073)
2-2-2-3: COMPENSATION:
Commencing January 1, 2008, each council member shall receive a biweekly salary in the sum of four hundred twenty dollars forty one cents ($420.41).
(Ord. 3728, 8-6-2007)
2-2-2-4: ELECTION:
The city of Nampa shall have a city council composed of six (6) members. During each general city election, three (3) of the six (6) members of the city
council shall stand for reelection for a four (4) year term of office. Each candidate for the city council shall meet the residency requirements in the city of
Nampa as set out in Idaho Code. The city clerk shall assign a number for each of the six (6) council seats with existing council seats retaining their
previously assigned numbers. The assignment of each numbered council seat shall be at random with the method of random selection to be determined
by the city clerk. Candidates for council seats, as established by this chapter, shall file for a designated council seat in the manner prescribed by Idaho
Code. Beginning with the general municipal elections to be held in November 1995, those council persons with terms ending in January 1996, shall stand
for election, after filing for candidacy as required by this chapter, against other qualified candidates for the council seats created by this chapter; however,
the two (2) newly created council seats shall be filled in the general municipal elections to be held in November 2013, one seat for an initial two (2) year
term and the second seat for a four (4) year term so that three (3) council seats will expire every two (2) years. Thereafter, each council person shall stand
for election every four (4) years, after filing for candidacy as required by this chapter, against other qualified candidates pursuant to and for the council
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 32/410
seats as created by this chapter at the next general municipal election immediately prior to the termination of that council person's term of office. (Ord.
4062, 6-3-2013)
2-2-3: LEGISLATION AND POLICY MAKING:
2-2-3-1: DUTY OF COUNCIL MEMBERS:
As members of the legislative and policy making branch of the city, the council shall devote as much time as is required for the efficient and faithful
discharge of their duties. They shall attend all council meetings unless lawfully excused by the mayor or by a majority of the remaining members of council.
They shall also perform all duties reasonably expected of them by nature of their office, including, but not limited to, the passing of ordinances and
resolutions, as well as investigation and study of work done for the city according to the committees upon which they may severally be appointed by the
mayor. (Ord. 2073)
2-2-3-2: PRESENTMENT OF ORDINANCES:
All ordinances shall be written and presented to the council at a regular or special meeting. (Ord. 2073)
2-2-3-3: PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES:
Every ordinance shall be read at council meetings on three (3) different days; provided that one-half (1/2) plus one of the whole number of the council
members may, by yea and nay vote recorded in the minutes, dispense with the three (3) readings of the ordinance and pass the same at any meeting. At
each meeting, the ordinance shall be open to discussion and amendment, may be referred to a committee, and shall be passed to the next reading unless
by a vote of the council some other disposition is made. The ordinance shall be finally passed by a majority vote of the council, called and recorded yeas
or nays3. (Ord. 2073)
2-2-3-4: ENDORSEMENT AFTER PASSAGE:
When an ordinance is passed, the city clerk shall sign it, and the date of its passage by the council shall be added thereto, and it shall within three (3) days
thereafter be presented to the mayor, or, in case of his absence from the city, to the president of the council, for his approval. If he approves the same he
shall attach his signature thereto. (Ord. 2073)
2-2-3-5: LACK OF MAYORAL APPROVAL:
A. The mayor has the power to veto an ordinance. If an ordinance is vetoed, the mayor shall return the same with his objections, in writing, to the council
at the next regular meeting after the ordinance was presented to the mayor for approval. The council shall reconsider any ordinance so returned by the
mayor, and by an affirmative vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members elected to council, the ordinance shall become law notwithstanding the
mayor's veto. The city clerk shall then annex a certificate to the ordinance stating the ordinance was vetoed by the mayor and, upon reconsideration,
received the required majority of vote.
B. If the mayor neglects or refuses to sign any ordinance and returns the same with his objections, in writing, to the council at the next regular meeting
after being presented to the mayor for approval, the ordinance shall become law without signature. The city clerk shall then annex a certificate to the
ordinance stating the ordinance became law with the mayor's signature4. (Ord. 2073)
2-2-3-6: DATE OF PASSAGE:
An ordinance shall be considered passed on one of the following dates:
A. The date of approval by mayor,
B. The date of passage of the ordinance over a mayor's veto, or
C. The date of the next regular meeting after the ordinance was presented for approval, if the mayor has refused or neglected to sign the ordinance. (Ord.
2073)
2-2-3-7: EFFECTIVE DATE:
An ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage, approval and publication. An ordinance shall be deemed published when it
appears in one issue of the official newspaper published within the city or if none is published in Nampa, in a newspaper with general circulation in the
city5. (Ord. 2073)
2-2-3-8: RESOLUTION AND ORDERS TO ENTER CONTRACTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 33/410
A. Resolutions and orders to enter contracts shall be presented to the council. Such orders or resolutions may be disposed of in one reading, or otherwise
as the council may determine, and, upon a majority vote of the elected members of council, shall be passed or adopted by a roll call with the yea and
nay of each being recorded.
B. Once passed, resolutions and orders shall be engrossed and signed by the city clerk, and shall be presented to the mayor or council president in the
same manner and within the same time as ordinances.
C. Following presentation for endorsement, such resolutions and orders shall take the same course as ordinances, except that the city clerk shall not be
required to publish them unless so required by law. (Ord. 2073)
2-2-3-9: PRESERVATION OF DOCUMENTS:
The city clerk shall preserve the original ordinances, resolutions, and contracts. (Ord. 2073; amd. Ord. 2486)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4434 - APPOINTED OFFICIALS. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 3
ATTORNEY
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4434 - APPOINTED OFFICIALS. Go to new ordinance.
2-3-1: CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is an office of city attorney. The attorney shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of the mayor, to be confirmed by the council. (Ord. 2073)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4434 - APPOINTED OFFICIALS. Go to new ordinance.
2-3-2: DUTIES:
As the legal advisor to the mayor and council in all matters pertaining to municipal affairs, the attorney's duties shall include, but are not limited to, the
following:
A. Commence, prosecute and defend all suits and actions necessary to be commenced, prosecuted and defended on behalf of the corporation, or that
may be ordered by council,
B. Attend council meetings, unless excused by the mayor,
C. Prosecute cases arising from municipal violations, and
D. Upon requests, give advice or opinions, written or oral as may be required, to officials and city department heads on matters relating to official duties or
municipal affairs. (Ord. 2073)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4434 - APPOINTED OFFICIALS. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 4
OFFICERS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4434 - APPOINTED OFFICIALS. Go to new ordinance.
2-4-1: APPOINTIVE OFFICERS; DUTIES:
Officers shall perform, in relation to the office, all duties now and hereafter required by state law or city ordinance, as well as perform such other duties as
may be assigned to the office from time to time by the mayor and council. (Ord. 2073)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4434 - APPOINTED OFFICIALS. Go to new ordinance.
2-4-2: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
The mayor shall have the authority to appoint and the council to confirm appointed officers as necessary. (Ord. 2073)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 34/410
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4434 - APPOINTED OFFICIALS. Go to new ordinance.
2-4-3: DESIGNATION OF APPOINTED OFFICERS:
The following are appointed positions, however, the number of appointed positions may be modified at any time at the discretion of the mayor and council:
director of finance, public works director, chief of police and fire chief. The positions of treasurer, city clerk, and city attorney are appointed as required by
state law. (Ord. 4211, 12-7-2015)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4434 - APPOINTED OFFICIALS. Go to new ordinance.
2-4-4: APPOINTIVE OFFICERS; TERM OF OFFICE:
Appointed officers serve at the will and pleasure of the mayor and council and in no circumstance shall an appointed position serve for longer than two (2)
years at which time he may be considered for reappointment. (Ord. 2073)
Chapter 5
PERSONNEL SYSTEM
2-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a system of personnel administration to serve the city. The system herein established shall be consistent with
the policies and procedures outlined in the "City Of Nampa Employee Handbook". (Ord. 4279, 9-6-2016)
2-5-2: CLASSIFIED SERVICE:
The classified service shall be a class to which this law shall apply and shall include all employees as prescribed in the "City Of Nampa Employee
Handbook". An example of excluded positions: (Ord. 4279, 9-6-2016)
A. Members of the council, other elected officers, and department heads,
B. Members of appointed boards or commissions and city attorneys,
C. Persons employed to conduct a temporary or special inquiry, investigation or examination on behalf of the council or a committee thereof,
D. Volunteer personnel who receive no regular compensation from the city,
E. Persons, performing work under contract for the city who are not carried on the payroll as employees. (Ord. 2073)
2-5-3: PERSONNEL SYSTEM RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The "City Of Nampa Employee Handbook" shall be the official manual of procedures for the operation of the personnel system and shall be amended as
required by resolution of the council. (Ord. 4279, 9-6-2016)
2-5-4: PROHIBITION:
A. No person shall make any false statements, certificate, mark rating or report with regard to any tests, certification or appointment made under any
provision of this chapter or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution of this chapter and policies.
B. No person shall, directly or indirectly, give, render, pay, offer, solicit, or accept any money, service or other valuable consideration for any appointment,
promotion, or proposed promotion to, or any advantage in, a position in the city government services.
C. No employee of the personnel department, examiner, or other person shall defeat, devise or obstruct any person in his or her right to examination,
eligibility, certification or appointment under this chapter, or furnish to any person any special or secret information for the purpose of affecting the rights
or prospects of any person with respect to employment by the city. (Ord. 2073)
2-5-5: PENALTIES:
Any person who wilfully violates any provision of this law or of the personnel rules and regulations established thereunder may be subjected to disciplinary
action. (Ord. 2073)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 35/410
Chapter 6
LIBRARY BOARD
2-6-1: BOARD CREATED; MEMBERS:
There shall be a board of library directors composed of five (5) members appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council. Board members are
appointed for five (5) years rotating terms. All appointments are made by the mayor with confirmation by the council. Each year an appointment shall be
made to fill the position of the retiring member. When a vacancy occurs for any reason other than an expired term a member shall be appointed to
complete the remainder of that term. (Ord. 2073)
2-6-2: RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS:
No more than one member of the library board shall be a nonresident of the city. (Ord. 2073)
2-6-3: ORGANIZATION:
The library board shall organize annually, at the time the business year for the city commences, and they shall elect a chairman and a vice chair from
among their own members who shall serve for one year; prohibited, further, that the chairman of the board shall serve for one year only and shall not
succeed himself. Such library board shall adopt written rules for the transaction of the general business of the board. The library director serves as
secretary and may appoint a member of the library staff to keep written minutes of all regular and special meetings. (Ord. 3989, 10-3-2011)
2-6-4: MEMBERS SERVE WITHOUT COMPENSATION:
All members of said board shall serve without salary or any compensation. (Ord. 2073)
2-6-5: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the board to have and they shall have control of the expenditures of all monies collected for the library fund subject to the approval of
the council and such monies shall be drawn from the treasury upon vouchers properly authenticated by the board with the approval of the council. The
board shall have supervision, care and custody of any and all rooms or buildings which are used for the purpose of the library. (Ord. 2073)
2-6-6: LIBRARY FUND:
The council shall levy and collect such taxes under the laws of the state as shall be necessary to maintain the library, and keep the same in a separate
fund to be paid out upon the recommendation of the library board, with the approval of the council. (Ord. 2073)
2-6-7: LIBRARY DIRECTOR:
The library board shall have authority to select a library director and such assistants as may be necessary. (Ord. 4211, 12-7-2015)
Chapter 7
AIRPORT COMMISSION
2-7-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There shall be an airport commission to be known as the Nampa airport commission for the purpose of advising the mayor and council in the planning and
development of the Nampa municipal airport. The commission shall consist of a board of five (5) members, exclusive of the mayor, who shall at all times
be an ex officio member of said commission. Members are appointed for five (5) year rotating terms. All appointments are made by the mayor with
confirmation by the council. Each year an appointment shall be made to fill the position of the retiring member. When a vacancy occurs for any reason
other than an expired term a member shall be appointed to complete the remainder of that term. (Ord. 3644, 11-20-2006)
2-7-2: RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS:
No more than one member of the airport commission shall be a nonresident of the city or the surrounding impact area; prohibited, further, that the
nonresident must be a member of an organization on the airport or an employee of a business on the airport for the last two (2) years. (Ord. 3644, 11-20-
2006)
2-7-3: ORGANIZATION:
The airport commission shall organize and elect a chairman and a vice chairman from their membership who shall serve for one year terms. The chairman
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 36/410
and vice chairman shall not serve consecutive terms. Election of officers shall take place in January of each year. The new chairman and vice chairman
shall assume office at the first regular meeting following elections. During the absence or disability of the chairman, the vice chairman shall assume the
duties of the chairman. The airport director or his designee shall serve as secretary. The secretary shall keep accurate records of all proceedings of the
commission. (Ord. 3644, 11-20-2006)
2-7-4: MEMBERS SERVE WITHOUT COMPENSATION:
All members of said board shall serve without salary or any compensation. (Ord. 3644, 11-20-2006)
2-7-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. It shall be the duty of the commission, and they shall have the power, except as otherwise provided by law, to recommend and make suggestions to the
council, and to all other public authorities and agencies, concerning the operation and maintenance of the municipal airport and its real and personal
property belonging to the city.
B. To make recommendations to the council for the planning, landscaping, improving, constructing, and equipping of the airport.
C. To recommend to the council the granting or withholding of permits for construction of hangars, or the use of said airport, or any portion thereof.
D. To recommend to the council all budget requests consisting of proposed improvements, equipment, purchases and maintenance needs to be paid from
the special fund appropriated for the airport.
E. To direct all sums of money received from any source as revenue from the airport to the finance department, where it shall be accredited to the airport
fund of the city. (Ord. 3644, 11-20-2006)
Chapter 8
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
2-8-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There shall be a planning and zoning commission for the city, which said commission shall be known and designated as the planning and zoning
commission. (Ord. 2073)
2-8-2: APPOINTMENT; TERM:
The Nampa planning and zoning commission, shall consist of nine (9) members, all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor and which said
appointments shall be confirmed by the majority vote of the council. Not more than two (2) of the nine (9) members to be appointed by the mayor may be
nonresidents of the city. An appointed member of the commission who is a resident of the city must have resided in the city for at least two (2) years prior
to the appointment and must remain a resident of the city during service on the commission. There shall be at least one appointed member of the
commission who is a resident of the area of the city impact. Commissioners are appointed for six (6) year rotating terms. All appointments are made by the
mayor with confirmation by the council. Each year appointments shall be made to fill the positions of retiring commissioners. When a vacancy occurs for
any reason other than an expired term a commissioner shall be appointed to complete the remainder of that term. (Ord. 2073; amd. Ord. 2676)
2-8-3: ORGANIZATION:
The planning and zoning commission shall elect its own chairman and vice chairman and fill such other offices as it may determine it requires. Election of
officers shall take place in December of each year. The new chairman and vice chairman shall assume office at the first regular meeting in January and
serve through the last meeting in December. During the absence or disability of the chairman, the vice chairman shall assume the duties of the chairman.
The planning director or his designee shall serve as secretary. The secretary shall keep accurate record of all proceedings of the commission1. (Ord.
2073)
2-8-4: MEETINGS:
The commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month during the year, except the months of June, July, and August; and such other and
further meetings as may be determined by a majority of the members of said commission to be called and held at a time, place, and manner as the
commission shall order in its minutes. The regular meetings shall be held the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month at six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M.
and unless otherwise decided and determined by the members, such meetings shall be held in the council chamber of the city hall and shall at all times be
open to the public with public hearings commencing at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.2 (Ord. 2073)
2-8-5: COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS:
Members may receive such mileage and per diem compensation as provided by resolution of the council3. (Ord. 2073)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 37/410
2-8-6: POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The powers, duties and responsibilities of the planning and zoning commission shall comply with the state of Idaho local planning act of 19754. (Ord.
2073)
Chapter 9
GOLF COURSE COMMISSION
2-9-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There shall be a golf course commission to be known as the Nampa golf course commission for the purpose of directing and managing the affairs of the
Nampa City Golf Course. The commission shall consist of a board of seven (7) commissioners, exclusive of the mayor, who shall at all times be an ex
officio member of said commission.
Five (5) of the commission members are appointed for five (5) year rotating terms. Two (2) of the commission members shall be selected from Centennial
or Ridgecrest Golfers Associations and are appointed for one year terms. All appointments are made by the mayor with confirmation by the council. Each
year an appointment shall be made to fill the position of the retiring member. When a vacancy occurs for any reason other than expired term a member
shall be appointed to complete the remainder of that term. (Ord. 2073; amd. Ord. 2578)
2-9-2: RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS:
All persons appointed to membership on the commission shall be duly qualified voters in the city, provided, however, one such appointed member may
reside outside the city and does not have to be a qualified voter in the city. (Ord. 2073)
2-9-3: ORGANIZATION:
The golf course commission shall elect its own chairman and fill such other offices as it may determine it requires. All officers elected shall hold office
during the pleasure of the commission. During the absence or disability of the chairman, the vice chairman shall assume the duties of the chairman. If the
vice chairman has not been elected, then the secretary shall call a meeting of the commission for the purpose of electing a vice chairman. The secretary
shall be required to keep an accurate record of all proceedings of the commission, and the commission shall file quarterly or more often, if necessary, a
report of all its proceedings, transactions, and recommendations to the council. The secretary of the commission shall be entitled to receive such expenses
as may be determined by the commission, and as need therefore arises, subject, however, to the approval of the council. The commission shall have the
power to recommend the adoption of rules and regulations for its own deliberations. (Ord. 2073)
2-9-4: MEMBERS SERVE WITHOUT COMPENSATION:
The commissioners serve without compensation of any kind or character. However commissioners may be provided with golf course passes as provided in
the "Centennial-Ridgecrest Golf Operations Manual" as approved by the city council. (Ord. 2073; amd. Ord. 3109)
2-9-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the commission, and it shall have the power, except as otherwise provided by law, as follows:
A. To make recommendations to the council for the planning, landscaping, improving, construction and equipping of the golf course.
B. To make recommendations to the council for the operation and maintenance of the golf course.
C. To recommend to the council all requests for payment of expenditures for improvements, equipment and maintenance from the special fund
appropriated for the golf course.
D. To direct all sums of money received from any source as revenue from the golf course, to the finance department, where it shall be credited to the golf
course fund of the city. (Ord. 2073)
Chapter 10
NAMPA ARTS AND HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
2-10-1: DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND POLICY; RESTRICTIONS UNDER STATE LAW ON EXPENDITURE OF CERTAIN
FUNDS:
A. The Nampa city council hereby finds that it is in the public interest to create an advisory body hereafter named and appointed to assist the mayor and
city council in carrying out the responsibilities of their offices to increase the appreciation of the arts, culture, and history among Nampa's citizens and
to create and maintain an atmosphere conducive to the fullest expression of all forms of art and history in order to provide artistic satisfaction to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 38/410
artist and to enrich the lives of all Nampa citizens. This advisory board shall replace the previously existing Nampa arts commission and Nampa historic
preservation commission.
B. In continuing its work with respect to historic preservation, the commission shall comply with all requirements and restrictions associated with the
commission's receipt of grants and other funding set forth in Idaho Code title 67, chapter 46, or in any specific grant made thereunder. (Ord. 4225, 2-1-
2016)
2-10-2: COMMISSION, MEMBERSHIP, TERMS OF OFFICE, VACANCIES:
A. There is hereby created the Nampa arts and historic preservation commission, consisting of seven (7) members to be appointed by the mayor and
confirmed by the city council. The mayor shall endeavor to appoint at least two (2) members with professional training or experience in the disciplines
of architecture, history, architectural history, urban planning, archaeology, engineering, law, or other historic preservation related disciplines, as set forth
in the secretary of the interior's historic preservation professional qualification standards. The term of office for each of the members shall be three (3)
years, and no member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms. Provided, however, the initial members shall divide themselves at their first
meeting, by lot, into three (3) classes: two (2) members shall form the first class and shall serve for one year from the date of appointment; two (2)
members shall form the second class and shall serve for two (2) years from the date of appointment; and, three (3) members shall form the third class
and shall serve for three (3) years from the date of appointment. All vacancies shall be reported to the council within five (5) days by the chairman or
vice chairman and shall be filled by appointment in the same manner as appointments are originally made. Appointments to complete an unexpired
term shall be for the balance of the term only.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the mayor may appoint, if confirmed by city council, one nonvoting, ex officio student member to the commission, in
addition to the seven (7) members described above. Such student member must be, at the time of appointment, under the age of twenty five (25)
years. Any such student member shall be appointed to a term of up to one year, and shall serve no more than two (2) consecutive terms.
C. Vacancies on the commission shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. The commission shall publicly announce any
vacancies, review candidates and recommend appointments to the mayor, who shall thereafter have the right to appoint any candidate, whether or not
recommended by the commission. (Ord. 4225, 2-1-2016)
2-10-3: ORGANIZATION, COMPENSATION:
Within a reasonable time following appointment the commission shall organize and select a chairman and vice chairman. The members of the commission
shall serve and act without compensation, except that their actual and necessary expenses shall be allowed by the council. Any majority of members of
the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. (Ord. 4225, 2-1-2016)
2-10-4: DEFINITIONS:
ARTS: The boundaries of what may be considered the "arts" are subjective and constantly changing; however, for purposes of this chapter, the arts shall
include, but not be limited to, all phases of the visual, performing and literary arts.
DESIGNATED HISTORIC PROPERTY: In order for any historic property to be designated in the ordinance, it must, in addition, meet the criteria
established for inclusion of the property in the national register of historic places.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION: The identification, evaluation, recordation, documentation, curation, acquisition, management, protection, restoration,
rehabilitation, stabilization, maintenance, interpretation, conservation, and education of buildings, structures, objects, districts, areas, and sites significant
in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this state, its communities or the nation.
HISTORIC PROPERTY: Any building, structure, district, area or site that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology or culture of this community,
the state or the nation.
HISTORY: For the purposes of this chapter, the term "history" shall include projects, programs or activities that relate to the identity, customs, skills, history
or heritage of a group of people that are transferred, communicated or passed along to succeeding generations. (Ord. 4225, 2-1-2016)
2-10-5: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The commission shall advise and assist the mayor and city council to develop, coordinate and promote the visual, performing and literary arts and heritage
programs and policies for the enjoyment, education, cultural enrichment and benefit of the citizens of Nampa. In furtherance of these duties, the
commission shall have the following objectives, in addition to all other powers, duties and responsibilities of the commission contemplated in Idaho Code
section 67-4604:
A. To stimulate greater governmental and public awareness and appreciation of the importance of the arts, historic preservation, and history.
B. To encourage the preservation and growth of the city's artistic, cultural, and historical resources, and foster the development of a receptive climate for
the arts, culture, historic preservation, and history.
C. To provide general assistance to Nampa's artistic, historical, and cultural organizations with information and encouragement.
D. To encourage opportunities for Nampa residents to participate in artistic, historical, and cultural activities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 39/410
E. To promote the development of Nampa artists, institutions and community organizations sponsoring arts, historic preservation, and historical activities.
F. To assess the arts and cultural heritage needs of the people of Nampa and make such information available to the city council and all interested
agencies and persons.
G. To encourage and coordinate the artistic, historic preservation, historical, and cultural activities of other governmental agencies.
H. To seek and encourage financial support, including grants, loans and guarantees to Nampa artists, arts institutions, historians and community
organizations sponsoring arts, historic preservation, and history activities, subject to city council approval.
I. To represent the public interest by developing and recommending policies that pertain to arts, historic preservation, and history to the Nampa city
council.
J. To advise the city regarding the costs, benefits and other issues of acquiring cultural assets and implementing cultural programming.
K. To appoint members of the community to subcommittees to provide support to the commission.
L. To consider and recommend to the city council such local laws and regulations, ordinances, special conditions or restrictions as may be necessary or
desirable for the protection, enhancement and preservation of historic properties, as contemplated in Idaho Code section 64-4612.
M. To recommend to the city council, within the limits of its funding, the employment of or the contracting with other parties for the services of technical
experts or other persons as the commission deems necessary to carry on its functions. (Ord. 4225, 2-1-2016)
2-10-6: MEETINGS, POLICIES:
The commission shall hold regular public meetings, keep a written record of its proceedings, and file an annual report with the city council summarizing its
activities and setting forth recommendations. The commission shall establish policies for its internal operation. (Ord. 4225, 2-1-2016)
Chapter 11
ECONOMIC AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
2-11-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is an economic and community development commission for the purpose of directing and advising the economic and community development
affairs of the city. The commission consists of a board of ten (10) commissioners, exclusive of the mayor, who is an ex officio member.
Commission members are appointed for one year terms. Appointments are made by the mayor with the confirmation of the council. The mayor will
annually appoint and the council confirm a chairman. When a vacancy occurs for any reason other than an expired term a member shall be appointed to
complete the remainder of that term. (Ord. 2133)
2-11-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
All persons appointed to membership on the commission shall be representatives of government, civic and private sectors of the community. This includes,
but is not limited to, the city, Nampa chamber of commerce, Nampa Industrial Corporation, retail shopping organizations, and educational and medical
organizations. (Ord. 2133)
2-11-3: ORGANIZATION, OFFICERS, RULES, MEETINGS:
The commission will annually elect such other officers as it may determine it requires. During the absence of the chairman the vice chairman will assume
the duties of the chairman. If the vice chairman has not been elected, then the secretary will call a meeting of the commission for the purpose of electing a
vice chairman. The secretary will be required to keep an accurate record of all proceedings of the commission, and the commission shall file quarterly or
more often, if necessary, a report of all its proceedings, transactions and recommendations to the council. The commission has the power to recommend
the adoption of rules and regulations for its own deliberations. The commission shall meet as often as it deems necessary.
The chairman may appoint or the commission elect from among its members the chairmen and members of three (3) permanent committees:
infrastructure, existing business, and diversification. The commission chairman and the permanent commission chairmen will form an executive committee
that reports to the commission and seeks approval of the commission and council. Committee members may be other members of the commission or
members of the community appointed at large.
Temporary subcommittees may be formed to work on particular projects. (Ord. 2133)
2-11-4: MEMBERS SERVE WITHOUT COMPENSATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 40/410
The commissioners serve without compensation of any kind. (Ord. 2133)
2-11-5: POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
It is the duty of the commission, and it has the power, except as otherwise provided by law, to monitor, report, recommend and work on economic and
community development matters concerning the following:
A. Improvement of community infrastructure including transportation, schools, utilities, public services, health care and recreation.
B. Retention and expansion of local businesses including projects concerning the health of local businesses, and the use of local natural resources for
economic enterprise.
C. Diversification of the local economy including the recruitment and creation of new businesses, the attraction of new investments and residents, and the
expansion of the tourism trade. (Ord. 2133)
Chapter 12
COMMUNITY RELATIONS COMMISSION
2-12-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is a community relations commission which consists of seven (7) members exclusive of the mayor or one council member who will serve as ex
officio member.
The first board of the commissioners shall be appointed by the mayor with confirmation by the council, and the members of the first commission shall be
appointed as follows: two (2) members for a period of two (2) years, one member for three (3) years, two (2) members for four (4) years and two (2)
members for five (5) years. Thereafter, their successors shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years. In the event of the death, resignation or any
vacancy on the commission, the mayor is authorized to fill such vacancy by appointment for the unexpired term of such member, subject to council
confirmation. (Ord. 2154)
2-12-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
All persons appointed to the commission shall be residents of the city or the surrounding impact area. A majority of the commissioners shall be
representative of the ethnic community. (Ord. 2154)
2-12-3: ORGANIZATION:
The board of commissioners shall organize the commission within thirty (30) days after the commission has been appointed; and shall elect from their
membership a chairman, vice chairman and a secretary. The commission shall meet annually in February for the purpose of electing new officers to serve
a period of one year. (Ord. 2154)
2-12-4: MEETINGS:
The commission shall hold at least one regular meeting open to the public each month, and such other and further meetings as may be determined by the
chairperson or by a majority of the members to be called and held at a time, place and manner as the commission shall order in its minutes. The chairman,
or commission by majority vote, may choose to omit monthly meetings if circumstances dictate. (Ord. 2154)
2-12-5: QUORUM; RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A majority of the appointive members shall constitute a quorum. In matters of parliamentary procedure, the rules state in Roberts rules of order shall
govern the deliberations of the commission. (Ord. 2154)
2-12-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. It is the duty of the commission to promote improved communication, understanding and cooperation among all citizens.
B. To recommend to the council, and other entities of the community, programs that will be beneficial to community residents.
C. To review as requested by the council any alleged cases of discrimination or mistreatment of any minority group, and to report their recommendation on
these alleged cases to the city administration.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 41/410
D. To encourage all people in our community to support the regulations of government.
E. To assist city government in informing the community of the affirmative action program of the city and to encourage employment and educational
opportunities when available.
F. To acquaint itself with the concerns of the city's residents and to promote a response to these concerns/needs through both informal and
governmental/organizational channels. (Ord. 2154)
Chapter 13
NAMPA CIVIC CENTER AUXILIARY COMMISSION
2-13-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There is a Nampa civic center auxiliary commission. The commission is the executive board of the Nampa civic center auxiliary. (Ord. 2201)
2-13-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the commission is to act as a liaison between the mayor, council, civic center management, and current members in good standing of the
Nampa civic center auxiliary. The commission shall further provide a variety of support services for the Nampa civic center. (Ord. 2201)
2-13-3: ORGANIZATION:
Members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor, and such appointments shall be approved by the council. The commission consists of seven
(7) individuals who shall serve as officers of the Nampa civic center auxiliary. The mayor shall be an ex officio member of the commission. (Ord. 2201;
amd. Ord. 2422)
2-13-4: OFFICERS:
Officers of the commission consist of a president, a vice president, a secretary, a treasurer and a commissioner at large. (Ord. 2201)
2-13-5: TERM OF COMMISSIONERS:
Members of the commission are appointed to five (5) year terms. The terms are staggered so that terms of one or two (2) members expire each year. (Ord.
2201)
2-13-6: MEETINGS:
Meetings of the commission are conducted in accordance with by laws of the commission as deemed necessary by the commission or as requested by the
mayor and council. (Ord. 2201)
2-13-7: COMPENSATION:
All commission members serve without compensation except for reimbursement for out of pocket expenses as approved by the commission and council.
(Ord. 2201)
Chapter 14
VENUE MANAGEMENT ADVISORY COMMISSION
2-14-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There shall be an advisory commission to be known as the Venue Management Advisory Commission for the purpose of advising the Mayor and Council
in directing and managing the affairs of the Ford Idaho Center and the Nampa Civic Center, and to advise as to the potential benefits or drawbacks of the
formation of any future auditorium district to be established or proposed either wholly or partially within the City limits of the City of Nampa. The
commission shall consist of a board of eight (8) Commissioners, exclusive of the Mayor, who shall at all times be an ex officio member of said commission.
(Ord. 4369, 4-2-2018)
All of the commission members are appointed for five (5) year rotating terms. All appointments are made by the Mayor with confirmation by the Council.
Each year an appointment shall be made to fill the position of the retiring member. When a vacancy occurs for any reason other than expired term, a
member shall be appointed to complete the remainder of that term. (Ord. 4113, 4-21-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 42/410
2-14-2: ORGANIZATION:
The Venue Management Advisory Commission shall elect its own Chairman and fill such other offices as it may determine it requires. All officers elected
shall hold office during the pleasure of the commission. During the absence or disability of the Chairman, the Vice Chairman shall assume the duties of the
Chairman. If the Vice Chairman has not been elected, then the Secretary shall call a meeting of the commission for the purpose of electing a Vice
Chairman. The Secretary shall be required to keep an accurate record of all proceedings of the commission, and the commission shall file quarterly or
more often, if necessary, a report of all its proceedings, transactions, and recommendations to the Council. The Secretary of the commission shall be
entitled to receive such expenses as may be determined by the commission, and as need therefore arises, subject, however, to the approval of the
Council. The commission shall have the power to recommend the adoption of rules and regulations for its own deliberations. (Ord. 4369, 4-2-2018)
2-14-3: MEMBERS SERVE WITHOUT COMPENSATION:
The Commissioners serve without compensation of any kind or character. (Ord. 3390, 10-18-2004)
2-14-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the commission to advise the Mayor and Council with regard to the operation, maintenance, and improvement of the Ford Idaho
Center. (Ord. 3390, 10-18-2004; amd. Ord. 4369, 4-2-2018)
Chapter 15
CENTRAL NAMPA DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
2-15-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
There shall be an advisory commission to be known as the central Nampa development commission for the purpose of advising the mayor and council in
directing and managing the development and affairs of the Nampa downtown revitalization project. The commission shall consist of a board of eight (8)
commissioners, exclusive of the mayor and one member of the Nampa city council appointed by the mayor who shall at all times be ex officio, nonvoting
members of said commission. The eight (8) commissioners shall include two (2) members of the Nampa business improvement district.
Five (5) of the commission members are appointed for five (5) year rotating terms. Three (3) of the commission members shall be appointed for one year
terms. All appointments are made by the mayor with confirmation by the council. Each year, an appointment shall be made to fill the position of the retiring
member. When a vacancy occurs for any reason other than expired term, a member shall be appointed to complete the remainder of that term. (Ord. 3530,
12-19-2005)
2-15-2: ORGANIZATION:
The central Nampa development commission shall elect its own chairman and vice chairman, and shall fill such other offices as it may determine it
requires. All officers elected shall hold office during the pleasure of the commission. During the absence or disability of the chairman, the vice chairman
shall assume the duties of the chairman. The secretary shall be required to keep an accurate record of all proceedings of the commission, and the
commission shall file quarterly, or more often if necessary, a report of all its proceedings, transactions, and recommendations to the council. The secretary
of the commission shall be entitled to receive such expenses as may be determined by the commission, and as the need therefor arises, subject however,
to the approval of the council. The commission shall have the power to recommend the adoption of rules and regulations for its own deliberations. (Ord.
3530, 12-19-2005)
2-15-3: COMPENSATION:
The commissioners serve without compensation of any kind or character. (Ord. 3530, 12-19-2005)
2-15-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the commission to advise the mayor and council with regard to the development, improvement, management, and overall
administration of the Nampa downtown revitalization project. (Ord. 3530, 12-19-2005)
Chapter 16
DESIGN STANDARDS COMMITTEE
2-16-1: COMMITTEE CREATED:
There shall be a design standards committee for the city, which said committee shall be known and designated as the building and site design standards
(BSDS) committee. (Ord. 3657, 1-2-2007)
2-16-2: APPOINTMENT; TERM:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 43/410
The BSDS committee shall consist of seven (7) members, all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of city council. Not more than two
(2) of the seven (7) members to be appointed by the mayor may be nonresidents of the city. An appointed member of the committee must have resided in
the city for at least one year prior to the appointment and must remain a resident of the city or the impact area as defined by the current comprehensive
plan, during service on the committee. All appointments are made by the mayor with confirmation by the council. Each year appointments shall be made to
fill the positions of retiring committee members. When a vacancy occurs for any reason other than an expired term a new committee member shall be
appointed to complete the remainder of that term. Membership shall be composed of seven (7) citizens at large having background and interest in
community design such as architects, engineers, planners, designers, developers, builders, businesspersons, and landscape architects. Committee
members shall be appointed for the following terms of office: two (2) for two (2) years; two (2) for three (3) years; and three (3) for four (4) years.
Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the same manner as an appointment. (Ord. 3657, 1-2-2007)
2-16-3: ORGANIZATION:
The committee shall elect its own chairman and vice chairman and fill such other offices as it may determine it requires. Election of officers shall take place
as determined by the committee. During the absence or disability of the chairman, the vice chairman shall assume the duties of the chairman. The
planning director or his designee shall serve as secretary. The secretary shall keep accurate records of all proceedings of the committee. (Ord. 3657, 1-2-
2007)
2-16-4: MEETINGS:
The committee shall hold at least one regular meeting each month during the year and such other and further meetings as may be determined by a
majority of the members of said committee to be called and held at a time, place, and manner as the committee shall order in its minutes. The regular
meetings shall be held at a date and time as decided according to the committee, and, unless otherwise decided and determined by the members, such
meetings shall be held in the council chambers of Nampa City Hall and shall at all times be open to the public. (Ord. 3657, 1-2-2007)
2-16-5: POWERS, DUTIES, AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The committee shall review projects forwarded by staff, requested by the applicant, greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet or complicated in
nature. The committee shall review projects for compliance with design review standards within title 10, chapters 4, "GB (GB1, GB2 And GBE) Gateway
Business Districts/Zones", and 16, "BC Community Business District/Zone", of this code. (Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015; amd. Ord. 4281, 9-19-2016)
The BSDS committee shall review projects and either approve, approve with conditions, or deny such application. The planning director, or a designated
representative, shall then notify the applicant in writing of the decision. (Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
Staff decisions may be appealed to the BSDS committee, and conversely BSDS committee decisions may be appealed to the planning commission for
review and decision.
The powers, duties and responsibilities of the BSDS committee shall comply with the state of Idaho local planning act of 1975. (Ord. 3657, 1-2-2007)
Chapter 17
ARTS COMMISSION1
(Rep. by Ord. 4225, 2-1-2016)
Chapter 18
NAMPA BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN ADVISORY COMMITTEE
2-18-1: PURPOSE AND FUNCTION:
The city of Nampa wishes to develop a network of bicycle and pedestrian facilities throughout the community. Therefore, the mayor and city council
creates the Nampa bicycle and pedestrian advisory committee (BPAC). The purpose of the bicycle and pedestrian advisory committee is to advise the city
on matters regarding the development of this network. The committee shall:
A. Provide recommendations to the mayor and city council on policies, procedures or programs to implement the goals and objectives outlined in the
Nampa bicycle and pedestrian master plan and the transportation master plan.
B. Annually review the bicycle and pedestrian master plan and recommend updates or amendments as necessary to reasonably increase bicycle and
pedestrian facilities through the community and fulfill the goals and objectives of the city of Nampa comprehensive and strategic plans.
C. Annually review and provide input and recommendations on the Nampa transportation master plan as necessary to fulfill the goals and objectives of the
city of Nampa comprehensive and strategic plans.
D. Seek, provide, and coordinate community support for new bicycle and pedestrian funding opportunities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 44/410
E. Seek, provide, and coordinate bicycle and pedestrian community input during the annual budgeting process.
F. Seek, provide, and coordinate bicycle and pedestrian community input for transportation projects.
G. Educate and promote active transportation to the greater Nampa community. (Ord. 4074, 11-4-2013)
2-18-2: APPOINTMENT; TERM:
The Nampa BPAC shall consist of seven (7) members, all of whom serve in a voluntary capacity at the pleasure of the mayor of the city of Nampa. Not
more than two (2) of the seven (7) members to be appointed by the mayor, may be nonresidents of the city. All appointments are made by the mayor with
confirmation by the council. Where possible, membership shall be appointed in a manner which will allow members to represent the following
stakeholders: bicyclists, citizens, industry, business owners, small and large employers, educators and/or education administrators (college, high school,
middle school and elementary school), representatives from ethnic or minority groups, parents, elderly and persons with disabilities. Committee members
shall be appointed for three (3) year terms starting with staggered terms. (Ord. 4074, 11-4-2013)
2-18-3: ORGANIZATION:
The committee shall elect a chairman, vice chairman, and secretary and any other officers as it finds necessary to complete the purpose and function of
the Nampa BPAC. Election of officers shall take place at the first regularly scheduled meeting and annually at the regularly scheduled meeting after the
first of every calendar year thereafter. During the absence or disability of the chairman, the vice chairman shall assume the duties of the chairman. The
secretary shall provide an agenda and minutes as an accurate record of all proceedings of the committee. The public works director or designee, parks
department director or designee and the planning and zoning director or designee shall be staff liaisons to the committee. (Ord. 4074, 11-4-2013)
2-18-4: MEETINGS:
The committee shall hold regular meetings as necessary as determined by the Nampa BPAC to accomplish its purpose and function. The regular meetings
shall be held at a date and time as decided according to the committee, and, unless otherwise decided and determined by the members, such meetings
shall be held in the council chambers of Nampa City Hall and shall at all times be open to the public. (Ord. 4074, 11-4-2013)
2-18-5: STAFFING:
The city of Nampa public works department shall provide reasonable staff assistance to facilitate the purpose and function of the Nampa BPAC. The city of
Nampa parks department shall provide additional staff assistance as necessary to ensure the purpose and function of the Nampa BPAC efforts are in
accordance with off street pathway standards in the bicycle and pedestrian master plan. The city of Nampa planning and zoning department shall provide
additional staff assistance as necessary to ensure the purpose and function of the Nampa BPAC efforts are in accordance with the city of Nampa
comprehensive plan. The Nampa city mayor's office shall provide additional staff assistance as necessary to ensure the purpose and function of the
Nampa BPAC efforts are in accordance with the city of Nampa strategic plan. (Ord. 4074, 11-4-2013)
2-18-6: FUNDING:
Funding for the Nampa BPAC and staff assistance shall be from the city of Nampa general fund and follow staffing as assigned. (Ord. 4074, 11-4-2013)
Title 3
GENERAL SERVICES
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
3-1-1: BOARD OF APPRAISERS; DUTIES:
There is a Board of Appraisers, as the same is referenced in sections 8-1-3 and 8-2-4 of this Code, consisting of the following: Finance Director, Public
Works Director, City Engineer, and three (3) citizens at large, appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. Citizens will serve on a rotational
basis with staggered four (4) year terms. The board shall recommend all rates, charges or fees made and established under authority of this chapter. The
board shall also conduct hearings and hear appeals from services, regulations, and fees charged under this chapter. The Board of Appraisers' decisions
must be presented to Council for approval. (Ord. 4408, 11-19-2018)
3-1-2: DELINQUENT CHARGES:
All charges or fees, as provided by this title, not paid within thirty (30) days of the date when due shall become delinquent, and shall be imposed as a lien
against and upon such premises. The Clerk shall at the time of certifying the City taxes, certify such delinquencies together with all penalties to the Tax
Collector of Canyon County1. (Ord. 2087)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 45/410
3-1-3: PENALTY CLAUSE:
A violation of any provision of this title, other than nonpayment of fees and charges, and unless specifically otherwise designated in the provision, shall be
a misdemeanor as prescribed in section 1-1-7 of this Code. (Ord. 3242, 7-21-2003)
3-1-4: INTERFERING WITH UTILITY ACCESS; UNLAWFUL; PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
It is unlawful for any person to hinder or in any way interfere with access by City employees to City water, utility, and irrigation services and meters while
the City employee is lawfully engaged in the performance of his or her duties. A violation of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a fine of
seventy five dollars ($75.00). (Ord. 3242, 7-21-2003)
Chapter 2
UTILITY BILLING
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
BILLS: Includes billing for domestic water, sewer and refuse hauling services and may be referred to as "water or utility bills".
DOMESTIC WATER: Potable water used for any purpose.
NAMPA SHARES AND CARES PROGRAM: A program administered by the city of Nampa to provide payment assistance for low income utility customers
meeting established criteria.
UNCLAIMED FUNDS: Any funds remaining in a closed utility account more than one year after the last date of service whose owner cannot be located.
USER: A resident who uses the city domestic water, sewer and refuse hauling services. (Ord. 4014, 4-16-2012)
3-2-2: CROSS REFERENCES:
Title 8, chapters 1 and 2 of this code address basis for charges, special funds, specific procedures, testing of water meters, waste of water meters, waste
of water, unauthorized use, and other provisions, and should be referenced in conjunction with this chapter. (Ord. 2087)
3-2-3: NEW SERVICE:
An applicant for new service who will be responsible for the utility bills at a particular location and/or address shall complete and file with the utility billing
office an information form as prescribed by the city. Failure to file the completed form shall be cause for denial of water service. A deposit may be required
as delineated within this chapter. (Ord. 3934, 11-15-2010)
3-2-4: DEPOSIT:
The city reserves the right to require a deposit for any of the following reasons: (Ord. 4160, 1-20-2015)
A. The applicant has outstanding a prior service account with the city which accrued within the past four (4) years and at the time of application for service
remains unpaid, and not in dispute.
B. Within the past four (4) years the applicant's service from any utility, including the city, has been terminated for one of the following reasons:
nonpayment of an account not in dispute; or misrepresentation; failure to reimburse the company for damages due to negligent or intentional acts of
the customer.
C. The customer fails to pay his account on or before the date such payment is delinquent.
D. Nonresidential first time customer. (Ord. 2087; amd. Ord. 2269)
The deposit shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for residential customers and three hundred dollars ($300.00) for commercial or other
nonresidential customers. The deposit may be collected in one or two (2) installments, to be determined by the city. This deposit will be held for twelve
(12) months, at which time a review of the account will be made. If the account is determined to be in good standing, the deposit will be applied to the
customer's active account. If a deposit is held for a customer that no longer requires utility services from the city, said deposit will be applied to that
customer's final bill. Should any balance remain thereafter, it will be refunded to the customer within thirty (30) days. (Ord. 4160, 1-20-2015)
3-2-5: SERVICE CHARGES:
The city has the authority to charge fees for accounts that require additional services such as new accounts, delinquent accounts, leak checks, special
readings, turnoffs, and turn ons. Service charges shall be established by the board of appraisers. (Ord. 2087)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 46/410
3-2-6: SERVICE CHARGED AGAINST PREMISES:
Water, sewer, and trash hauling fees are charged against the premises for which the service is permitted. (Ord. 2087)
3-2-7: DENIAL OF SERVICE:
The city shall not initially deny or discontinue service to any user because of any delinquent utility bill on the premises that is attributable to the prior use of
services by another user. Provided further that the city shall not initially deny service to any user for whatever reason without informing the user of the right
to a hearing prescribed in this chapter.
In the case of an initial denial of service, the city is not required to provide service pending a hearing. However, a hearing upon request of a user initially
denied service shall be held as expeditiously as possible and held in accordance with procedures for pretermination hearings prescribed in this chapter.
(Ord. 2087)
3-2-8: DUE DATE; DELINQUENT BILLS:
Utility bills must be paid by the due date shown on the billing statement, and any charges or fees not paid by the due date shall be considered delinquent.
In the event a utility bill becomes delinquent, service may be terminated. Service shall be terminated on the shutoff date indicated on the billing statement
unless a pretermination hearing is requested by the user prior to the due date. The hearing shall be held with due process protection. If a pretermination
hearing is requested the city will not discontinue service to the user prior to the hearing. Should the user not request a pretermination hearing, or if an
adverse decision is rendered against the user as a result of the pretermination hearing, the city may require the user to pay the delinquent utility charges,
plus a service charge, and a deposit as a condition of receiving service again.
The board of appraisers shall have the responsibility of holding pretermination hearings. The board shall render its decision in writing, giving the reasons
for its determination and the right to appeal the decision pursuant to the Idaho state administrative procedure act. (Ord. 3935, 11-15-2010)
3-2-9: RIGHT OF CITY TO TURN WATER OFF:
The city has the right to shut off water for nonpayment of utility bills after following procedures prescribed in this chapter. The city shall not be responsible
for any damage such as bursting of boilers supplied by direct pressure, the breaking of any pipe, water heater, or fixtures, or any other damage resulting
from shutting the water off. (Ord. 2087)
3-2-10: SEWER BILLING:
All billings for sewer charges levied under this chapter shall be combined with billings for water and trash hauling services and shall be billed and become
delinquent at the same time and in the same manner. (Ord. 2087)
3-2-11: ESTIMATED UTILITY BILLS:
Estimated water and sewer charges may be issued when weather or other circumstances do not permit reading of meters. Estimated bills will be
calculated by using the three (3) previous billing periods. If estimated charges are higher than actual consumption, a credit will be issued to the account
based on the first meter reading thereafter. (Ord. 2087)
3-2-12: ADJUSTMENTS:
Any bill for water supplied or service rendered will be considered a proper charge unless protest is made to the utility billing office within sixteen (16) days
after presentation of the bill. Adjustment will only be allowed when evidence clearly shows that the excessive charge is due to underground leaking pipes
or fixtures, and not wasteful use and then only when repairs have been promptly made and reported to the utility billing office. No allowances will be made
covering more than two (2) billing periods including the billing period in which the protest was made. Adjustments will be made on previously established
averages, or on an average established after the leak is repaired, and in addition the user will be charged a pumping fee for excess water usage. The
utility billing office shall determine the excess consumption due to leakage. (Ord. 2087)
3-2-13: UNLAWFUL TO TURN ON WATER AFTER BEING TURNED OFF:
It is unlawful for any person after the water has been turned off from his premises by the city for any reason to turn on or to use or allow the water to be
used except by authority of the city. (Ord. 2087)
3-2-14: USE OF UNCLAIMED FUNDS FOR NAMPA SHARES AND CARES PROGRAM:
Any "unclaimed funds" as defined in section 3-2-1 of this chapter will be deemed abandoned and may be utilized in the Nampa shares and cares program
to provide assistance to low income utility customers. (Ord. 4014, 4-16-2012)
Chapter 3
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 47/410
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
COLLECTOR: A person engaged in the business of solid waste collection, transportation and disposal when specifically authorized by the mayor and
council as provided herein to perform such services in and for the city or any person employed by the city for the same purposes.
GARBAGE: All putrescible wastes resulting from the storage, handling, processing, distribution, preparation, cooking and serving of food and wastes from
the storage, handling, processing, distribution and sale of produce, animal products or animal by products or poultry or fish.
REFUSE: All garbage, rubbish and small animal carcasses (i.e., cats and like small animals) or parts thereof.
RUBBISH: Rubbish includes, but is not limited to, paper and paper products, plastic, fabrics, leather, ceramics, glass, wood, vegetation (i.e., trees, leaves,
grass clippings, and like materials), rubber and rubber like materials including vehicle tires, ashes, metallic and nonmetallic articles and materials.
SOLID WASTE: All useless, unwanted or discarded putrescible and nonputrescible wastes. Solid waste includes, but is not limited to, garbage, refuse,
rubbish, ashes, trees, shrubs, grass and lawn clippings, weeds, leaves, street cleanings, construction and demolition wastes, animal carcasses, offal,
unwanted and abandoned vehicles, car bodies, sewage treatment residue and other residential, commercial, industrial and agricultural wastes. Solid
waste, as herein defined, excludes materials that are known as hazardous waste and governed by the environmental protection agency, or its agents, and
its regulations.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE: Any land designated and used only for the depositing, incinerating, composting, grinding or other processes of
treatment, utilization, transfer or conversion of solid wastes rendering them inoffensive. (Ord. 2087)
3-3-2: CONTRACTING:
The mayor and council may contract with, franchise, or employ a person for the collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste in and for the city.
(Ord. 2087)
3-3-3: UNAUTHORIZED COLLECTIONS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of solid waste collection for hire within the city unless so authorized by the mayor and council. (Ord.
2087)
3-3-4: STORAGE OF SOLID WASTE:
It is the duty of every occupant of any premises where refuse is created or accumulated within the city to keep or cause to be kept portable approved
containers for the deposit of refuse. All garbage shall, before deposit in such containers, be wrapped in paper or other material, so as to prevent the
escape of liquids. (Ord. 2087)
3-3-5: CONTAINERS:
A. All containers used for the storage of refuse shall be watertight and not easily corrodible, rodent and fly proof, shall be equipped with handles and a
close fitting lid. Such containers shall be not less than ten (10) gallons' liquid measure capacity nor more than thirty five (35) gallons' capacity and
weigh no more than sixty (60) pounds when filled. Allied Waste containers shall not exceed ninety five (95) gallons' capacity nor weigh more than two
hundred (200) pounds when filled. The container shall be of the type guaranteed by the manufacturer and labeled to be leakproof. Lids shall not be
removed except when necessary to place refuse in such container or to take the same therefrom. Containers shall be maintained in a sanitary
condition with the inside and outside washed so as to keep the same free and clean of accumulated grease and decomposing material and so that no
odor or health nuisance shall exist.
B. The provisions of the preceding section may be waived in those instances where specifically designed and approved volume refuse containers suitable
for mechanical handling by collection equipment are provided by and agreed to by the collector and occupant and approved by the city.
C. For purposes of recycling, the city will provide a blue bin which may be used as a container for refuse to be recycled, or the customer may utilize other
containers for refuse to be recycled. The blue bin provided by the city for recyclable refuse will not be used for disposable refuse. Refuse to be recycled
will be kept separate from refuse to be disposed of.
D. Containers not in conformance with the provision of this section shall be unlawful and may not be serviced by the collector.
E. Small animal refuse (i.e., cats and like small animals) may be stored in approved refuse containers, provided that such refuse is closely wrapped in a
plastic bag or other equally nonpervious material and then closely wrapped in paper and securely tied.
F. Rubbish consisting only of cardboard, or wooden boxes, brush, leaves, weeds and cuttings from trees, lawns, shrubs and gardens, may be kept
separately without depositing in such containers, providing that such bulk materials, such as leaves, shall be in a can, box, sack or receptacle for ease
of loading and that brush, or any bulky material, shall be tied in bundles not to exceed four feet (4') in length. Any such receptacles or bundles shall not
weigh more than seventy five (75) pounds gross weight when filled. Compost piles may be maintained for fertilization purposes, and matter used for
fertilization purposes only may be transported, kept and used; provided the same shall not constitute a nuisance. Nothing in this section shall be
construed so as to permit the violation of any nuisance rules or regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 48/410
G. Containers not meeting the requirements of this chapter that are found on any public rights of way or property owned by the city may be removed by the
city or its agents and disposed of. (Ord. 3699, 5-7-2007)
3-3-6: STORAGE LOCATION:
A. Refuse containers, except approved volume containers as defined in subsection 3-3-5B of this chapter, shall not be placed nor stored outside within
twenty five feet (25') of any public street in any residential area of the city except on regularly scheduled collection days within that area. The siting of
approved volume containers adjacent to the public streets shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer.
B. Specially designed, permanent enclosures for approved refuse containers may be allowed adjacent to the public rights of way in residential areas,
provided that:
1. There is no public alley or other suitable access immediately adjacent to a premises.
2. All occupants within one hundred feet (100') agree to the installation in writing prior to construction.
3. The city engineer's office shall issue a written permit authorizing the construction.
4. The enclosure shall be well constructed, functional, aesthetically pleasing and not exceed in overall outside dimensions eight feet (8') in length, four
feet (4') in width and three and one-half feet (31/2') in height. (Ord. 2087)
3-3-7: COMPULSORY USE OF COLLECTION SYSTEM:
No person shall be permitted to refuse to accept the collection and disposal service provided for in this chapter. The temporary failure of any person to
receive such service due to circumstances beyond the control of the city shall not exempt such person from payment of charges provided by this chapter.
A. Collectors shall collect refuse from each residential customer at least once each week or as may otherwise be provided by the city. Provided, however,
that for all public buildings, hospitals, hotels, buildings and boarding and rooming houses or any other premises within the city designated by the
responsible authority, all garbage shall be collected, removed and disposed of at least once each day. (Ord. 2087)
3-3-8: SCHEDULE AND QUANTITY OF COLLECTION:
The maximum amount of refuse that will be collected and frequency of collection are established in the contract with the collector. (Ord. 2087)
3-3-9: OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Unless other arrangements are made with the collector, it shall be the duty of every occupant within the city to ensure the regular and timely removal of
all refuse from their premises by making certain that all refuse containers are placed in a location reasonably accessible to the collector prior to
regularly scheduled times of collection. "Reasonably accessible" shall mean within ten feet (10') of a regular traveled vehicular way.
B. Removal of all dead animals (except cats and like small animals) shall be the sole responsibility of each occupant.
C. Removal of trees, construction and demolition waste, unwanted and abandoned vehicles and car bodies and all other large and bulky items of solid
waste shall be the sole responsibility of each occupant. (Ord. 2087)
3-3-10: COLLECTORS FOR HIRE; STANDARDS:
A. The collector shall perform all services incident to and in connection with the collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste to an approved solid
waste disposal site, and not otherwise without the written consent of the mayor and council, in an orderly, timely, efficient and businesslike manner.
B. A collector shall maintain at his own expense a regular place of business and shall conduct the business of solid waste collection from a location clearly
marked with appropriate public markings, keep normal business hours at such location, provide listed telephone service attended by his employees
during normal business hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal state holidays.
C. A collector shall provide sufficient trained manpower and serviceable and well maintained vehicles, equipment and devices of a type and size currently
standard to the national solid waste collection industry appropriate to the geographic size and population density of this city and complementary to the
levels of service set forth herein and/or as may be subsequently determined by the mayor and council, to assure complete, regular removal from the
city of all "solid waste" under the conditions and as defined herein. All containers used to transport solid waste shall be equipped with a cover sufficient
to prevent spillage while being transported. (Ord. 2087)
3-3-11: EMERGENCY PROVISION:
In recognition that the public health, safety and welfare may be endangered by any failure of the solid waste collection system, it is hereby ordained that
any failure on the part of the collector to perform required services for any reason whatsoever shall entitle and be legally incumbent upon the mayor and
council to declare a public emergency and then to have performed solid waste collection, transportation and disposal services for the public, utilizing the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 49/410
vehicles, equipment, devices, facilities and employees of the collector, and/or city forces in lieu thereof, without special compensation to the collector, until
such time as the collector satisfactorily demonstrates to the mayor and council it has the ability to render service at the level required by this chapter. (Ord.
2087)
3-3-12: APPEAL FROM SERVICE:
Any person who will show cause for good and cogent reason(s) why they should be exempt from compliance with one or more of the provisions of this
chapter or any ruling made hereunder, may petition the board of appraisers for consideration of an exemption or relief from such provisions or rulings.
(Ord. 2087)
3-3-13: COLLECTION OF CHARGES:
Charges for collection shall be carried on the utility bill, and the same shall be paid with the water and sewer bills. The utility billing office is authorized to
discontinue service to any premises if the entire water, sewer and refuse bill is not paid, said charges to become delinquent as provided in the utility billing
chapter. The city may direct that collection service as herein defined not be provided to any premises where the rules and regulations of this chapter are
not complied with. (Ord. 2087)
Chapter 4
NUISANCES
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
DISEASED: Any tree which has become blighted, defaced, or has acquired a disease not capable of cure through treatment or the use of any known or
recognized form of spray material.
JUNKED VEHICLES: Partially dismantled, wrecked, discarded or otherwise nonoperating motor vehicles or parts thereof. Also includes, but is not limited
to, trucks, mobile homes, trailers, travel trailers, coaches, farm vehicles and machinery and/or bodies or major parts.
NUISANCE: Any condition or use of a property which is detrimental to the property interest of another or which causes or tends to cause material
diminution in the value of other properties in the neighborhood or any condition or use of a property that tends to promote blight and deterioration, invite
plundering, create fire hazards, constitute an unattractive nuisance, create a harborage for rodents and insects, or be injurious to the health, safety or
general welfare of the inhabitants of the city.
SOLID WASTE: All useless, unwanted or discarded putrescible and nonputrescible wastes. Solid waste includes, but is not limited to, garbage, refuse,
rubbish, ashes, trees, shrubs, grass and lawn clippings, weeds, leaves, street cleanings, construction and demolition wastes, animal carcasses, offal, car
bodies, sewage treatment residue and other residential, commercial, industrial and agricultural wastes. Solid waste, as here defined, excludes materials
that are known as hazardous waste and governed by the environmental protection agency, or its agents, and its regulations.
TREES: All trees, plants and shrubs which, upon maturity, grow to a height of more than four feet (4').
WEEDS: Undesirable plant growth that is unkept, unsightly, deleterious and/or injurious to the public. Weeds include noxious weeds, grasses, unkept
bushes and any plant meeting this description. (Ord. 3954, 2-22-2011)
3-4-2: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES:
Nothing contained herein or elsewhere, shall limit the power of the city to cause or effect abatement of any nuisance by notifying the occupant in writing to
remove the same within five (5) days, or sooner if deemed expedient by a code enforcement official, following the receipt of such notice. In default of
abatement of the nuisance, the city is empowered to remove and abate the nuisance at the expense of the owner creating, causing, committing or
maintaining the same, and to levy a special assessment of the premises whereon the nuisance is situated to defray the cost or to reimburse the city for the
cost of abating the same. The city has the authority to employ such labor as is necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter and allow the bills
therefor1. (Ord. 3954, 2-22-2011)
3-4-3: DUMPING UNLAWFUL:
It is a misdemeanor to throw, discard, or deposit any solid waste upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public properties within the city. (Ord. 2087)
3-4-4: RIGHT TO REMOVE:
Refuse, debris, solid waste and items under this chapter that are a "nuisance" as herein defined may be removed and disposed of by the city from any
public rights of way or property owned by the city. (Ord. 2087)
3-4-5: BURNING PROHIBITED:
The burning of substances of any kind within the city is prohibited except by permission of the fire department. (Ord. 2087)
3-4-6: RIGHT OF INSPECTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 50/410
The city through its authorized representative bearing proper identification shall be permitted at proper and reasonable hours of the day to enter and
inspect all premises for the purpose of nuisance control. The authorized representative shall not enter premises where the occupant or owner shall object
to such entry except where an order for the purpose of entry has been obtained from the appropriate court. (Ord. 2087)
3-4-7: SOLID WASTE ACCUMULATION UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any occupant or owner to allow to accumulate in or about any premises any solid waste, so as to cause the premises to be or remain a
nuisance. (Ord. 2087)
3-4-8: WEEDS TO BE DESTROYED:
Every person residing, doing business, owning, renting or leasing property within the city shall be required to keep weeds over eight inches (8") in height
continuously cut down, weeded out, removed, sprayed or destroyed. This shall not only include all weeds on private property, but weeds situated on public
property adjacent to or contiguous with private property including areas behind curbs, sidewalks, parking areas, and property to the center of alleys and
ditches. (Ord. 2087)
3-4-9: OBSTRUCTION TO COMFORTABLE ENJOYMENT OF LIFE:
No person shall maintain, permit, cause or contribute to anything within the city which is injurious to health or is indecent or offensive to the senses or an
obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. (Ord. 2087)
3-4-10: MAINTENANCE OF NUISANCE UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge of any premises to maintain, keep or allow any nuisance to remain on
such premises longer than five (5) days, or sooner if deemed expedient by a code enforcement official. This shall not only include all nuisances on private
property, but nuisances situated on public property adjacent to or contiguous with private property including areas behind curbs, sidewalks, parking areas,
and property to the center of alleys and ditches. Said five (5) day period, or sooner if deemed expedient by a code enforcement official, shall commence
after written notice is served as provided in section 1-1-14 of this code.
The written notice of the five (5) day period, or sooner if deemed expedient by a code enforcement official, shall be served upon any adult occupying the
premises on which the nuisance is located and upon the owner of the nuisance, if known. If no occupant of the premises or owner of the nuisance can be
found, a notice affixed to any building on the premises shall constitute notice to the owner or occupant of the premises, and the owner of the nuisance. If
there is no building on the premises, such notice may be affixed elsewhere on the premises. Provided, however, no additional or further notice shall be
required for subsequent or continuing violations.
This section shall not apply with regard to any such nuisance located in an enclosed building or so located on the premises as not to be readily visible from
any public place or from any surrounding private property. This section shall not apply to partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, discarded or otherwise
nonoperating motor vehicles or parts thereof which are stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a
licensed dismantler, licensed salvage yard or junk dealer or when storing or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or
commercial enterprise. (Ord. 3954, 2-22-2011)
3-4-11: INJURIOUS PESTS AND INSECTS:
The permitting of injurious pests, or insects, or their eggs or larvae, upon any tree or trees, or shrubbery, within the corporate limits of the city, upon the
property owned or in the control of any person or dedicated street or streets adjacent thereto is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. It is hereby made
the duty of every owner and owners of any real property in the city to eradicate any and all injurious pests or insects, or their eggs or larvae from any and
all trees or shrubbery upon the property owned or controlled by them or growing upon the public right of way between the property line and the street
travelway adjacent thereto, and anyone failing to do so shall be and is hereby declared to be maintaining a nuisance. (Ord. 2087)
3-4-12: DEAD, DEFACED, BROKEN, AND DANGEROUS TREES; REMOVAL AND FAILURE TO TRIM:
Every dead, defaced, broken, dangerous, diseased, or untrimmed tree, within any public right of way which has or may become a traffic hazard or a
hazard to adjoining property and is so determined by the city is hereby declared to be and to constitute a nuisance. It is the duty of every owner of any
premises in the city to have removed dead, defaced, diseased, broken or dangerous trees and to trim trees located upon the public right of way between
the property line and street travelway adjacent thereto. (Ord. 2087)
3-4-13: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the cutting, trimming or removing of trees that will fall on any public right of way or public property without first
procuring a license. (Ord. 2087)
3-4-14: DAMAGE TO TREES; UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to damage or mutilate any tree within any street or public ground of the city. (Ord. 2087)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 51/410
3-4-15: ICE, SNOW, DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS:
The accumulation of snow, ice, dirt or any solid waste upon the sidewalks of the city or placement of items (e.g., dumpsters, portable backstops,
landscaping features, etc.) upon such so as to obstruct the same is declared to be a nuisance and the responsibility of the owner to move or remove in a
timely manner. (Ord. 3371, 8-2-2004)
Chapter 5
PARK DEVELOPMENT FEE
3-5-1: PARK DEVELOPMENT FUND:
All fees and charges received and collected under authority of this chapter shall be deposited and credited to a special fund to be designated as the park
development fund. The account of said fund shall show all receipts and expenditures by park development zones. As provided by law, when budgeted and
appropriated, the funds and credits to the park development fund shall be available for expenditures authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 2359)
3-5-2: PARK DEVELOPMENT ZONES:
There is hereby designated three (3) park development zones within the city of Nampa and within the area of city impact.
Zone 1:That area which is north of the Union Pacific mainline.
Zone 2:That area which is south of the Union Pacific mainline and east of State Highway 45.
Zone 3:That area which is south of the Union Pacific mainline and west of State Highway 45.
(Ord. 2359)
3-5-3: USE OF FUNDS:
Funds may be spent for authorized park development only within the park development zone in which the fund is collected. Authorized expenditure of
funds shall include the acquisition of real estate for park creation or space uses and capital improvements to public park or recreational facilities which
either provide new or expanded uses. (Ord. 2359)
3-5-4: DETERMINATION OF STANDARD PARK DEVELOPMENT FEE:
The methodology utilized in determining the determination of standard park development fee shall be set forth in a document titled, "Park Development
Fee _ 1993 Analysis", a copy of which shall be kept on file at the office of the city clerk. The fee may be adjusted annually by council resolution to become
effective January 1. Said adjustment shall be made in accordance with a nationally recognized inflation index. A copy of the calculation for the fee
adjustment shall be kept on file at the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 2359)
3-5-5: COLLECTION OF FEE:
The impact fee shall be collected at the time a building permit is issued in accordance with the number of equivalent residential units as set forth below:
Land Use Number Of Equivalent Residential Units
All land uses that do not
have permanent residents
0
1 bedroom dwelling unit 0.50
2 bedroom dwelling unit 0.75
3 or more bedroom dwelling unit 1.00
(Ord. 2359)
3-5-6: REDUCTION OF FEE:
Dwellings within certain subdivisions, multi-family development, planned unit development or mobile home parks may be exempted from payment of all or
a portion of the fee provided a qualifying recreational improvement or land donation is made. Said improvement or land donation shall be in accordance
with criteria set forth in a document titled, "Park Development Fee _ 1993 Analysis", a copy of which shall be kept on file at the office of the city clerk. (Ord.
2359)
3-5-7: TRANSITION TO IMPACT FEES:
The fees imposed by this chapter shall be phased out beginning with the date that chapter 7, "Development Impact Fees", of this title becomes effective.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 52/410
All park development fee agreements prior to the date that chapter 7, "Development Impact Fees", of this title becomes effective will be honored according
to their terms. No new park development fee agreements will be entered into after the effective date of chapter 7, "Development Impact Fees", of this title.
(Ord. 3494, 9-19-2005)
Chapter 6
OPEN BURNING
3-6-1: OPEN BURNING PROVISIONS:
A. Outdoor Fires: No person shall build, ignite, or maintain any outdoor fire of any kind or character, or for any purposes whatsoever, except as provided
herein:
1. The following types of fires are allowable, and shall not require a permit hereunder. Such fires must be constantly attended by a competent adult until
such fire is completely extinguished:
a. Fires used by organized firefighting personnel for the purposes of combating fire or training.
b. Barbecues, or other fires used for the preparation of food.
c. Campfires, or fires used for recreational or ceremonial purposes. A garden hose connected to the water supply, or other fire extinguishing
equipment must be readily available for use.
2. No person shall allow, suffer, cause, or permit burning of any of the following types of materials at any time:
a. Household solid waste or garbage;
b. Leaves, grass clippings;
c. Junked motor vehicles or any material resulting from a salvage operation;
d. Tires or other rubber materials or products;
e. Plastics;
f. Asphalt or composition roofing or any other asphaltic material or product;
g. Tar, tarpaper, waste, or heavy petroleum products;
h. Existing structures;
i. Lumber or timbers treated with preservatives;
j. Other construction materials such as sheetrock, flooring, insulation;
k. Dead animals or parts thereof, except upon the order of a public health officer to dispose of diseased animals;
l. Paint, solvent, or other chemicals;
m. Trade waste;
n. Insulated wire;
o. Pathogenic wastes or infectious wastes, except under order off a public health officer to dispose of diseased animals;
p. Hazardous waste, except when burned under order of a public or military fire chief to dispose of materials (including military ordinance) which
present a danger to life, valuable property, or the public welfare, or for the purpose of the prevention of a fire hazard when no practical alternative
method of disposal or removal is available;
q. Any type of materials that emit large volumes of smoke, particulates, or odors, including wet materials;
r. Any other material that would otherwise be allowed under this chapter, but is determined to be a nuisance, hazard, or source of air pollution;
s. Notwithstanding the provisions of any section of this chapter, any material which violates an air pollution alert; and
t. Notwithstanding the provisions of any section of this chapter, any material which is restricted as specified in IDAPA rules for the control of air
pollution 16.01.01.
3. The following types of fires may be allowed by permit only:
a. Fires used for the purpose of weed abatement along fence lines, canal banks, and ditch banks;
b. Fires used for control or alleviation of fire hazard or for weed control when no alternative control method exists;
c. Vegetation, brush, or gardening waste, generated on the property where the burning will take place;
d. Special permits will be issued in accordance with current Nampa fire department policy.
4. Conditions of the permit:
a. All open burning is prohibited if either: 1) the department of environmental quality reports the air quality index to exceed their minimum
requirements for any air pollutant, 2) in the event of adverse weather conditions or the prediction of adverse weather conditions. When calling to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 53/410
request a permit, Nampa fire department will advise the applicant if either of the conditions exist;
b. Only one fire in a single location may be burned at any one time on a single permit;
c. Open burning is not permitted within twenty five feet (25') of any structure or combustible material;
d. Fires shall not be allowed to smolder overnight;
e. Size of pile shall be limited to no more than three feet (3') in diameter and two feet (2') in height;
f. Any open fire shall be constantly attended by a competent adult until such fire is completely extinguished. This person shall have a garden hose
connected to the water supply, or other fire extinguishing equipment readily available for use;
g. Permits shall be obtained by calling the Nampa fire department;
h. All permits must contain the name, address, and phone number of permittee, the location of proposed burning, and what is being burned. Permit is
good for the day of issuance only;
i. Any person denied a burning permit by the city of Nampa may appeal that decision in writing to the city council. Such appeal must be made within
ten (10) days. The city of Nampa shall rule on said appeal within fifteen (15) days of receipt.
B. Violation And Penalties:
1. Violation of, or failure to comply with any provisions of this chapter shall be a violation of this chapter, and will permit the city of Nampa to initiate one
or more of the following actions:
a. Legal proceedings to obtain an injunction against the permittee or the owner of the property upon which open burning was conducted;
b. Suspension of issuance of all future and/or granted permits for open burning by the city of Nampa.
2. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. An infraction shall be punishable by a civic penalty of not more than
one hundred dollars ($100.00).
3. Nothing in this chapter precludes the DEQ from enforcing the provisions of the rules for the control of air pollution in Idaho (IDAPA 16.01.01, the
environmental protection and health act, or the hazardous waste management act). (Ord. 2910)
Chapter 7
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
3-7-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
The city council of the city of Nampa, Canyon County, Idaho, finds that:
A. Based on the city of Nampa comprehensive plan adopted by the city pursuant to chapter 65, title 67, Idaho Code, including, but not limited to, the
capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan, and the general governmental goal of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of
the citizens of the city, it is necessary that the city's public facilities for: 1) parks and recreation, 2) streets, 3) police, and 4) fire/emergency medical
services (EMS) be expanded and improved to accommodate new development within the city. Throughout this chapter, the system improvements for
these four (4) types of public facilities are sometimes collectively referred to as the "city capital facilities" and sometimes individually referred to as a
"city capital improvements element".
B. The city has formed the development impact fee advisory committee required by Idaho Code section 67-8205, and that committee has performed the
duties required of it pursuant to such statute. The city intends that the committee continue to exist and to perform those duties identified in Idaho Code
section 67-8205 that occur following the adoption of development impact fees.
C. New residential and nonresidential development imposes and will impose increasing and excessive demands upon city capital facilities.
D. The revenues generated from new residential and nonresidential development often do not generate sufficient funds to provide the necessary
improvements of these city capital facilities to accommodate new development.
E. New development is expected to continue, and will place ever increasing demands on the city to provide and expand city capital facilities to serve new
development.
F. The city has planned for the improvement of the city capital facilities in the capital improvements element of the city of Nampa comprehensive plan.
G. Chapter 82, title 67 of the Idaho Code (the Idaho development impact fee act) authorizes the city to adopt a development impact fee system to offset,
recoup, or reimburse the portion of the costs of needed improvements to the city capital facilities caused by new development in the city.
H. The creation of an equitable development impact fee system would promote the purposes set forth in the Idaho development impact fee act, in that it
would: 1) ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth and development; 2) promote orderly growth and development by
establishing uniform standards by which local governments may require that those who benefit from new growth and development pay a proportionate
share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve new growth and development; 3) ensure that those who benefit from new growth and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 54/410
development are required to pay no more than their proportionate share of the cost of public facilities needed to serve new growth and development;
and 4) prevent duplicate and ad hoc development requirements.
I. The creation of an equitable development impact fee system would enable the city to accommodate new development, and would assist the city to
implement the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. (Ord. 3729, 8-20-2007)
J. In order to implement an equitable development impact fee system for the city capital facilities, the city retained Galena Consulting to prepare an impact
fee study for these types of facilities. The resulting document is titled "City Of Nampa, Idaho Impact Fee Study And Capital Improvement Plans", dated
March 1, 2016 (the "development impact fee study"), and that document is hereby incorporated by reference. (Ord. 4267, 7-18-2016, eff. 10-1-2016)
K. The methodology used in preparing the development impact fee study, when applied through this chapter, complies with all applicable provisions of
Idaho law, including those set forth in Idaho statutes sections 67-8204(2), 67-8204(16), 67-8204(23), 67-8207 and 67-8209. The incorporation of the
development impact fee study by reference satisfies the requirement in Idaho statutes section 67-8204(16) for a detailed description of the
methodology by which the development impact fees were calculated, and the requirement in Idaho Code section 67-8204(24) for a description of
acceptable levels of service for system improvements.
L. The development impact fee study contains the capital improvements element of the city of Nampa comprehensive plan, and such element has been
prepared in conformance with the requirements of chapters 65 and 82 of title 67 of the Idaho Code.
M. The development impact fee study sets forth reasonable methodologies and analyses for determining the impacts of various types of new development
on the city capital facilities, and determines the cost of acquiring or constructing the improvements necessary to meet the demands for such facilities
created by new development.
N. In accordance with Idaho Code, the development impact fee study was based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such
costs. In addition, the development impact fee study uses a fee calculation methodology that is net of credits for the present value of revenues that will
be generated by new growth and development based on historical funding patterns and that are anticipated to be available to pay for system
improvements, including taxes, assessments, user fees, and intergovernmental transfers.
O. The development impact fees described in this chapter are based on the development impact fee study, and do not exceed the costs of system
improvements for city capital facilities to serve new development that will pay the development impact fees.
P. The facilities for parks and recreation, streets, police, and fire/emergency medical services (EMS) included in the calculation of fees in the development
impact fee study will benefit all new residential and nonresidential development throughout the city, and it is therefore appropriate to treat all areas of
the city as a single service area for purposes of calculating, collecting, and spending the development impact fees collected from residential and
nonresidential development.
Q. There is both a rational nexus and a rough proportionality between the development impacts created by each type of development covered by this
chapter and the development impact fees that such development will be required to pay.
R. This chapter creates a system by which development impact fees paid by new development will be used to finance, defray, or reimburse a portion of the
costs incurred by the city to construct improvements for city capital facilities in ways that benefit the development for which each development impact
fee was paid within a reasonable period of time after the development impact fee is paid, and in conformance with Idaho Code section 67-8210.
S. This chapter creates a system under which development impact fees shall not be used to correct existing deficiencies for any capital facilities, or to
replace or rehabilitate existing improvements, or to pay for routine operation or maintenance of those facilities.
T. This chapter creates a system under which there shall be no double payment of impact fees, in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-8204(19).
U. This chapter is consistent with all applicable provisions of chapter 82, title 67, Idaho Code, concerning development impact fee ordinances. (Ord. 3729,
8-20-2007)
3-7-2: AUTHORITY AND APPLICABILITY:
A. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the city's general police power, the authority granted to the city pursuant to chapters 65 and 82, title 67, Idaho Code,
and other applicable laws of the state of Idaho.
B. This chapter shall apply to all areas of the city. (Ord. 3729, 8-20-2007)
3-7-3: INTENT:
A. This chapter is adopted to be consistent with, and to help implement, the City of Nampa comprehensive plan, and particularly the capital improvements
element of that plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 55/410
B. The intent of this chapter is to ensure that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of improvements to City capital facilities; to ensure
that such proportionate share does not exceed the cost of improvements to such facilities required to accommodate new development; and to ensure
that funds collected from new development are actually used for improvements to City capital facilities that benefit such new development.
C. It is the further intent of this chapter to be consistent with those principles for allocating a fair share of the cost of new capital facilities to new
development, and for adopting development impact fee ordinances, established by chapter 82, title 67 of the Idaho Code.
D. It is not the intent of this chapter to collect any money from any new development in excess of the actual amount necessary to offset new demands for
City capital facilities created by such new development.
E. It is not the intent of this chapter that any monies collected from any development impact fee deposited in an impact fee account ever be commingled
with monies from a different impact fee account, or ever be used for a development impact fee component different from that for which the fee was
paid, or ever be used to correct current deficiencies in the City capital facilities or ever be used to replace, rehabilitate, maintain, or operate any City
facility. (Ord. 3729, 8-20-2007)
3-7-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, some of which are assigned by Idaho Code section 67-8203, as
indicated:
ACCOUNTS: The parks capital facilities account, the street capital facilities account, the police capital facilities account, and the fire/EMS capital facilities
account, established as part of the Development Impact Fee Trust Fund established in section 3-7-7 of this chapter.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING: Housing affordable to families whose incomes do not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the median income for the City of
Nampa. Section 67-8203(1) Idaho Code.
APPROPRIATE: To legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of a governmental entity. Section 67-
8203(2) Idaho Code.
BUILDING PERMIT: A building permit issued by the building official permitting the construction of a building or structure within the City of Nampa.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT: An improvement with a useful life of ten (10) years or more, by new construction or other action that increases the service
capacity of a public facility. Section 67-8203(3) Idaho Code.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS ELEMENT: A component of the City of Nampa comprehensive plan adopted pursuant to chapter 65, title 67, Idaho Code,
which component meets the requirements of a capital improvements plan pursuant to chapter 65, title 67 of the Idaho Code. Section 67-8203(4) Idaho
Code.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN: A plan adopted pursuant to this chapter that identifies capital improvements for which development impact fees may
be used as a funding source. Section 67-8203(5) Idaho Code.
CITY: City of Nampa, Idaho.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Nampa, Idaho.
DEVELOPER: Any person or legal entity undertaking development, including a party that undertakes the subdivision of property pursuant to Idaho Code
sections 50-1301 through 50-1334. Section 67-8203(6) Idaho Code.
DEVELOPMENT: Any construction or installation of a building or structure, or any change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use,
character or appearance of land, that creates additional demand and need for public facilities or the subdivision of property that would permit any change
in the use, character or appearance of land. Section 67-8203(7) Idaho Code.
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: Any written authorization from a governmental entity that authorizes the commencement of a development. Section 67-
8203(8) Idaho Code.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE: The payment of money imposed as a condition of development approval to pay for a proportionate share of the cost of
system improvements needed to serve development. Section 67-8203(9) Idaho Code. In the context of this chapter, development impact fee means one of
the four (4) impact fees defined for the four (4) city capital facilities elements, and development impact fees (in the plural) means all four (4) impact fees (or
all of them that apply to the proposed development pursuant to this chapter). The term does not include:
A. A charge or fee to pay the administrative, plan review, or inspection costs associated with permits required for development;
B. Connection or hookup charges;
C. Availability charges for drainage, sewer, water or transportation for services provided directly to the development; or
D. Amounts collected from a developer in a transaction in which the city or another governmental entity has incurred expenses in constructing capital
improvements for the development if the owner or developer has agreed to be financially responsible for the construction or installation of the capital
improvements, unless a written agreement is made pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-8209(3) for credit or reimbursement.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ADMINISTRATOR: That individual designated from time to time by the city council of Nampa, Idaho, to administer the
development impact fee system established by this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 56/410
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE STUDY: The document entitled "City Of Nampa, Idaho Development Impact Fee Study And Capital Improvement Plans",
dated March 1, 2016, prepared by Galena Consulting for the city, that sets forth reasonable methodologies and analyses for determining the impacts of
various types of development on the city capital facilities and determines the cost of expansions to those facilities necessary to meet the demands created
by new development.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE TRUST FUND: The trust fund established by section 3-7-7 of this chapter that includes: a) a parks capital facilities
account, b) a street capital facilities account, c) a police capital facilities account, and d) a fire/EMS capital facilities account. The development impact fee
trust fund is also sometimes called the trust fund.
DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENT: A requirement attached to a developmental approval or other governmental action approving or authorizing a particular
development project including, but not limited to, a rezoning, which requirement compels the payment, dedication or contribution of goods, services, land,
or money as a condition of approval. Section 67-8203(10) Idaho Code.
EXTRAORDINARY COSTS: Those costs incurred as a result of an extraordinary impact. Section 67-8203(11) Idaho Code.
EXTRAORDINARY IMPACT: An impact that is reasonably determined by the governmental entity to: a) result in the need for system improvements, the
cost of which will significantly exceed the sum of the development impact fees to be generated from the project or the sum agreed to be paid pursuant to a
development agreement as allowed by Idaho Code section 67-8214(2), or b) result in the need for system improvements that are not identified in the
capital improvements plan. Section 67-8203(12) Idaho Code.
FEE PAYER: A person or legal entity that pays or is required to pay a development impact fee. Taxing districts are expressly included within this definition
of "fee payer", unless the taxing district enters into a written agreement with the City of Nampa that provides otherwise. A fee payer may include a
developer.
FIRE/EMS CAPITAL FACILITIES: Lands, as well as buildings, improvements to land, and related equipment and vehicles meeting the definition of "capital
improvement", used for fire and emergency medical service facilities included in the calculation of the fire/EMS impact fee in the development impact fee
study, and specifically including those related costs included in the definition of "system improvement costs", but not including maintenance, operations, or
improvements that do not expand capacity.
IMPACT-GENERATING LAND DEVELOPMENT: Land development designed or intended to permit a use of the land that will contain more dwelling units
or floor space than the then existing use of the land, or the making of any material change in the use of any structure or land in a manner that increases
demand for City capital facilities. The type of proposed impact-generating land development shall be based on the proposed use of the land.
INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENT: A study prepared by a fee payer, calculating the cost of expansions or improvements to one or more of the City capital
improvements elements required to serve the fee payer's proposed development, that is based on the established LOS standard, is performed on an
average cost (not marginal cost) methodology, that uses the service units and unit construction costs stated in the development impact fee study, and is
performed in compliance with any criteria for such studies established by this chapter or by the City.
LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS: A description of the service area and projections of land uses, densities, intensities, and population in the service area over
at least a twenty (20) year period. Section 67-8203(16) Idaho Code.
LEVEL OF SERVICE: A measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for public facilities. Section 67-8203(17) Idaho Code.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, constructed according to HUD/FHA mobile home construction and safety standards, transportable in one or more
sections, that, in the traveling mode, is eight feet (8') or more in width or is forty (40) body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is three hundred
twenty (320) or more square feet, and that is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein, except that such
term shall include any structure that meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer
voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under 42 USC
5401 et seq. Section 67-8203(18) Idaho Code.
MODULAR BUILDING: Any building or building component, other than a manufactured or mobile home, which is of closed construction and is either
entirely or substantially prefabricated or assembled at a place other than the building site. Sections 67-8203(19) and 39-4301, Idaho Code.
PARKS CAPITAL FACILITIES: Open space lands, as well as buildings, improvements to land, and related equipment meeting the definition of "capital
improvement", used for public parks, recreation, open space, and trail facilities included in the calculation of the park impact fee in the development impact
fee study, and specifically including those related costs included in the definition of "system improvement costs", but not including maintenance,
operations, or improvements that do not expand capacity.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, governmental agency, business trust, estate, partnership, association, two (2) or more persons having a joint or
common interest, or any other entity.
POLICE CAPITAL FACILITIES: Lands, as well as buildings, improvements to land, and related equipment and vehicles meeting the definition of "capital
improvement", used for police facilities included in the calculation of the police impact fee in the development impact fee study, and specifically including
those related costs included in the definition of "system improvement costs", but not including maintenance, operations, or improvements that do not
expand capacity.
PRESENT VALUE: The total current monetary value of past, present, or future payments, contributions or dedications of goods, services, materials,
construction or money. Section 67-8203(20) Idaho Code.
PROJECT: A particular development on an identified parcel of land. Section 67-8203(21) Idaho Code.
PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS: Site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development project and
that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the project. Section 67-8203(22) Idaho Code.
PROPORTIONATE SHARE: That portion of the cost of system improvements determined pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-8207, that reasonably relates
to the service demands and needs of the project. Section 67-8203(23) Idaho Code.
PUBLIC FACILITIES: A. Water supply production, treatment, storage and distribution facilities;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 57/410
B. Wastewater collection, treatment and disposal facilities;
C. Roads, streets and bridges, including rights-of-way, traffic signals, landscaping and any local components of State or Federal highways;
D. Stormwater collection, retention, detention, treatment and disposal facilities, flood control facilities, and bank and shore protection and enhancement
improvements;
E. Parks, open space and recreation areas, and related capital improvements; and
F. Public safety facilities, including law enforcement, fire, emergency medical and rescue and street lighting facilities.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, that either has its own
motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. Section 67-8203(25) Idaho Code.
SERVICE AREA: Any defined geographic area identified by a governmental entity or by intergovernmental agreement in which specific public facilities
provide service to development within the area defined, on the basis of sound planning or engineering principles or both. Section 67-8203(26) Idaho Code.
SERVICE UNIT: A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or discharge attributable to an individual unit of development calculated in
accordance with generally accepted engineering or planning standards for a particular category of capital improvements. Section 67-8203(27) Idaho Code.
STREET CAPITAL FACILITIES: Lands, improvements to land, and equipment meeting the definition of "capital improvement", used for the system of traffic
signals and for the widening of bridges on arterial and collector roads, included in the calculation of the street impact fee in the development impact fee
study, and consistent with the capital improvements element, and specifically including those related costs included in the definition of "system
improvement costs", but not including maintenance, operations, or improvements that do not expand capacity.
SUCCESSOR IN INTEREST: A "person", as defined by this chapter, who gains a fee simple interest in land for which a development impact fee is paid or
a credit is approved pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT COSTS: Costs incurred for construction or reconstruction of system improvements, including design, acquisition, engineering
and other costs attributable thereto, and also including, without limitation, the type of costs described in Idaho Code section 50-1702(h), to provide
additional public facilities needed to serve new growth and development. For clarification, system improvement costs do not include: a) construction,
acquisition or expansion of public facilities other than capital improvements identified in the capital improvements plan; b) repair, operation or maintenance
of existing or new capital improvements; c) upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to serve existing development in
order to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards; d) upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing capital
improvements to provide better service to existing development; e) administrative and operating costs of the governmental entity unless such costs are
attributable to development of the capital improvement plan, as provided in Idaho Code section 67-8208; or f) principal payments and interest or other
finance charges on bonds or other indebtedness except financial obligations issued by or on behalf of the governmental entity to finance capital
improvements identified in the capital improvements plan. Section 67-8203(29) Idaho Code.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS: In contrast to project improvements, means capital improvements to public facilities that are designed to provide service to a
service area including, without limitation, the type of improvements described in Idaho Code section 50-1703. Section 67-8203(28) Idaho Code. For the
purposes of this chapter, the system improvements are the park capital facilities, street capital facilities, police capital facilities, fire/EMS capital facilities.
(Ord. 3729, 8-20-2007; amd. Ord. 4267, 7-18-2016, eff. 10-1-2016; Ord. 4420, 3-4-2019)
3-7-5: DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES IMPOSED:
A. Fee Obligation:
1. After the effective date hereof, any person who commences any impact generating land development, except those exempted pursuant to
subsection B of this section, shall be obligated to pay development impact fees upon commencement of such activity. The amount of the
development impact fees shall be determined in accordance with this chapter.
2. If the fee payer is applying for an extension of a permit issued previously, then the development impact fees required to be paid shall be the net
increase between the development impact fees applicable at the time of the current permit application and any development impact fees previously
paid pursuant to this chapter to finance similar types of system improvements to accommodate demands created by the same development.
3. If the fee payer is applying for a permit to allow a change of use or for the expansion, redevelopment, or modification of an existing development, the
development impact fees required to be paid shall be based on the net increase in the development impact fees for the new use as compared to the
previous use.
B. Exemptions: The following types of development shall be exempted from payment of the development impact fees. Any claim for exemption shall be
made no later than the time when the applicant applies for the first building permit for the proposed development that creates the obligation to pay the
development impact fees, and any claim for exemption not made at or before that time shall have been waived. The Development Impact Fee
Administrator or a designee shall determine the validity of any claim for exemption pursuant to the criteria set forth below:
1. Rebuilding the same amount of floor space of a structure that was destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, providing the structure is rebuilt and ready
for occupancy within two (2) years of its destruction;
2. Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not increase the number of service units;
3. Replacing a residential unit, including a manufactured home, with another residential unit on the same lot, provided that the number of service units
does not increase;
4. Constructing an addition on a residential structure that does not increase the number of service units;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 58/410
5. Placing a temporary construction trailer or office on a lot;
6. Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses, such as tennis courts or clubhouses, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the use
creates a significant impact on the capacity of system improvements;
7. The installation of a modular building, manufactured home, or recreational vehicle if the fee payer can demonstrate by documentation such as utility
bills and tax records that either: a) a modular building, manufactured home, or recreational vehicle was legally in place on the lot or space prior to the
effective date hereof, or b) a development impact fee has been paid previously for the installation of a modular building, manufactured home or
recreational vehicle on that same lot or space;
8. Projects for which a development impact fee for each type of public facility covered by this chapter has previously been paid in an amount that
equals or exceeds the development impact fee that would be required by this chapter;
9. Projects built by the Federal government or the State government; and,
10. Projects which meet all of the following criteria may apply for an individualized assessment pursuant to subsection C4 of this section, except that
the applicant may simply rely on the documented project history rather that retaining a qualified professional to prepare the individual assessment:
a. A development agreement was entered into by the project developer and the City setting forth the entitlements and obligations of the developer,
which agreement was approved by the City Council prior to January 1, 2014; and
b. The final plat for the development, or site plan attached to the development agreement, was approved by the City prior to January 1, 2014; and
c. The development, through the terms of the development agreement, or otherwise, has built, or is obligated to build public facilities, which facilities
are not "project improvements", in excess of the amount that would be collected under this chapter.
C. Fee Table And Calculation Of Amount Of Development Impact Fees:
1. Fee Table:
Police fees:
Single family residence (per unit) $ 359.00
Multi family residence (per unit) 359.00
Retail (per square foot of building area) 0.21
Office (per square foot of building area) 0.21
Industrial (per square foot of building area) 0.21
Fire fees:
Single-family residence (per unit) 560.00
Multi-family residence (per unit) 560.00
Retail (per square foot of building area) 0.28
Office (per square foot of building area) 0.28
Industrial (per square foot of building area) 0.28
Street fees:
Single-family residence (per unit) 2,841.00
Multi-family residence (per unit) 1,648.00
Retail (per square foot of building area) 6.85
Office (per square foot of building area) 4.24
Industrial (per square foot of building area) 1.52
Parks and recreation fees:
Single-family residence (per unit) 1,699.00
Multi-family residence (per unit) 1,699.00
2. Levels Of Service: The levels of service upon which the foregoing fees are calculated are as follows:
Fire: Ninety percent (90%) fractile response time of five (5) minutes and twenty six (26) seconds or less; the fees are calculated on the basis that two
(2) additional fire stations will need to be constructed in the next ten (10) years and equipped with one fire engine as well as support vehicles and
equipment for each station, of which one hundred percent (100%) is calculated to be growth related and therefore one hundred percent (100%) of
the cost of which is eligible for imposition of development impact fees; an additional truck will need to be purchased to serve the demands of new
growth, of which one hundred percent (100%) is calculated to be growth related and therefore one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of which is
eligible for imposition of development impact fees; the purchase of two (2) squad vehicles and a remodel to two (2) stations to provide bays for these
vehicles, of which one hundred percent (100%) is calculated to be growth related and therefore one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of which is
eligible for imposition of development impact fees; and the funding of a standard of cover analysis update to ensure growth-related capital
Impact Fee Category Fee Amount
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 59/410
improvements are properly sited to serve growth, of which one hundred percent (100%) is calculated to be growth related and therefore one hundred
percent (100%) of the cost of which is eligible for imposition of development impact fees.
Parks: 3.2 acres of developed parks per 1,000 population; plus an additional swimming pool one hundred percent (100%) of which is attributable to
new growth, and lighting for adult softball fields only twenty two percent (22%) of which is attributable to new growth; and associated equipment with
a life expectancy in excess of ten (10) years.
Police: 1.15 officers per 1,000 population; the fees are calculated on the basis that physical space will be necessary to house the projected twenty
six (26) growth-necessitated officers and outfit them with patrol vehicles and equipment, of which one hundred percent (100%) is calculated to be
growth related and therefore one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of which is eligible for imposition of development impact fees; and the funding
of a standard of cover analysis update to ensure growth-related capital improvements are properly sited to serve growth, of which one hundred
percent (100%) is calculated to be growth related and therefore one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of which is eligible for imposition of
development impact fees.
Streets: Nampa's street system currently operates at a level of service "D", which means that while many streets are increasingly congested, they
are not yet at capacity. Some streets facilities in the City meet and/or exceed level of service D, while others may be at a level of service E or F. The
fees are calculated on a basis that will increase capacity of intersections, bridges and culverts, and road widening to ensure the current level of
service does not decrease due to new growth. The portion of these projects attributable to new growth ranges from fifty percent to one hundred
percent (50% - 100%). (Ord. 4420, 3-4-2019)
3. Using The Fee Table: Development impact fees shall be calculated using the fee table above unless: a) the fee payer requests an individualized
assessment pursuant to subsection C4 of this section, or b) the City designates the proposed development as a development of extraordinary impact
in writing to the fee payer, in which case the provisions of subsection C5 of this section shall apply.
a. Any person who commences any new impact generating land development, except those exempted pursuant to this chapter, or those preparing
an individual assessment pursuant to this chapter, shall pay all development impact fees applicable to the proposed development, as determined
by the fee table. Persons choosing to pay applicable development impact fees pursuant to the fee table shall be deemed to have made a full and
complete payment of the project's proportionate share of City capital facilities costs for system improvements, except as noted in subsection 3-7-
12I of this chapter.
b. If the proposed development is of a type not listed in the fee table, then the City shall apply the development impact fees applicable to the most
nearly comparable type of land use listed in the fee table. The determination as to which type of development is most nearly comparable to the
proposed development shall be made by referring to traffic generation rates for land uses published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers,
and by identifying that land use listed in the fee table whose traffic generation rates are most comparable to the proposed land use. If no traffic
generation rate for the proposed land use appears in a publication of the Institute of Transportation Engineers, or if it is not possible to determine
which land use listed in the fee table has the most comparable traffic generation rates, then the most nearly comparable land use shall be
determined by the Development Impact Fee Administrator based on comparison of other characteristics of the proposed land use (including
employment or occupancy, the size of the facility, and the amount of parking to be provided) with the characteristics of those land uses listed in the
fee table.
c. If the proposed development includes a mix of those uses listed in the fee table, then the development impact fees shall be determined by adding
up the development impact fees that would be payable for each use as if it were a freestanding use pursuant to the fee table. For example,
development impact fees for a church without ancillary facilities will be determined through the process in subsection C3b of this section; but
development impact fees for a church with a daycare center shall be established by adding: 1) fees determined through the process in subsection
C3b of this section for the church itself, and 2) fees identified in the fee table for the daycare portion of the facility.
d. If the fee payer requests that the city calculate the amount of development impact fees due pursuant to the fee table, the city shall notify the fee
payer of such amount within thirty (30) days after receipt of that request.
4. Using An Individual Assessment:
a. In lieu of calculating the amount(s) of development impact fees by reference to the fee table, a fee payer may request that the amount of the
required development impact fee be determined through an individual assessment for the proposed development. The individual assessment
process shall permit consideration of studies, data, and any other relevant information submitted by the fee payer to adjust the amount of the fee. If
a fee payer requests the use of an individual assessment, the fee payer shall be responsible for retaining a qualified professional to prepare the
individual assessment that complies with the requirements of this chapter, at the fee payer's expense. The fee payer shall bear the burden of
proving by clear and convincing evidence that the resulting individual assessment is a more accurate measure of its proportionate share of the
cost of city capital improvements, based on the city's adopted levels of service, than the development impact fees that would otherwise be due
pursuant to the fee table.
b. Each individual assessment shall be based on the same level of service standards and unit costs for system improvements used in the
development impact fee study, shall use an average cost (not a marginal cost) methodology, and shall document the relevant methodologies and
assumptions used.
c. An application for an individual assessment may be submitted at any time that the number of dwelling units in the proposed development and the
types and amounts of development in each nonresidential category identified in the fee table is known. The city shall issue a decision within thirty
(30) days following receipt of a completed application for individual assessment and supporting information from the applicant, so as not to
unreasonably delay subsequent applications for or issuance of building permits.
d. Each individual assessment shall be submitted to the development impact fee administrator or a designee, and may be accepted, rejected, or
accepted with modifications by the development impact fee administrator or a designee as the basis for calculating development impact fees. The
criteria for acceptance, rejection, or acceptance with modifications shall be whether the individual assessment is a more accurate measure of
demand for the city capital improvements element(s) created by the proposed development, or the costs of those facilities, than the applicable fee
shown in the fee table.
e. The decision by the development impact fee administrator or designee on an application for an individual assessment shall include an explanation
of the calculation of the impact fee, shall specify the system improvement(s) for which the impact fee is intended to be used, and shall include an
explanation of those factors identified in Idaho Code section 67-8207.
f. If an individual assessment is accepted or accepted with modifications by the development impact fee administrator or a designee then the
development impact fees due under this chapter for such development shall be calculated according to such individual assessment.
5. Extraordinary Impacts:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 60/410
a. If the city determines that a proposed development generates extraordinary impacts that will result in extraordinary costs, the city will notify the fee
payer of such determination within thirty (30) days after receipt of a request for a certification pursuant to subsection D of this section or a request
for a building permit or development approval, whichever occurs first. Such notice shall include a statement that the potential impacts of such
development on system improvements are not adequately addressed by the development impact fee study, and that a supplemental study at the
fee payer's expense will be required.
b. Circumstances that may lead to a determination of extraordinary impacts include, but are not limited to: 1) an indication that traffic generation from
the proposed development or activity will exceed those typical for a facility or activity of its type, 2) an indication that employment generated by the
development or activity will exceed those typical for a facility or activity of its type, 3) an indication the assumptions used in the development
impact fee study underestimate the level of activity or impact on city capital facilities from the proposed development or activity, or 4) an indication
that levels of calls for law enforcement, fire, or emergency services from developments or activities owned or operated by the fee payer or its
agents exceed the assumptions used in the development impact fee study.
c. Within thirty (30) days following the designation of a development with extraordinary impacts, the city shall meet with the fee payer to discuss
whether the fee payer wants to: 1) pay for the supplemental study necessary to determine the system improvement costs related to the proposed
development, or 2) modify the proposal to avoid generating extraordinary impacts, or 3) withdraw the application for certification, building permit, or
development approval.
d. If the fee payer agrees to pay for the supplemental study required to document the proposed development's proportionate share of system
improvement costs, then the city and the fee payer shall jointly select an individual or organization acceptable to both to perform such study, the
fee payer shall enter into a written agreement with such individual or organization to pay the costs of such study. Such agreement shall require the
supplemental study to be completed within thirty (30) days of such written agreement, unless the fee payer agrees to a longer time.
e. Once the study has been completed, the fee payer may choose to: 1) pay the proportionate share of system improvement costs documented by
the supplemental study, or 2) modify the proposed development to reduce such costs, or 3) withdraw the application. If the fee payer agrees to pay
the system improvement costs documented in the supplemental study, that agreement shall be reduced to writing between the city and the fee
payer prior to review and consideration of any application for any development approval or building permit related to the proposed development.
f. Notwithstanding any agreement by the fee payer to pay the proportionate share of system improvement costs documented by the supplemental
study, nothing in this chapter shall obligate the city to approve development that results in an extraordinary impact.
D. Certification: After the development impact fees due for a proposed development have been calculated pursuant to the fee table or the individual
assessment, the fee payer may request the development impact fee administrator or a designee for a certification of the amount of development impact
fees due for that development. Within thirty (30) days after receiving such request, the development impact fee administrator or a designee shall issue
a written certification of the amount of development impact fees due for the proposed development. Such certification shall establish the development
impact fee so long as there is no material change to the particular project as identified in the individual assessment application, or the impact fee
schedule set forth in the fee table. The certification shall include an explanation of the calculation of the impact fee including an explanation of factors
considered under Idaho Code section 67-8207 and shall also specify the system improvement(s) for which the development impact fee is intended to
be used.
E. Payment Of Fees:
1. All development impact fees due shall be paid to the city at the following times:
a. If a building permit or manufactured home installation permit is required, then at the time such permit is issued; or
b. If no building permit or manufactured home installation permit is required, then at the time that construction commences; or
c. At such other time as the applicant and the city have agreed to in writing, pursuant to applicable Idaho law.
2. All monies paid by a fee payer pursuant to the fee table shall be identified as development impact fees and shall be promptly deposited in the
appropriate account(s) described in section 3-7-7 of this chapter.
3. A fee payer may pay a development impact fee under protest in order to avoid delay in the issuance of a building permit or development approval. A
fee payer making a payment under protest shall not be estopped from exercising the right of appeal provided in section 3-7-10 of this chapter, nor
shall such fee payer be estopped from receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been illegally collected. (Ord. 3897, 1-19-2010, eff. 3-1-
2010)
3-7-6: SERVICE AREAS:
The following service areas are established for each development impact fee element:
A. The park impact fee service area shall include the entire city, and park impact fees may be expended for park capital facilities located anywhere in the
city.
B. The street impact fee service area shall include the entire city, and street impact fees may be expended for street capital facilities located anywhere in
the city.
C. The police impact fee service area shall include the entire city, and police impact fees may be expended for police capital facilities located anywhere in
the city.
D. The fire/EMS impact fee service area shall include the entire city, and fire/EMS impact fees may be expended for fire/EMS capital facilities located
anywhere in the city. (Ord. 3729, 8-20-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 61/410
3-7-7: USE OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE FUNDS:
A. Establishment Of Trust Fund And Accounts:
1. A development impact fee trust fund (the "trust fund") is hereby established for the purpose of ensuring that the development impact fees collected
pursuant to this chapter are used to address impacts reasonably attributable to new development for which the development impact fees are paid.
2. The trust fund shall be divided into four (4) accounts: a parks and recreation capital facilities account, a street capital facilities account, a police
capital facilities account, and a fire/EMS capital facilities account.
3. The development impact fee trust fund shall be maintained in an interest bearing account. The interest earned on each account shall not be
governed by Idaho Code section 57-127, but shall be considered funds of the account and shall be subject to the same restrictions on uses of funds
as the development impact fees on which the interest is generated.
4. Monies in each account shall be spent in the order collected, on a first in/first out basis.
B. Deposit And Management Of The Trust Fund:
1. All development impact fees collected by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be promptly deposited into the appropriate account in the trust fund.
2. The city shall maintain accounting records for each account.
3. As part of its annual audit process, the city shall prepare an annual report: a) describing the amount of all development impact fees collected,
appropriated, or spent during the preceding year for each capital improvements element and service area; and b) describing the percentage of taxes
and revenues from sources other than development impact fees collected, appropriated or spent for system improvements during the preceding year
by capital improvements element and service area.
C. Limitations On Expenditures Of Fees In Accounts:
1. Park And Recreation Impact Fee: The monies collected from the park and recreation impact fee shall be used only to plan for and acquire or
construct park and recreation capital facilities, or to pay debt service on any portion of any future general obligation bond issue or revenue bond
issue or similar instrument used to finance the acquisition or construction of park capital facilities within the city, or to reimburse the city for such
costs.
2. Street Impact Fee: The monies collected from the street impact fee shall be used only to plan for and acquire or construct street capital facilities, or
to pay debt service on any portion of any future general obligation bond issue or revenue bond issue or similar instrument used to finance the
acquisition or construction of street capital facilities within the city, or to reimburse the city for such costs.
3. Police Impact Fee: The monies collected from the police impact fee shall be used only to plan for and acquire or construct police capital facilities, or
to pay debt service on any portion of any future general obligation bond issue or revenue bond issue or similar instrument used to finance the
acquisition or construction of public safety capital facilities within the city, or to reimburse the city for such costs.
4. Fire/EMS Impact Fee: The monies collected from the fire/EMS impact fee shall be used only to plan for and acquire or construct fire/EMS capital
facilities, or to pay debt service on any portion of any future general obligation bond issue or revenue bond issue or similar instrument used to
finance the acquisition or construction of public safety capital facilities within the city, or to reimburse the city for such costs.
5. Development Impact Fees: Development impact fees shall not be used to pay for any purpose that does not involve system improvements that
create additional service available to serve new growth and development. (Ord. 3729, 8-20-2007)
3-7-8: REFUNDS OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES PAID:
A. Duty To Refund: Development impact fees shall be refunded to the fee payer, or to a successor in interest, in the following circumstances:
1. Service is available but never provided;
2. A building permit, or permit for installation of a manufactured home, is denied or abandoned;
3. The fee payer pays a development impact fee under protest and a subsequent review of the fee paid or the completion of an individual assessment
determines that the fee paid exceeded the proportionate share to which the governmental entity was entitled to receive; or
4. The city has collected a development impact fee and has failed to appropriate or expend the collected fees pursuant to subsection B of this section.
B. Failure To Encumber Trust Funds Or Commence Construction: Any development impact fees paid shall be refunded if the city has failed to commence
construction of system improvements in accordance with this chapter, or to appropriate funds for such construction, within eight (8) years after the date
on which such fee was paid. Any refund due shall be paid to the owner of record of the parcel for which the development impact fees were paid. The
city may hold development impact fees for longer than eight (8) years if it identifies in writing: 1) a reasonable cause why the fees should be held longer
than eight (8) years; and 2) an anticipated date by which the fees will be expended, but in no event greater than eleven (11) years from the date they
were collected. If the city complies with the previous sentence, then any development impact fees identified in such writing shall be refunded to the fee
payer if the city has failed to commence construction of system improvements in accordance with this chapter, or to appropriate funds for such
construction on or before the date identified in such writing.
C. No Refund Due:
1. Later Changes To Development: After a development impact fee has been paid pursuant to this chapter and after a certificate of occupancy has
been issued, no refund of any part of such fee shall be made if the project for which the fee was paid is later demolished, destroyed, or is altered,
reconstructed, or reconfigured so as to reduce the size of the project or the number of units in the project.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 62/410
D. Interest: Each refund shall include a refund of interest at one-half (1/2) the legal rate provided for in Idaho Code section 28-22-104 from the date on
which the fee was originally paid.
E. Timing: The city shall make a determination of whether a refund is due within thirty (30) days after receipt of a written request for a refund from the
owner of record of the property for which the fee was paid. When the right to a refund exists, the city shall send the refund to the owner of record within
ninety (90) days after the city determines that a refund is due.
F. Standing: Any person entitled to a refund shall have standing to sue for a refund under the provisions of this chapter if there has not been a timely
payment of a refund pursuant to subsections A through E of this section. (Ord. 3729, 8-20-2007)
3-7-9: CREDITS AGAINST DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES:
A. Credits To Be Issued: When a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest has constructed system improvements of the same category as a
city capital improvements element, or contributed or dedicated land or money towards the completion of system improvements of the same category as
a city capital improvements element, and the city has accepted such construction, contribution, or dedication, the city shall issue a credit against the
development impact fees otherwise due for the same city capital improvements element in connection with the proposed development, as set forth in
this section. Credit shall be issued regardless of whether the contribution or dedication to system improvements was required by the city as a condition
of development approval or was offered by the developer and accepted by the city in writing, and regardless of whether the contribution or dedication
was contributed by the developer or by a local improvement district controlled by the developer.
B. Limitations: Credits against development impact fees shall not be given for: 1) project improvements, or 2) any construction, contribution, or dedication
not agreed to in writing by the city prior to commencement of the construction, contribution, or dedication. Credits issued for one city capital
improvements element may not be used to reduce development impact fees due for a different capital improvements element. No credits shall be
issued for system improvements contributed or dedicated prior to the effective date hereof.
C. Valuation Of Credit At Present Value:
1. Land: Credit for qualifying land dedications shall, at the fee payer's option, be valued at the present value of: a) one hundred percent (100%) of the
most recent assessed value for such land as shown in the records of the county assessor, or b) that fair market value established by a private
appraiser acceptable to the city in an appraisal paid for by the fee payer. In the event that city and the fee payer cannot agree upon an appraiser,
either may petition the district court for appointment of an appraiser.
2. Improvements: Credit for qualifying acquisition or construction of system improvements shall be valued by the city at the present value of such
improvements based on complete engineering drawings, specifications, and construction cost estimates submitted by the fee payer to the city. The
city shall determine the amount of credit due based on the information submitted, or, if it determines that such information is inaccurate or unreliable,
then on alternative engineering or construction costs acceptable to the city as a more accurate measure of the value of the offered system
improvements to the city.
D. When Credits Become Effective:
1. Approved credits for land dedications shall become effective when the land has been conveyed to the city in a form acceptable to the city at no cost
to the city, and has been accepted by the city. When such conditions have been met, the city shall note that fact in its records. Upon request of the
fee payer, the city shall issue a letter stating the amount of credit available.
2. Approved credits for acquisition or construction of system improvements shall generally become effective when: a) all required construction has
been completed and has been accepted by the city, b) a suitable maintenance and warranty bond has been received and approved by the city, and
c) all design, construction, inspection, testing, bonding, and acceptance procedures have been completed in compliance with all applicable
requirements of the city and the state of Idaho. Approved credits for the construction of system improvements may become effective at an earlier
date if the fee payer posts security in the form of a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or escrow agreement and the amount and terms of
such security are accepted by the development impact fee administrator or a designee. At a minimum, such security must be in the amount of the
approved credit or an amount determined to be adequate to allow the city to construct the system improvements for which the credit was given,
whichever is higher. When such conditions have been met, the city shall note that fact in its records. Upon request of the fee payer, the city shall
issue a letter stating the amount of credit available.
E. Application Procedures:
1. In order to obtain a credit against development impact fees otherwise due, a fee payer shall submit a written offer to dedicate to the development
impact fee administrator or a designee for specific parcels of qualifying land or a written offer to contribute or construct specific system improvements
to the city capital facilities in accordance with all applicable state or city design and construction standards, and shall specifically request a credit
against the type of development impact fees for which the land dedication or system improvement is offered. No request for a credit against
development impact fees shall be accepted unless a written offer to dedicate, contribute, or construct has previously been approved in writing by the
city.
2. After receipt of the request for credit, the development impact fee administrator or a designee shall review the request and determine whether the
land or system improvements offered for credit will reduce the costs of providing city capital facilities by an amount at least equal to the value of the
credit. If the development impact fee administrator or a designee determines that the offered credit satisfies that criterion, then the credit shall be
issued. The city shall complete its review and determination of an application for credit within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application for credit.
F. Transferability Of Credit: A credit may only be transferred by the fee payer that has received the credit to a successor in interest pursuant to the terms of
this chapter. The credit may be used only to offset development impact fees for the same city capital improvements element for which the credit was
issued. Credits shall be transferred by any written instrument clearly identifying which credits issued under this chapter are being transferred, the dollar
amount of the credit being transferred, and the city capital improvements element for which the credit was issued. The instrument of transfer shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 63/410
signed by both the transferor and transferee, and a copy of the document shall be delivered to the development impact fee administrator or a designee
for documentation of the change in ownership before it shall become effective.
G. Accounting Of Credits: Each time a request to use approved credits is presented to the city, the city shall reduce the amount of the development impact
fees for the type of fee for which the credit is provided, and shall note in the city's records the amount of credit remaining, if any. Upon request of the
fee payer or successor in interest to whom the credit was issued, the city shall issue a letter stating the amount of credit remaining.
H. Credits Exceeding Fee Amounts Due: If the credit due to a fee payer pursuant to subsections A through G of this section exceeds the development
impact fee that would otherwise be due from the fee payer pursuant to section 3-7-5 of this chapter (whether calculated through the fee table in section
3-7-5 of this chapter or through an independent assessment), the fee payer may choose to receive such credit in the form of either: 1) a credit against
future development impact fees due for the same capital improvements element, or 2) a reimbursement from development impact fees paid by future
development that impacts the system improvements contributed or dedicated by the fee payer. Unless otherwise stated in an agreement with the fee
payer, the city shall be under no obligation to use any city funds, other than development impact fees paid by other development for the same city
capital improvements element, to reimburse the fee payer for any credit in excess of development impact fees due.
I. Written Agreement Required: If credit or reimbursement is due to the fee payer pursuant to this section, the city shall enter into a written agreement with
the fee payer, negotiated in good faith, prior to the contribution, dedication, or funding of the system improvements giving rise to the credit. The
agreement shall provide for the amount of credit or the amount, time and form of reimbursement, and shall have a term not exceeding ten (10) years.
(Ord. 3729, 8-20-2007)
3-7-10: APPEALS AND MEDIATION:
Disputes regarding decisions made in the application of this chapter shall be resolved through appeal to the city council, or through mediation, as set forth
below:
A. Right To Appeal:
1. Any fee payer that is or may be obligated to pay a development impact fee, or that claims a right to receive a refund, reimbursement, or credit under
this chapter, and who is dissatisfied with a decision made by the development impact fee administrator or a designee in applying this chapter, shall
first request that the development impact fee administrator reconsider the decision. A fee payer requesting reconsideration shall state in writing to the
development impact fee administrator the reasons why the fee payer believes the decision to be in error. The development impact fee administrator
shall issue a written decision confirming or modifying the decision within fifteen (15) days of receipt of a written request for reconsideration.
2. Any fee payer that is dissatisfied with the decision of the development impact fee administrator upon reconsideration pursuant to subsection A1 of
this section, may appeal such decision to the city council. The fee payer shall have the burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence that the
decision was in error.
3. In order to pursue the appeal described in subsection A2 of this section, the fee payer shall file a written notice of the appeal with the development
impact fee administrator or a designee within thirty (30) days after the date of the reconsideration, or the date on which the fee payer submitted a
payment of development impact fees under protest, whichever is later. Such written application shall include a statement describing why the fee
payer believes that the decision was in error, together with copies of any documents that the fee payer believes support the claim.
4. The city council shall hear the appeal within sixty (60) days after receipt of a written notice of appeal. The fee payer shall have a right to be present
and to present evidence in support of the appeal. The development impact fee administrator or designee who made the decision under appeal shall
likewise have the right to be present and to present evidence in support of the decision. The criteria to be used by the city council in considering the
appeal shall be whether: a) the decision or interpretation made by the development impact fee administrator after reconsideration, or b) the
alternative decision or interpretation offered by the fee payer more accurately reflects the proportionate share of the costs of system improvements to
city capital facilities necessary to serve new development and whether this chapter has been correctly applied. The city council shall issue a decision
upholding, reversing, or modifying the decision being appealed within thirty (30) days after hearing the appeal.
B. Mediation:
1. Any fee payer that has a disagreement with the city regarding a development impact fee that is or may be due for a proposed development pursuant
to this chapter, may enter into a voluntary agreement with the city to subject the disagreement to mediation by a qualified independent party
acceptable to both the fee payer and the city.
2. Mediation may take place at any time following the filing of a timely appeal pursuant to this section, or as an alternative to such appeal, provided that
the request for mediation is filed no later than the last date on which a timely appeal could be filed pursuant to subsection A of this section.
3. Participation in mediation does not preclude the fee payer from pursuing other remedies provided for in subsection A of this section.
4. If mediation is requested, any related mediation costs shall be shared equally by the fee payer and the city, and a written agreement regarding the
payment of such costs shall be executed prior to the commencement of mediation.
5. In the event that mediation does not resolve the issues between the parties, the fee payer retains all rights to seek relief from a court of competent
jurisdiction. (Ord. 3729, 8-20-2007)
3-7-11: ENFORCEMENT AND COLLECTION:
When any development impact fee is due pursuant to the terms of this chapter, or pursuant to the terms of any written agreement between a fee payer and
the city authorized by this chapter, and such fee has not been paid in a timely manner, the city may exercise any or all of the following powers, in any
combination, to enforce the collection of the fee:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 64/410
A. The city may withhold building permits or other development approvals related to the development for which the fee is due until all development impact
fees due have been paid.
B. The city may withhold utility services from the development for which the fee is due until all development impact fees due have been paid.
C. The city may add to the amount of the fee interest at the legal rate provided for in Idaho Code section 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was
due.
D. The city may impose liens for failure to timely pay a development impact fee following procedures contained in chapter 5, title 45, Idaho Code. (Ord.
3729, 8-20-2007)
3-7-12: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to create any additional right to develop real property or diminish the power of the city in regulating the orderly
development of real property.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall obligate the city to approve any development request that may reasonably be expected to reduce levels of service below
minimum acceptable levels established in the development impact fee study.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall restrict or diminish the power of the city: 1) to impose reasonable conditions on the annexation of any property to the city in
accordance with Idaho Code, including conditions for recovery of project or system improvement costs required as a result of such voluntary
annexation, or 2) to negotiate and execute development agreements that may impose additional conditions on development, including the recovery of
project or system improvement costs, either in connection with a proposed annexation or in connection with any other development within the city.
D. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, that portion of a project for which a complete application for a building permit has been received by
the city prior to the effective date hereof shall not be subject to the development impact fees imposed by this chapter. If the resulting building permit is
later revised or replaced after the effective date hereof, and the new building permit reflects a development density, intensity, or number of units more
than ten percent (10%) higher than that reflected in the original building permit, then development impact fees may be charged on the difference in
density, intensity, or number of units between the original and the revised or replacement building permit.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall restrict the city from requiring fee payer or an applicant for a development approval or building permit to construct
reasonable project improvements required to serve the applicant's project, provided that such request does not duplicate a system improvement in a
category for which costs were included in the development impact fee study.
F. Any monies, including any accrued interest not assigned to specific system improvements within such capital improvements program and not expended
pursuant to section 3-7-7 of this chapter or refunded pursuant to section 3-7-8 of this chapter shall be retained in the same account until the next fiscal
year.
G. The city shall be entitled to collect and retain a surcharge of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per residential unit and two cents ($0.02) per square foot for
commercial/nonresidential building for each development impact fee collected in order to recoup that portion of the cost of preparing the capital
improvements plan that is attributable to determining the development impact. Such surcharge does not exceed each development's proportionate
share of the cost of preparing the plan.
H. If the city discovers an error in the development impact fee study that results in assessment or payment of more than a proportionate share of system
improvement costs on any proposed development, the city shall: 1) adjust the development impact fee to collect no more than a proportionate share or
2) discontinue the collection of any development impact fees until the error is corrected by ordinance.
I. If development impact fees are calculated and paid based on a mistake or misrepresentation, they shall be recalculated. Any amounts overpaid by a fee
payer shall be refunded by the city within thirty (30) days after the City's acceptance of the recalculated amount, with interest at the legal rate provided
for in Idaho Code section 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was paid. Any amounts underpaid by the fee payer shall be paid to the City within
thirty (30) days after the City's acceptance of the recalculated amount, with interest at the legal rate provided for in Idaho Code section 28-22-104 from
the date on which the fee was paid. In the case of an underpayment to the City, the City may withhold issuance of building permits or development
approvals for the project for which the development impact fee was paid until such underpayment is corrected, and if amounts owed to the City are not
paid within such thirty (30) day period, the City may also repeal any building permits or development approvals issued in reliance on the previous
payment of such development impact fee and refund such fee to the fee payer. (Ord. 3729, 8-20-2007)
J. The Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee established during the preparation of the development impact fee study shall continue in existence,
and shall be composed of five (5) members appointed by City Council. Three (3) members shall be active in the business of development, building, or
real estate; said members may not be employees or officials of a governmental entity while serving on the committee. The remaining two (2) members
shall be selected from among residents of the City of Nampa who are not active in the business of development, building or real estate. The committee
shall serve in an advisory capacity and has been established to: 1) assist the City in adopting land use assumptions; 2) review the capital
improvements plan, and proposed amendments, and file written comments; 3) monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements plan;
4) file periodic reports, at least annually, with respect to the capital improvements plan and report to the City any perceived inequities in implementing
the plan or imposing the development impact fees; and 5) advise the City of the need to update or revise land use assumptions, the capital
improvements plan, and development impact fees. (Ord. 4323, 7-3-2017)
K. The City Council shall consider the Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee's recommended revision(s) to this chapter at least once every twelve
(12) months. The committee's recommendations and the City Council's actions are intended to ensure that the benefits to a fee paying development
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 65/410
are equitable, in that the fee charged to the development shall not exceed a proportionate share of the costs of system improvements, and the
procedures for administering development impact fees remain efficient.
L. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent or prohibit private agreements between developers, the City, the Idaho Transportation Department,
and/or other governmental entities in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements or providing for credits or reimbursements for
system improvement costs incurred by a developer or fee payer, including interproject transfers of credits, or providing for reimbursement for project
improvements that are used or shared by more than one development project. If it can be shown that a proposed development has a direct impact on a
public facility under the jurisdiction of the Idaho Transportation Department, then the agreement shall include a provision for the allocation of
development impact fees collected from the developer or fee payer for the improvement of the public facility by the Idaho Transportation Department.
M. Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and shall be subject to those remedies provided in section 1-1-7 of this Code. Knowingly furnishing
false information to any official of the City charged with the administration of this chapter on any matter relating to the administration of this chapter,
including, without limitation, the furnishing of false information regarding the expected size, use, or impacts from a proposed development, shall be a
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 3729, 8-20-2007)
Chapter 8
FRANCHISE FEE USE
3-8-1: ELECTRIC FRANCHISE FEES:
The use of electric power franchise fees is limited to capital maintenance, capital improvements and/or downtown projects. (Ord. 3981, 9-19-2011)
Title 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare through structural
strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to life and property from fire and
other hazards attributed to the built environment. (Ord. 3187, 12-16-2002)
4-1-2: PERMIT FEES REQUIRED:
Permits required under this title require fees be paid at the time of issuance of said permit, unless specified otherwise herein.
Permit fees for projects started without the required permits shall be subject to a special investigation fee, which shall be assessed at a rate of twice that of
the original permit fee unless otherwise provided herein. (Ord. 4353, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
4-1-3: FEE REFUNDS:
Fees paid for the permits associated with the construction of improvement to any building regulated under this title shall be refundable at a rate of eighty
percent (80%) of the original permit. Refund requests must be made in writing and be accompanied by the original permit. Refunds cannot be granted for
license fees, plan review fees or for permits which are expired or null and void for any reason. (Ord. 3187, 12-16-2002)
4-1-4: FEES:
Except as otherwise specified all fees are established by resolution of the Council. The building official may assess a special investigation fee equal to the
total permit fee if the signed permit application and their related fees are not received within the allowed seven (7) days. (Ord. 4353, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-
2018)
4-1-5: PENALTY AND VIOLATION:
Unless otherwise prescribed, violations of the building regulations, and violations of any subsection of any uniform or model code adopted in this title, are a
misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or
both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 3187, 12-16-2002)
4-1-6: LICENSE REVOCATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 66/410
In case of violation of any of the provisions of the Building, Plumbing, Electrical, or Mechanical Codes, or other regulation of the City of Nampa related to
any permitted project, by any person holding a required license and after such violator has been given written notice of such violation and said licensee
has failed to correct the violation within the time specified in the notice, the building official, or his authorized representative, may declare the license
revoked and notify the licensee and then report to the Mayor and Council at their next regular meeting his action and reason therefor. Any licensee who
has had their license so revoked shall not be issued another license until said violation has been corrected and formal application made as provided in this
title.
Any revocation may be appealed in writing to the Council within fifteen (15) days from the date notice of the revocation is given to the licensee. (Ord. 3187,
12-16-2002)
4-1-7: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
Any person, firm or corporation holding a license shall not lend such license to any other person, firm or corporation or allow any other person, firm or
corporation to perform work under their license. (Ord. 3187, 12-16-2002)
4-1-8: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT BY LIMITATION:
Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after
its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the work is
commenced. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than one hundred eighty (180)
days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
The time frame by which a project shall be deemed to be suspended or abandoned shall be measured from the date of the last inspection recorded in the
permit inspection records. (Ord. 3187, 12-16-2002)
4-1-9: PERMIT REACTIVATION:
Any expired permit may be reactivated for an additional one hundred eighty (180) days upon the payment of a fee totaling twenty percent (20%) of the fee
as it would apply to the permitted work at the time of reactivation. All projects whose permits are expired and are under consideration for reactivation will
be subject to the codes in effect at the time of reactivation and may require plan review. If a rereview is required the building official shall assess a plan
review fee equal to that specified for a new project. (Ord. 3187, 12-16-2002)
4-1-10: PERMITS DENIED:
The building official may withhold issuance of any permit to any person, firm or corporation who has outstanding correction notices or outstanding fees,
fines or other indebtedness owed the City of Nampa and has failed to take the directed corrective action.
Issuance of new permits may not be withheld if an appeal of the building official's action has been filed for consideration by the Nampa City Council.
Appeal of the building official's action may be made to the Nampa City Council. Such an appeal must be made in writing to the City Council whereby the
appellant will provide the reason(s) why they have not corrected the substandard work or paid the outstanding fee. (Ord. 3979, 9-6-2011)
4-1-11: PERMIT REVOCATION:
The building official may revoke any permit issued in error, any permit issued on the basis of incorrect information or upon learning of work which has been
performed in violation of this Code or any other law of the State of Idaho. Upon revocation the permit holder shall cease all work until such time that a new
permit has been issued or written notification of reactivation of the nullified permit has been received. (Ord. 3187, 12-16-2002)
4-1-12: INSPECTION OF WORK:
The building official or his authorized representative has the authority to enter any premises at any reasonable hour for the examination of work permitted
under this title or any other provision of this Code. All work requiring inspection under this section shall be left exposed and accessible to the inspector until
such time that the inspector has approved the installation or construction. (Ord. 3187, 12-16-2002)
4-1-13: WORK COMMENCING BEFORE PERMIT ISSUANCE:
Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits
shall be subject to a special investigation. A special investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or
subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required herein, unless the building official determines that
special circumstances exist which indicate a justifiable reason for the failure to obtain said permit. Upon such a finding the building official may reduce the
special investigation fee to an amount deemed reasonable based upon the circumstances. (Ord. 3187, 12-16-2002)
Chapter 2
BUILDING CODE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 67/410
4-2-1: CODES ADOPTED:
All the rules, regulations and ordinances of a general and permanent character relating and applying to and regulating the erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings or
structures as said rules, regulations and ordinances are printed and contained in Code book form designated and entitled 2015 International Building Code
(IBC), with amendments as published by the International Code Council, as adopted by the State of Idaho or the Idaho Building Code Board, together with
any amendments or revisions to the International Building Code made by the Idaho Building Code Board through the negotiated rulemaking process; the
2012 International Residential Code parts I through VI, and IX (IRC) with amendments as published by the International Code Council, as adopted by the
State of Idaho or the Idaho Building Code Board, together with any amendments or revisions to the International Building Code made by the Idaho
Building Code Board through the negotiated rulemaking process; the 2015 International Existing Building Code (IEBC) with amendments as published by
the International Code Council; and, the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) with amendments as published by the International Code
Council, as adopted by the State of Idaho or the Idaho Building Code Board, together with any amendments or revisions to the International Building Code
made by the Idaho Building Code Board through the negotiated rulemaking process; and the 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous
Buildings as published by the International Conference of Building Officials, be and the same hereby are ratified and adopted as the Building Code of
Nampa City and as ratified and adopted shall be the rules and regulations and ordinances governing the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration,
repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, and area of buildings or structures within the City. With the approval
of the building official any item that has been approved for inclusion in future codes, which is published in the "Supplement to the International Codes",
may be considered as an acceptable path to compliance. Copies of the most current amendments or revisions to the above referenced codes, resulting
from the negotiated rulemaking process, are available at the Building Department, from the Building Department's website, and from the Idaho Building
Code Board. (Ord. 4353, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
4-2-2: AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE AND INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE:
IBC/IRC section 101.1, "Title". These regulations shall be known as the building code of Nampa city, hereinafter referred to as "this code".
IBC section 101.4.4, "Plumbing" is amended as follows:
Reference to the international plumbing code shall be replaced with the most current version of the Idaho state plumbing code, as set forth in Idaho
Code section 54-2601 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time, as well as all rules and regulations promulgated by the Idaho plumbing board
pursuant to the authority granted to it under Idaho Code section 54-2606. Copies of the most current version of the Idaho state plumbing code and
the aforementioned rules and regulations are on file and available in the office of the building official, and the same shall be used as the path to
compliance for plumbing installations within the city of Nampa.
(Ord. 4158, 1-5-2015)
IBC section 101.4.5, "Property Maintenance" is deleted and repealed along with all references to the international property maintenance code throughout
the IBC and IRC.
(Ord. 3942, 12-20-2010)
IBC/IRC section 103.2, "Appointment" is deleted and repealed in its entirety.
(Ord. 4353, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
IBC/IRC section 105.2, "Work Exempt From Permit" is amended as follows:
105.2 Work Exempt From Permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be
done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the
following:
1.One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed
200 square feet (18.58 m2).
2.Oil derricks.
3.Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a
surcharge or impounding class I, II or IIIA liquids.
4.Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18 925 l) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does
not exceed 2:1.
5.Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part
of an accessible route.
6.Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work.
7.Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery.
(Ord. 3942, 12-20-2010)
8.Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a group R-3 occupancy that are less than 48 inches (1219 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons
(18 925 l) and are installed entirely above ground.
(Ord. 4213, 12-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
9.Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes, not including service systems.
10.Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings.
11.Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 68/410
additional support of group R-3 and U occupancies.
12.Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1753 mm) in height.
13.Any structure that has been deemed to be public art by the Nampa arts commission which by its configuration, design or construction is
incapable of being used or occupied by any person or persons. This exemption shall be subject to the Nampa arts commission providing the
Nampa building department a copy of the engineered drawings for review and approval and an agreement to obtain all structural inspections and
approvals as required by the building department.
(Ord. 3942, 12-20-2010)
IBC section 108.6, "Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance" is deleted and repealed in its entirety.
IBC section 112/IRC section R111, "Connection To Service Utilities" is amended to read as follows:
A final inspection and approval is required upon completion and prior to occupancy and use of all buildings and structures. Lack of building official
approval may result in the termination of utility services to said building or structure and prosecution under IBC section 113.3 and Nampa city code
section 4-1-5.
IBC section 113/IRC section R112, "Board Of Appeals" is deleted and replaced with the language in Nampa city code section 4-2-5.
IRC section and table 302.6, "Dwelling/garage fire separation," is amended to read as follows:
Private garages shall be separated from residences and their attic area by means of a minimum 5/8 inch, type X gypsum board applied to the garage
side. Garages beneath habitable rooms shall be separated from all habitable rooms above by not less than 5/8 inch, type X gypsum board or
equivalent. Garages located less than 3 feet from a dwelling unit on the same lot shall be protected with not less than 5/8 inch, type X gypsum board
applied to the interior side of exterior walls that are within this area. Penetrations within such walls listed above are required to be protected as
required for one-hour construction. Door openings between the garage and residence, shall be equipped with a self-closer, and be constructed of
either a solid core wood door not less than 13/8 inch in thickness, solid or honeycombed steel doors not less than 13/8 inch in thickness. Openings
from a private garage into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted.
(Ord. 4353, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
IBC section 1608.2, "Ground Snow Loads" is amended to read as follows:
The ground snow load to be used in determining the design snow loads for the city of Nampa shall be 20 psf (pg).
IBC section 1612.5, "Flood Hazard Documentation" is deleted and repealed in its entirety.
(Ord. 3942, 12-20-2010)
IRC section R104.10.1, "Areas Prone To Flooding" is amended as follows:
The building official shall not grant modifications to any provisions related to areas prone to flooding established by table R301.2(1) without the
review and approval by the Nampa city floodplain administrator.
IRC section R105.3.1.1, "Substantially Improved Or Substantially Damaged Existing Buildings In Areas Prone To Flooding" is amended as follows:
For applications for reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of existing buildings or structures located in an area prone to
flooding as established by table R301.2(1), the Nampa city floodplain administrator shall examine or cause to be examined the construction
documents of the proposed work. For buildings that have sustained damage of any origin, the value of the proposed work shall include the cost to
repair the building or structure to its pre-damaged condition. All substantially improved or reconstruction of existing structures shall be made in
accordance with the Nampa city floodplain ordinance.
(Ord. 4353, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
IRC section R202, definition for "Townhouse" is amended to read as follows:
Townhouse is a single family dwelling unit constructed in a row of attached units, where the number of contiguous units exceeds three (3) units,
separated by property lines and with open space on at least two (2) sides.
(Ord. 4213, 12-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
IRC table R301.2(1), is amended to read as follows:
Table R301.2(1)
Climatic And Geographic Design Criteria
Ground
Snow
Load
Wind
Speed
e
Seismic
Design
Category
g Subject To Damage From
Winter
Design
Tempf
Flood Hazards
h
Ice Shield
Underlayment
i
Freezing
Index
j
Mean
Annual
Tempk
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 69/410
(mph)
Weathering
a
Frost
Line
Depth
b
Termite
c
Decay
d
Ground
snow load
of 20 psf.
90 B Severe 24
inches
Slight to
moderate
None
to
slight
10
degrees
Fahrenheit
Floodplain ordinance
effective 3-28-84, with
current revisions and
FIRM maps as currently
adopted
No 860 51.8
For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kN/m2, 1 mile per hour = 1.609 km/h
a.Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry than necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of this code. The
weathering column shall be filled in with the weathering index (i.e., "negligible," "moderate", or "severe") for concrete as determined from the
weathering probability map [figure 8301.2(3)]. The grade of masonry units shall be determined from ASTM C34, C55, C62, C73, C90, C129, C145,
C216 or C652.
b.The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in figure R403.1(1). The jurisdiction shall fill in the frost line depth column with the
minimum depth of footing below finish grade.
c.The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "very heavy", "moderate to heavy," "slight to moderate," or "none to slight" in accordance with
figure R301.2(6) depending on whether there has been a history of local damage.
d.The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "moderate to severe," "slight to moderate," or "none to slight" in accordance with R301.2(7)
depending on whether there has been a history of local damage.
e.The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the wind speed from the basic wind speed map [figure R301.2(4)]. Wind exposure category
shall be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with section R301.2.1.
f.The outdoor design dry-bulb temperature shall be selected from the columns of 971/2 percent values for winter from ASHRAE-97 handbook of
fundamentals.
g.The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the seismic design category determined from section 8301.2.2.1.
h.The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with (a) the date of the jurisdiction's entry into the national flood insurance program (date of adoption
of the first code or ordinance for management of flood hazard areas), (b) the date(s) of the currently effective FIRM and FBFM, or other flood hazard
map adopted by the community, as may be amended.
i.In accordance with sections R905.2.7.1, R905.4.3, R905.5.3, R905.6.3, R905.7.3 and R905.8.3, for areas where the average daily temperature in
January is 25°F (-4°C) or less, or where there has been a history of local damage from the effects of ice damming, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part
of the table with "yes." Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with "no."
j.The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the 100-year return period air freezing index (BF-days) from figure R403.3(2) or from the 100-
year (99%) value on the National Climatic Data Center data table "air freezing index-USA method (base 32° Fahrenheit)" at
www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.
k.The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the mean annual temperature from the National Climatic Data Center data table "air freezing
index-USA method (base 32° Fahrenheit)" at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.
(Ord. 3942, 12-20-2010; amd. Ord. 4213, 12-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
4-2-3: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, remove, convert, demolish, or install any building,
structure, or manufactured/mobile home without first obtaining a building permit which said permit is the authority to commence construction or installation.
(Ord. 3942, 12-20-2010)
4-2-4: DETERMINATION OF BUILDING VALUE:
The determination of valuation for all construction shall be established by resolution of the city council or the actual project cost, including all related site
improvement and building costs, whichever is greater. The building costs submitted by the applicant shall be compared to the "cost per square foot
valuation table", as adopted by the Nampa city council per resolution 41-2004. The greater of these two (2) values shall be used for purposes of the
calculation of permit fees. The certificate of occupancy can be withheld from any project until the owner/contractor has submitted a certificate of total
building cost to the building official. (Ord. 4158, 1-5-2015)
4-2-5: BUILDING AND FIRE CODE ADVISORY AND APPEALS BOARD:
A building and fire code advisory and appeals board shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council and shall serve to determine the
suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction and to provide reasonable interpretations of the international building and fire codes and
amendments thereto as provided in this code. Additionally, it is intended that this board may serve in an advisory capacity to the mayor and city council as
Nampa's elected officials to deliberate code amendments, critique public policy initiatives, provide guidance in the development of certain discretionary
enforcement activities and formulate public outreach programs.
All board members must be qualified by experience, association or training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction. The board members
shall serve for a term of two (2) years, provided, however, two (2) of the members shall be initially appointed for a one year term only, after which their term
shall be for a period of two (2) years. The building official and the fire marshal shall also serve as nonvoting members of the board. The board shall consist
of seven (7) members. The board shall be comprised of one residential building contractor; one commercial contractor; one member from a construction
support industry; one Idaho licensed architect; one Idaho licensed structural engineer; one citizen at large; and an individual who is qualified by his/her
experience as a fire prevention officer. In addition to the seven (7) members, one additional member qualified in any of the above referenced categories
shall be appointed to serve as an alternate whenever there is a vacancy or absence on the board. If the mayor is unable to find an eligible candidate for
placement upon the board, the mayor shall choose a member who is qualified in one of the other categories identified above. An appeal of a decision
issued by the board of appeals may be made to the council if such appeal is made in writing to the city clerk within seven (7) days of notification of the
board of appeals' action.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 70/410
This board shall meet no less than once a year and shall be kept up to date on those matters that are related or associated to their responsibilities and
duties to the city of Nampa. (Ord. 4117, 5-5-2014)
4-2-6: MANUFACTURED HOME SETUP CODE ADOPTED:
The Idaho state manufactured home setup code, as defined in title 44, chapter 22, of Idaho Code shall be the minimum standard for the installation of
manufactured homes in the city of Nampa. (Ord. 3942, 12-20-2010)
Chapter 3
PLUMBING CODE
4-3-1: PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing minimum standards of design, materials and workmanship for all plumbing hereafter installed,
altered or repaired and to establish methods of procedure within the limits of this City the most current version of that certain Plumbing Code known as the
Idaho State Plumbing Code, as set forth in Idaho Code section 54-2601 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time, as well as all rules and
regulations promulgated by the Idaho Plumbing Board pursuant to the authority granted to it under Idaho Code section 54-2606. Copies of the most
current version of the Idaho State Plumbing Code and the aforementioned rules and regulations are on file in the office of the building official, and the
same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
Though incorporated by reference through the statutes and regulations cited hereinabove, be advised that the City has thereby adopted the provisions of
the "Cross Connection Control Manual", published by the Pacific Northwest section of the American Water Works Association (December 1995, 6th
edition) as set forth in IDAPA 07.02.04.012.01, or any later addition thereto or amendment thereof as may be hereafter adopted by statute or regulation.
(Ord. 4158, 1-5-2015)
4-3-2: PERMITS REQUIRED:
All plumbing piping and drainage work, except in case of repairs to leaks, replacing broken fixtures or like emergency repairs, shall require the installer to
obtain a plumbing permit from the Building Department. (Ord. 3942, 12-20-2010)
4-3-3: CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 4353, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
4-3-4: AUTOMATIC FIRE PREVENTION SPRINKLING SYSTEMS:
No automatic fire sprinkling system shall be installed without a permit for such installation being first obtained. (Ord. 3942, 12-20-2010)
4-3-5: QUALIFICATIONS OF INSTALLERS:
Any plumbing installations requiring a plumbing permit and inspection as defined in this Code shall be installed by a State licensed journeyman plumber
employed by a State licensed plumbing contractor.
Exceptions:
A. Homeowner Installation: Plumbing installations may be performed by individuals who are the legal owner of group R, division 3 and group U, division
1, occupancies as defined by the International Building Code, and the property to which the structures are attached. Plumbing installations allowed
under this exception shall only be permitted if the property owner will be residing in the dwelling for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after
the plumbing is completed.
B. Hardship Cases: A member of the immediate family will be allowed to perform plumbing installations for a family member unable to perform the work
for himself or herself. (Ord. 4353, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
4-3-6: EXCAVATOR QUALIFICATIONS:
Excavation contractors involved in installing individual sewer and/or water service lines serving private properties, which are wholly outside the building
envelope, must have obtained one of the two (2) qualifiers listed below before applying for or receiving a Nampa City license or permit:
A. A State of Idaho, Health District septic system installer's certification.
B. A State of Idaho public works excavator license. (Ord. 3942, 12-20-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 71/410
4-3-7: SEWER TAPS:
Plumbing permits are required for all sewer taps. Permittees shall be either:
A. A State of Idaho licensed plumbing contractor; or
B. A State of Idaho public works licensed excavator.
Additionally, any sewer tap located on a public right-of-way will require a right-of-way permit. (Ord. 3942, 12-20-2010)
Chapter 4
ELECTRICAL CODE
4-4-1: NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
The 2017 National Electrical Code, together with any amendments or revisions made by the Idaho Electrical Board through the negotiated rulemaking
process, as amended, including all amendments made by the Electrical Board and adopted as State law, are adopted as part of this Code. Adoption of the
National Electrical Code shall run concurrent with the adoption of the Nampa City Code. (Ord. 4353, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
4-4-2: PERMITS REQUIRED:
All electrical wiring installations, electrical equipment changes, or any wiring installations require the installer to obtain an electrical permit from the Building
Department prior to the commencement of the work. The permit shall serve as permission to commence work. (Ord. 4353, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
4-4-3: CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 4353, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
4-4-4: QUALIFICATIONS OF INSTALLERS:
Any electrical wiring installations requiring an electrical permit and inspection as defined in this Code shall be installed by a State licensed journeyman
electrician employed by a State licensed electrical contractor.
Exceptions:
A. Homeowner Installation: Electrical wiring installations may be performed by individuals who are the legal owners of group R, division 3 and group U,
division 1, occupancies as defined by the International Building Code and the property to which the structures are attached. Wiring installations allowed
under this exception shall only be permitted if the property owner will be residing in the dwelling for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the
wiring is completed. (Ord. 3762, 12-17-2007)
B. Temporary Power Services: (Rep. by Ord. 4406, 11-5-2018)
C. Hardship Cases: A member of the immediate family will be allowed to perform electrical wiring for a family member unable to perform the work for
himself or herself. (Ord. 3762, 12-17-2007)
4-4-5: ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS:
In addition to the provisions of the National Electrical Code, the following shall apply:
A. Special Safeguards For Electrical Installations: In addition to the provisions specified in the Electrical Codes of the City, the electrical inspector may
require additional safeguards under special conditions and/or unusual circumstances which require additional safeguards for the protection of the
health, safety and general welfare of the City.
B. Location Of Service Equipment: Service disconnection means shall not be installed in clothes closets, cupboards, bathrooms or attics. They shall be
located in a readily accessible area.
C. Power Of Building Official To Disconnect Wiring: If the electrical inspector finds any part of any electric wiring, apparatus or fixtures in or about any
building to have been installed without a permit, or not in accordance with the rules and regulations as provided by this Code or the State of Idaho, or if
any electric installations are found to be dangerous to life or property, the building official is authorized to request that Idaho Power disconnect the
electrical energy to the structure. He shall at the same time give written notice of such disconnection to the owner or occupant of the building in which
such disconnection is being made and shall post the building with the notice and order issued to the electric utility. After such disconnected wiring,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 72/410
apparatus or fixtures have been replaced, repaired or rehabilitated to such put in a condition that they are deemed safe by the electrical inspector,
Idaho Power will be notified by means of a final inspection and approval by the electrical inspector. (Ord. 3762, 12-17-2007)
D. Commercial Buildings: This section covers all buildings or that part of a building or structure designated or intended for use by persons for commercial
purposes. Included are all occupancies as defined within the current edition of the International Building Code except: group R, and group U, division 1,
occupancies.
E. Wiring Methods: All wiring within structures housing the occupancies referenced in this section shall have their wiring installed within a raceway as
defined in the NEC installed in other methods which have been approved by the building official and which meet the intent of this section. Wiring
methods within group R and group U occupancies shall be dictated by the requirements of the adopted version of the National Electric Code. (Ord.
4406, 11-5-2018)
Chapter 5
MECHANICAL AND FUEL GAS CODES
4-5-1: CODES ADOPTED:
The 2012 international mechanical code, published by the International Code Council, as adopted by the state of Idaho or the Idaho building code board,
together with any amendments or revisions made by the Idaho heating, ventilation, and air conditioning board through the negotiated rulemaking process,
the 2012 international fuel gas code, published by the International Code Council, as adopted by the state of Idaho or the Idaho building code board,
together with any amendments or revisions made by the Idaho heating, ventilation, and air conditioning board through the negotiated rulemaking process,
and the 2012 international residential code parts V and VI, published by the International Code Council, as adopted by the state of Idaho or the Idaho
building code board, together with any amendments or revisions to the international building code made by the Idaho building code board through the
negotiated rulemaking process, are adopted as part of the Nampa city code and shall provide the standard for the installation of all mechanical equipment
installed within the city not otherwise covered by existing city regulations. Copies of the most current amendments or revisions to the above referenced
codes, resulting from the negotiated rulemaking process, are available at the building department, from the building department's website, and from the
Idaho building code board. (Ord. 4213, 12-7-2015, eff. 1-1-2016)
4-5-2: PERMITS REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to do, or cause to be done, any mechanical equipment installations without first obtaining a mechanical permit from the
division of building safety authorizing such work to be done. (Ord. 3942, 12-20-2010)
4-5-3: QUALIFICATION OF INSTALLERS:
Any mechanical installations requiring a mechanical permit and inspection as defined in this code shall be installed by a state licensed mechanical
contractor who has a valid state license.
Exceptions:
A. Homeowner Installation: Mechanical installations may be performed by individuals who are the legal owners of group R, divisions 3 - 4, and group U
occupancies as defined by the international building code, and the property to which the structures are attached. Mechanical installations allowed
under this exception shall only be permitted if the property owner resides in the dwelling for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the
installation is completed.
B. Hardship Cases: Members of the immediate family are allowed to perform mechanical installations including gas piping for family members unable to
perform the work for themselves. (Ord. 3942, 12-20-2010)
4-5-4: LICENSING REQUIRED:
Any person engaged in or becoming engaged in the gas piping business or the installation of mechanical equipment is required to secure a license from
the state of Idaho. (Ord. 3942, 12-20-2010)
4-5-5: AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE AND THE INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE:
IMC and IFGC sections 103.2 "Appointment" is deleted in its entirety.
IMC section 903 "Factory Built Fireplaces" add a new section to read as follows:
Section 903.3 "Provisions For Mitigating Indoor Air Pollutants Emitted By Unvented Gas Fireplaces". Unvented gas fireplaces shall not be permitted
without the installation of a supplemental whole-house ventilation strategy, which will serve to provide a non-passive outside fresh air source to the living
space during the time of fireplace operation. Such a strategy may be provided through the installation of an approved air-to-air heat exchanger, or an
engineered ventilation system designed to mitigate those combustion by-products emitted by the unvented gas burning appliance. The fresh air supply
must be activated and operating any time the unvented fireplace is in use.
(Ord. 3942, 12-20-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 73/410
Chapter 6
MOVING BUILDINGS
4-6-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Before any person may use any street in the city for the removal of any building, such person shall obtain a written permit from the building department.
The application for said permit shall be signed by the person desiring to use said street for such purpose and shall state the route over which the building
is to be moved and the final destination, and such other information as is deemed necessary.
Any person moving such building shall be liable to the city for any and all damage to the streets thereof, and also to any person whose property is injured
by reason of such removal. (Ord. 2094)
4-6-2: PREREQUISITES TO MOVING:
Any person who desires to move any building through or along a route which crosses or in any manner interferes with the line of any telegraph, telephone,
electric light, fire alarm circuit, or other electric wire line, shall, before obtaining such permit, give at least seventy two (72) hours written notice to the owner
or manager of any such apparatus. The notice shall contain all the information set forth in the application for permit. The applicant shall also pay in
advance to such owner or manager the amount of the cost and expense of cutting, repairing, moving, raising and replacing such wires, cables or other
apparatus as will be cut or interfered with. (Ord. 2094)
4-6-3: INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE:
All persons involved in the moving of any building through or along any public right of way shall:
A. Agree to hold harmless and indemnify the city, its officers, agents and employees, against any and all claims of personal injury or property damage
resulting therefrom.
B. Maintain all required insurance and file with the city a satisfactory certificate of insurance to indemnify the city against any form of liability to a minimum
dollar amount as determined by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2094)
4-6-4: INSPECTION:
The building department shall examine the building and shall specify the structural condition that such building must adhere to before being moved and
used of occupancy. The building department will inform such person what the building must contain in structural content in order to conform to city
specifications for a building to be placed in the area where such building is to be moved, and may require a sufficient bond to assure that the building will
be placed in such condition. (Ord. 2094)
4-6-5: INSPECTION FEE; OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
Every person is required to pay a fee for the inspection of any building to be moved into the city limits that will be subject to the building code.
The city may issue a special temporary building permit on the basis of the official building code.
The fee required for such special temporary building permit is the same as established for other building permits.
The special aspect of the temporary building permit is to allow a given time period, not to exceed ninety (90) days, for the correction of certain
nonconforming features of the "moved in" building or structure. In the event the nonconforming features are not corrected in the time period stated on the
temporary permit, the person obtaining the permit shall be subject to penalties of the building code.
In event such conformance is completed in the stated time interval, a regular permit will be issued without additional charge. (Ord. 2094)
Chapter 7
FIRE CODE
4-7-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The International Fire Code (IFC), as currently adopted by the Idaho State Fire Marshal, under the authority set forth in title 41, chapter 2, of the Idaho
Code, including any amendments or revisions thereto (IDAPA 18.01.50), is the applicable Fire Code for the City of Nampa. (Ord. 4353, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-
2018)
4-7-2: AMENDMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 4353, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 74/410
4-7-3: FEES FOR SERVICES:
The Nampa City Council may adopt, by resolution, fees to be charged by the Nampa Fire Department for the following services:
Fireworks:
Fireworks stands inspections (first 2 inspections)
Fireworks stands inspections (third and following inspections)
License fee
Permit for public display of fireworks
Flammable liquid storage tanks:
Permit for installation of one or two (2) tanks
Each additional tank
Permit for removal, abandonment or disposal (1 to 2 tanks)
Each additional tank
Hazardous materials storage:
Permit for high piled combustible stock
Permit for storage of liquefied petroleum gas
Permit which includes an initial inspection
Additional inspections
Inspections:
Certificate of compliance
Daycare inspections
Final inspection fee (beyond 1 hour)
Inspections outside workday
Inspections required by outside agency
Reinspections
Miscellaneous:
Beer and wine facility inspections
Burn permits
Business license permit
False alarms
Fire investigator
Fire response for nonresident or tax exempt
One engine response (1 hour minimum)
Response to a controlled burn in violation of permit
Two (2) engine response (1 hour minimum)
Operations:
Breathing air support vehicle
Dispatch
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 75/410
Station standby
Truck and/or rescue response per hour
Water tender response per hour
Plan review:
Fire alarm system plan review fee
Fire Code plan review
Fire sprinkler system plan review fee (includes overhead pressure test and rough in for cover inspection)
Flammable finishes fire suppression system plan review fee
Inspection of commercial hood fire suppression systems
Planning and zoning:
Annexations and zoning applications
Conditional use permits
Final plat
Planned unit development
Preliminary plat (per each lot) (Ord. 3762, 12-17-2007)
Chapter 8
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
4-8-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The 2015 International Existing Building Code (IEBC), together with any amendments or revisions to the IEBC by the Idaho Building Code Board through
the negotiated rulemaking process, is hereby adopted as part of this City Code. (Ord. 4353, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
4-8-2: AMENDMENTS:
All references in the 2015 International Existing Building Code to the "International Property Maintenance Code" are hereby deleted in their entirety. (Ord.
4353, 12-4-2017, eff. 1-1-2018)
Chapter 9
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
4-9-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
A. Statutory Authorization: The legislature of the state of Idaho in Idaho Code 46-1020 through 46-1024, authorized local government units to adopt a
floodplain map and floodplain management ordinance that identifies floodplains and that sets forth minimum development requirements in floodplains
that are designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of Nampa, Idaho, does
ordain as follows.
B. Findings Of Fact:
1. The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
2. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities,
and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood
damage also contribute to the flood loss.
C. Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, reduce the annual cost of flood
insurance, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 76/410
1. To protect human life and health;
2. To minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects;
3. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
4. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
5. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
6. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
7. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and
8. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.
D. Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses: In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
1. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
2. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
3. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
4. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and
5. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase hazards in other areas.
(Ord. 3964, 4-18-2011)
4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES: A building or structure incidental and subordinate to the principal building(s) located on the same property, such as
detached two (2) car garages, boathouses, small pole barns, storage sheds, and storage tanks.
APPEAL: A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: Designated as AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). AO zones have base flood depths that range
from one to three feet (3') above the natural ground; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and,
velocity flow may be evident. AO is characterized as sheet flow; AH indicates ponding, and is shown with standard base flood elevations.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. Designation on maps always includes the letters A or V. Also known as the "special flood hazard area", "floodplain" or the "regulatory
floodplain".
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the "100-year flood" or
the "regulatory flood".
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The water surface elevation during the base flood in relation to a specified datum. The base flood elevation (BFE) is
depicted on the FIRM to the nearest foot and in the FIS to the nearest one-tenth (1/10) of a foot.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
CRITICAL FACILITY: A facility that is critical for the health and welfare of the population and is especially important following hazard events. Critical
facilities include essential facilities, transportation systems, lifeline utility systems, high potential loss facilities and hazardous materials facilities.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or
accessory structures, or the construction of additions or substantial improvements to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement of mobile
homes; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of materials; specifically including the
construction of dikes, berms and levees. The term "development" does not include the operation, cleaning, maintenance or repair of any ditch, canal,
lateral, drain, diversion structure or other irrigation or drainage works that is performed or authorized by the owner thereof pursuant to lawful rights and
obligations.
DIGITAL FIRM (DFIRM): The digital flood insurance rate map depicts flood risk and zones and flood risk information. The DFIRM presents the flood risk
information in a format suitable for electronic mapping applications.
ELEVATED BUILDING: For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building that has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls,
shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE: The official form (FEMA form 81-31) used to track development, provide elevation information necessary to ensure
compliance with community floodplain management ordinances, and determine the proper insurance premium rate with section B completed by
community officials.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 77/410
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads, and the construction of street) were completed before September 4, 1984.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities
servicing lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading
or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD FRINGE: The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway covered by floodwaters during the regulatory flood.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map on which the federal insurance administration has delineated both the areas of special flood
hazards and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): The official report provided by the federal insurance administration that includes flood profiles, the flood boundaryfloodway
map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
B. The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The flood protection elevation is the elevation that corresponds to the elevation of the one percent (1%)
chance annual flood (base flood), plus any increase in flood elevation due to floodway encroachment. Therefore the flood protection elevation for the city is
equal to the BFE plus allowed floodway elevation or BFE plus one foot (1').
FLOODPLAIN: The land that has been or may be covered by floodwaters, or is surrounded by floodwater and inaccessible, during the occurrence of the
regulatory flood. The riverine floodplain includes the floodway and the flood fringe.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel
reserved to discharge and store the floodwater or flood flows associated with the regulatory flood.
INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC): A flood insurance claim payment up to thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) directly to a property owner for
the cost to comply with floodplain management regulations after a direct physical loss caused by a flood. Eligibility for an ICC claim can be through a
single instance of "substantial damage" or as a result of a "cumulative substantial change". (More information can be found in FEMA ICC manual 301.)
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements found at subsection 4-9-5B1b of this chapter (i.e.,
provided there are adequate flood ventilation openings).
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after September 4, 1984.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after September 4, 1984.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle: a) built on a single chassis; b) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection; c) designated to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1').
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before
damage occurred.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
the excavation for a basement, footing, piers, or foundation or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally aboveground as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 78/410
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage" regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of the structure should be: a) the appraised value of the structure
prior to the initial repair or improvement, or b) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures
which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of the repair work performed. The term does not include either:
A. A project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety codes specifications, which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
B. Alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
WATER DEPENDENT: A structure for commerce or industry that cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic
nature of its operations. (Ord. 3964, 4-18-2011)
4-9-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city of Nampa, Idaho.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to allow uses or structures that are otherwise prohibited by title 10 of this code.
B. Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency in its
"Flood Insurance Study (FIS) For Canyon County, Idaho", dated May 24, 2011, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) or digital flood
insurance rate maps (DFIRM), and other supporting data, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. The FIS and the FIRM are on
file at the office of the city of Nampa, city engineer, at 411 3rd Street South, Nampa, ID 83651.
C. Establishment Of Floodplain Development Permit: A floodplain development permit shall be required prior to development activities in special flood
hazard areas established in subsection B of this section.
D. Penalties For Noncompliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with
the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements
(including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates
this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or
imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
E. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions.
However, where this chapter and another chapter, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
F. Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
G. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the federal insurance administration, for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 3964, 4-18-2011)
4-9-4: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Application For Development Permit: Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city engineer, or his/her authorized
designee and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area
in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. The application shall be
accompanied with a filing fee that is and shall be established by council resolution. Specifically, the following information is required:
1. Application Stage:
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures recorded on a current elevation certificate (FF 81-
31) with section B completed by the local official;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 79/410
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection 4-9-5B2 of this chapter;
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
2. Construction Stage:
a. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the floodplain administrator an as built certification of the
floor elevation or floodproofing level, using appropriate FEMA elevation or floodproofing certificate, immediately after the lowest floor or
floodproofing is completed. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by the same.
b. Certificate deficiencies identified by the floodplain administrator shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to work proceeding.
Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections shall be cause for the floodplain administrator to issue a stop work order for the
project.
3. Expiration Of Floodplain Development Permit:
a. All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the commencement of work within one hundred eighty (180) days. A floodplain
development permit shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance unless the permitted activity has been substantially begun and
thereafter is pursued to completion.
B. Designation Of The Local Administrator: The city engineer, or his/her authorized designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter
by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
C. Duties And Responsibilities Of The Local Administrator: Duties of the city engineer, or his/her authorized designee shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Permit Review:
a. Review of all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
b. Review of all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state and local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
c. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the
encroachment provisions of subsection 4-9-5D of this chapter are met.
2. Use Of Other Base Flood Data (In A Zones): When base flood elevation data has not been provided (in A zones) in accordance with subsection 4-9-
3B, "Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard", of this chapter, the city engineer, or his/her authorized designee shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer subsections 4-9-
5B, "Specific Standards", and D, "Floodways", of this chapter.
3. Information To Be Obtained And Maintained:
a. Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood insurance study (FIS), or required as in subsection C2 of this section, obtain and
record the actual (as built) elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved
structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement. Recorded on a current elevation certificate (FF 81-31) with section B completed
by the local official.
b. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed nonresidential structures where base flood elevation data is provided through the FIS, FIRM, or
as required in subsection C2 of this section:
(1) Obtain and record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level), to which the structure was floodproofed; and
(2) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in subsection A2a of this section.
c. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.
4. Alteration Of Watercourses:
a. Notify adjacent communities and the Idaho department of water resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the federal insurance administration.
b. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not
diminished.
5. Interpretation Of FIRM Boundaries: Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation. Such appeals shall be granted consistent with the
standards of section 60.6 of the rules and regulations of the national flood insurance program (44 CFR 59-67).
D. Appeals And Variance Procedure:
1. Hearing And Decision: The city council as established by the city shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of
this chapter.
2. Appeals: The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by
the city engineer, or his/her authorized designee in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
3. Appeal To District Court: Those aggrieved by the decision of the city council, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the district court, as
provided by state law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 80/410
4. City Council Considerations: In passing upon such applications, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
a. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
b. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
c. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
d. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
e. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
f. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
g. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
h. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
i. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
j. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
k. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Conditions Attached: Upon consideration of the factors of subsection D4 of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
6. Records Maintained: The city engineer, or his/her authorized designee shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to
the federal insurance administration upon receipt.
7. Conditions For Variances:
a. Generally, the condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements
to be erected on a small or irregularly shaped lot contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood
level. As the lot size increases, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
b. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the national register of historic places or the
state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in this section.
c. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
d. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
e. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in subsection D4 of this section, or conflict with existing
local laws or chapters.
8. Variances Interpreted: Variances as interpreted in the national flood insurance program are based on the general zoning law principle that they
pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial
circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations
should be quite rare.
9. Nonresidential Buildings: Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing
than watertight or dry floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance
criteria except subsection D7a of this section, and otherwise complies with subsections 4-9-5A1, A3 and A4 of this chapter.
10. Written Notice: Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk. (Ord. 3964, 4-18-
2011)
4-9-5: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
A. General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:
1. Anchoring:
a. All new construction and substantial improvements, including accessory structures and storage tanks, shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
b. All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement and shall be installed using methods and
practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top frame ties to ground anchors.
2. AH Zone Drainage: Adequate drainage paths are required around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 81/410
3. Construction Materials And Methods:
a. All new construction and substantial improvements of an existing structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
b. All new construction and substantial improvements of an existing structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
c. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during flooding.
4. Utilities:
a. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems;
b. Water wells shall be located on high ground that is not in the floodway;
c. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters;
d. On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
5. Subdivision Proposals And Manufactured Home Parks:
a. All subdivision proposals and manufactured home parks shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and shall be reasonably safe
from flooding;
b. All subdivision proposals and manufactured home parks shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
c. All subdivision proposals and manufactured home parks shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage;
d. Base flood elevation data shall be generated and/or provided for subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres whichever is less.
6. Review Of Building Permits: Where elevation data is not available either through the flood insurance study (FIS), or from another authoritative source
(subsection 4-9-4C2 of this chapter), applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe
from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding,
etc., where available. Failure to elevate at least two feet (2') above grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates.
B. Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in subsection 4-9-3B, "Basis
For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard", or 4-9-4C2, "Use Of Other Base Flood Data (In A Zones)", of this chapter. Additional standards have
been clarified in FEMA technical bulletin 11-01 to allow crawl space construction for buildings located in the special flood hazard areas. The following
provisions are required:
1. Residential Construction:
a. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood
protection elevation (FPE).
b. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect and must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above the higher of the exterior or interior grade or floor immediately below the
opening.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters without manual intervention.
(4) For crawl space foundation types, construction must follow the guidelines in FEMA TB 11-01, crawl space construction for structures located in
special flood hazard areas: national flood insurance program interim guidance, specifically:
(A) Below grade, crawl spaces are prohibited at sites where the velocity of floodwaters exceeds five feet (5') per second.
(B) All building utility systems within the crawl space shall be elevated above the base flood elevation or be designed so that floodwaters cannot
enter or accumulate within the system component during flooding.
(C) The interior of a crawl space below the base flood elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent exterior grade
(LAG) and the height of the below grade crawl space, measured from the interior grade of the crawl space to the bottom of the floor joist must
not exceed four feet (4') at any point.
(D) Below grade, crawl spaces constructed in accordance with the requirements listed in this subsection shall not be considered basements.
However, applicants who construct buildings that have below grade crawl spaces are hereby advised that such buildings will have higher flood
insurance premiums than buildings that have crawl spaces with interior elevations at or above the lowest adjacent grade.
(E) An adequate drainage system shall be provided that removes floodwaters from the interior area of the below grade crawl space.
(5) Enclosed areas below BFE may be used solely for vehicle parking, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the
premises, or entry to the elevated area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 82/410
c. Accessory structures shall have the lowest floor including basement, elevated one foot (1') or more above the base flood elevation (BFE) or be
constructed to nonresidential standards.
2. Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall
either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood protection elevation (FPE); or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall:
a. Be floodproofed so that below the flood protection elevation (FPE) the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water.
b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications
and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in subsection 4-9-4C3b of this chapter.
d. Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in
subsection B1 of this section.
e. Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot (1') below
the floodproofed level (e.g., a building constructed to the base flood level will be rated as 1 foot below that level).
3. Manufactured Homes: All manufactured homes in the area of special flood hazard to be placed or substantially improved shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation or piers such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to the flood protection elevation and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
a. Manufactured homes placed on solid perimeter walls shall meet the flood vent requirements in subsection B1 of this section.
4. Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles placed on sites are required to either: a) be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days; or b) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or c) meet the requirements of subsection B3 of this section and the
elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes.
5. Minimum Health And Safety Standards: Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure that is not compliant with the provisions
of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is minimal in order to meet health and safety standards.
C. AE Zones With Base Flood Elevations But No Floodways: In areas with base flood elevations (but a regulatory floodway has not been designated), no
new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within AE zones on the community's FIRM, unless
it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
D. Floodways: Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 4-9-3B of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following
provisions apply:
1. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development unless certification by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
2. If subsection D1 of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of this section.
3. The administrator may make determinations to allow minor projects, such as projects that do not increase the natural grade (e.g., paving a driveway
or parking lot at existing grade, open fences and small isolated obstructions such as a mailbox or telephone pole).
E. Critical Facility: Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area (SFHA)
(100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical
facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet (3') above BFE or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is
higher. Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height utilized above. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken
to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood
elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
F. Alteration Of A Watercourse: A watercourse is considered altered when any change occurs within its banks. Prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit for alteration of a watercourse the applicant must:
1. Submit a description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development and submit
certification by a registered professional engineer that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished.
2. Notify adjacent communities, the U.S. army corps of engineers and the Idaho department of water resources stream channel alteration program.
Evidence of notification must be submitted to the floodplain administrator and to the federal emergency management agency.
3. Meet the requirements to submit technical data in subsection G of this section when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of culverts.
G. Requirement To Submit New Technical Data:
1. For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data reflecting
such changes be submitted to FEMA within six (6) months of the date such information becomes available. These development proposals include:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 83/410
a. Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood elevations or alter floodway boundaries.
b. Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard area.
c. Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of culverts.
d. Subdivisions or large scale development proposals requiring establishment of base flood elevations according to subsection A5d of this section.
2. It is the responsibility for the applicant to have technical data prepared in a format required for a conditional letter of map revision or letter of map
revision and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall be the responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. 3964, 4-18-
2011)
Chapter 10
SOLID FUEL HEATING EQUIPMENT REGULATIONS
4-10-1: OBJECTIVE:
To protect air quality resources vital to the public health, safety and economic future of the city of Nampa, by controlling emissions from solid fuel and
refuse burning. (Ord. 3762, 12-17-2007)
4-10-2: SOLID FUEL HEATING EQUIPMENT STANDARDS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to install solid fuel heating equipment in any new or existing structure until procuring from the building
department a mechanical permit, and completing the required approval and inspection process prior to operation.
B. It shall be unlawful on or after January 1, 2008, for any person in the city to: advertise for sale, offer to sell, or sell, for installation in any new or existing
building, solid fuel heating equipment which does not meet the following solid fuel burning equipment standards:
1. An air to fuel averaging of less than thirty five to one (35:1);
2. A firebox volume of less than twenty (20) cubic feet, a maximum;
3. Maximum burn rate of less than five (5) kg/hr; and
4. Maximum weight of less than eight hundred (800) kg.
Explicitly excluded are furnaces, boilers, cook stoves and open fireplaces. (Ord. 3762, 12-17-2007)
4-10-3: EXEMPTION:
The building official may grant an exemption to the solid fuel burning equipment standards provided in subsection 4-10-2B of this chapter, if the solid fuel
burning equipment is the sole source of heat or whenever compliance with the standards presents an economic hardship. Anyone denied an exemption as
provided herein may appeal the building official's decision to the Nampa building code appeals and advisory board. (Ord. 3762, 12-17-2007)
Title 5
BUSINESS LICENSES
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
5-1-1: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person required by this title to procure a license shall, before commencing their business, trade, occupation or vocation, make a written application for
license to the city. (Ord. 2105)
5-1-2: FAILURE TO PROCURE LICENSE:
Any person except as hereinafter provided, that shall do, transact, exercise, engage in or carry on, directly or indirectly, within the city any trade, business,
occupation, vocation or employment for which a license is required, without first procuring such a license shall be deemed in violation and the violation
shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2105)
5-1-3: FORMS:
All applications and licenses shall be on forms provided by the city. (Ord. 2105)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 84/410
5-1-4: FEES:
Unless otherwise specified within this title, fees are established by council resolution, shall be submitted with the application, are not prorated and are
nonrefundable. (Ord. 2105)
5-1-5: TERM OF LICENSE:
All licenses, except as specified otherwise, are issued for a calendar year and expire at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on December 31 of each year.
(Ord. 2105)
5-1-6: RENEWAL:
Unless otherwise specified, licenses may be renewed upon submittal of application, proof of insurance and any other required documents, and required
council approval where applicable. Failure to pay renewal fees on or before the renewal date shall result in the renewal fees being doubled up to a
maximum of two hundred dollars ($200.00). Licenses that are to be renewed for the calendar year must be submitted to the city clerk's office prior to the
last regular council meeting of each calendar year. (Ord. 2105; amd. Ord. 2549)
5-1-7: AUTHORITY TO ISSUE LICENSE:
The designated authority is authorized to issue licenses upon compliance with the requirements of the particular license. (Ord. 2105)
5-1-8: LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE:
No license issued or granted under the provisions of this title shall be transferable nor does the license authorize any other person to do business, or
authorize any other business that is therein mentioned to be done, or authorize the transfer of such business at any other place than is specified in such
license, except as may be otherwise provided within this title. (Ord. 2105)
5-1-9: REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
The council may at any time revoke any license for any cause which may appear to their satisfaction as sufficient grounds as relates specifically to the
licensing requirements. Cause for denial or revocation may involve conviction for crimes of "moral turpitude" as herein defined and for failure to meet or
maintain any of the requirements for a particular license as prescribed by city or state code. (Ord. 2105)
5-1-10: HEARING, VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Reference title 1 of this code, unless specified otherwise within this title. (Ord. 2105)
5-1-11: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
When specified that a license requires insurance the applicant shall file with the proper authority at time of application a policy, a certified true copy thereof,
or a certificate showing maintenance of a comprehensive liability insurance policy with a responsible insurance company stating that such liability
insurance coverage is in full force and effect to cover said person in the following minimums, unless otherwise specified:
Bodily injury $300,000.00 per person
300,000.00 per accident
Property damage $ 50,000.00
or in the alternative, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) single limit coverage. (Ord. 2105)
5-1-12: MORAL TURPITUDE:
"Moral turpitude" is defined, for purposes of this title, as any crime involving deceit, fraud, lying, theft or larceny. (Ord. 2105)
Chapter 2
TREE SERVICE
5-2-1: STATEMENT OF INTENT, PURPOSE AND BENEFITS:
A. The city of Nampa declares that it shall be the policy of the city to protect trees planted and growing within the public right of way. It shall also be the
policy of the city to prohibit the planting and growing of types or kinds of trees that may be hazardous, susceptible to injurious pests and/or diseases, or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 85/410
damaging to streets, sidewalks and curbs. Furthermore, the city declares that providing an aesthetically attractive plan to plant and grow trees for the
beautification of the streets of the city is in the best interest of the city, therefore, it is the intent of the city to:
1. Preserve and enhance the city's environmental, economic and social character with mature trees;
2. Protect public safety, health and welfare;
3. Encourage site and utility planning, building, and development practices to prevent indiscriminate removal or destruction of trees and avoid
unnecessary disturbance to trees within the city and its area of impact;
4. Follow ANSI A300 standards for tree maintenance;
5. Establish and maintain appropriate species diversity and age classes in order to provide a stable and sustainable community forest;
6. Establish a process by which trees are to be planted, pruned and removed; and
7. Implement the goals and objectives of the city's parks and forestry department.
B. The city of Nampa also declares that trees are important elements of the environment which promote and protect public health, safety, and the general
welfare of the community by providing:
1. A vital contribution to the aesthetic character of the community and the region's natural beauty;
2. Cost effective protection against severe weather conditions with cooling effects in the summer months and insulating effects in winter;
3. Economic support of local property values;
4. Improved air and water quality with the absorption of pollutants, assimilation of carbon dioxide and generation of oxygen, and the reduction of
excessive noise and adverse impacts caused by noise pollution;
5. A reduction of adverse impacts of land disturbing activities such as runoff from impervious surfaces, soil erosion, land instability, and sedimentation
pollution; and
6. Habitat, cover, food supply and corridors for a diversity of wildlife. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following words shall have the following meanings:
ANSI A300: The "American National Standard For Tree Care Operations" - tree, shrub and other woody plant maintenance - standard practices. This is a
document offering basic performance standards for tree pruning, published in 1995 by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or the same as
amended from time to time.
ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNER: Any person owning property adjacent to public rights of way.
ALTERNATE HOST PLANT: One of two (2) kinds of plants on which a parasitic fungus must develop to complete its life cycle.
ARBORICULTURE: The cultivation of trees, including planting, pruning, removal or any other action which affects the growth and maintenance of trees.
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE: The area under a tree extending from the base of a tree in all directions to an imaginary line ten feet (10') outside of the drip line
or as determined at a preliminary site inspection by the forester.
DISEASED TREES: Any tree which has become blighted, defaced, infected or has acquired a disease not capable of cure through treatment or the use of
any acceptable form of spray.
DRIP LINE: An imaginary circular line on the soil around a tree that mirrors the circumference of the tree's canopy. The tree's roots usually extend well
beyond this line.
FORESTER: Certified arborist responsible for administering the city's urban forestry program as provided in this chapter.
FORESTRY BOARD: The forestry board shall consist of a panel of seven (7) people: Two (2) city employees certified by the International Society of
Arboriculture (ISA) appointed by the parks director; one ISA certified person from the tree pruning industry appointed by the parks director; one landscape
architect appointed by the parks director; one person from the general public appointed by the parks director; the parks director; and the parks
superintendent. The parks director's appointees to the forestry board shall serve four (4) year terms.
HAZARD: Any tree, public or private, with visibly defined structural defects likely to cause failure of all or part of the tree, and be a danger to public safety.
INJURIOUS PEST OR DISEASE: An organism capable of seriously damaging the form or structural integrity of a tree.
INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY OF ARBORICULTURE, ISA: Internationally recognized organization that offers internationally certified courses in
arboricultural training.
OWNER: Every person including an owner, agent, tenant, occupant or lessee who exercises care, custody and control of real property within the city of
Nampa.
PERMIT: Written approval issued by the city and required for any activity on public trees or within critical root zone of public trees.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, company, municipal corporation or other governmental entity or organization of any kind.
PRUNING: The practice of cutting tree limbs according to standards contained in ANSI A300.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 86/410
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Improved or unimproved public property dedicated or deeded to the city for the purpose of providing vehicular, pedestrian and
public use.
PUBLIC SAFETY: The condition of being safe from bodily harm and/or property damage resulting from tree conditions and/or failures while using public
property.
RESIDENTIAL: Group R, division 3 occupancy as defined in the building code.
STREET TREE LIST: The list of acceptable trees and acceptable planting practices for trees located within the public right of way.
TOPPING: "Rounding" or "heading back" or any other term that can be described as severe cutting back of limbs within a tree crown to buds, stubs, or
laterals not large enough to assume a terminal role or as defined in ANSI A300.
TREE PRUNING PRACTICES: Rules and regulations adopted for purposes of describing appropriate tree pruning practices and procedures for trees
located in, upon and over the public right of way.
TREES: Any woody plant which is fifteen feet (15') or more in height at maturity with a single or multiple trunk often unbranched for several feet above the
ground and having a definite crown.
VISION TRIANGLE: Where front yards are required, that triangle of land defined on any corner lot by measuring from the intersection of the curb lines of
the two (2) adjacent streets, forty feet (40') along each curb line and connecting the two (2) points with a straight line or that triangle of land defined
adjacent to any alley or driveway intersecting a street by measuring along the alley or driveway edge and the back of the sidewalk of the adjacent street
seven and one-half feet (71/2') and connecting the two (2) points with a straight line.
Vision clearance in districts where front yards are not required and intersections are equipped with automated traffic signal controls shall be a minimum of
one foot (1') for each foot of street right of way width under sixty feet (60') up to a maximum of ten feet (10'). In districts where front yards are not required
and intersections are nonsignalized, vision clearance shall be the same as for districts where front yards are required.
Where curbs or sidewalks do not exist or a street improvement project is anticipated the measurement shall be taken from the projected future
curb/sidewalk lines. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-3: AUTHORITY OF FORESTER:
The forester, subject to the provisions of this chapter, is hereby authorized to:
A. Plant, prune, spray, preserve and remove trees in the public right of way or preserve the symmetry and beauty of trees located within the public right of
way.
B. Order the pruning, spraying, preservation or removal of trees upon private property when he shall find such action necessary to prevent the spread of
injurious pests or disease to trees located within the public right of way.
C. Supervise all work done under a permit issued in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
D. Prepare a street tree list consisting of acceptable trees, size and variety, proper planting instructions, and tree spacing of trees located within the right of
way.
E. Prepare rules and regulations containing guidelines for the pruning of trees located within the right of way to be known as the tree pruning practices.
F. Provide a form for applying for the planting, pruning, or removal of trees located within the public right of way.
G. Enter private property for the purpose of inspecting trees, shrubs, or plants that may harbor injurious pests, insects, or diseases potentially injurious to
right of way trees as described in sections 5-2-20 and 5-2-21 of this chapter.
H. Issue infractions through the department of code enforcement in accordance with provisions as set forth in section 5-2-15 of this chapter.
I. Administer a program of public outreach and education relating to community forestry and the planting and care of trees.
J. Maintain a licensing program as set forth in section 5-2-13 of this chapter.
K. Administer and maintain a permitting procedure for all planting, pruning, protection and removal of trees as set forth in section 5-2-4 of this chapter.
L. Facilitate the proper selection, planting and maintenance of trees in residential, commercial and industrial developments within city limits and the Nampa
city impact area; the forester shall review and provide comment on development applications when such applications are submitted to the Nampa city
planning and zoning department.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 87/410
M. Order the pruning or removal of public trees to ensure public health, safety and welfare while considering the health of the tree and other elements of
the infrastructure.
N. Remove trees located on public rights of way which have been declared to be a public nuisance as defined in section 5-2-22 of this chapter. Any trees
on public rights of way scheduled for removal shall be affixed with a public notice by the forester, or his authorized representative, stating the reason for
removal. Such notice shall be posted not less than fifteen (15) days prior to scheduled removal date unless determined by the forester to be an
emergency or immediate hazard to public safety as defined in section 5-2-23 of this chapter.
O. Require the protection of public trees (including the critical root zone) from construction or other harmful practices in order to avoid the creation of public
nuisances or damage to public trees. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person or owner shall plant any tree within the public right of way until a permit shall have been issued by the forester. Applications for tree plantings
shall be filed with the forester; trees must be of the type and variety permitted by the street tree list. The forester shall approve each tree for
appropriateness and ensure freedom from injurious pests or diseases. Any application denied by the forester shall be returned to the applicant with the
reasons for the refusal noted thereon. The applicant may file a new application or an amended application at any time thereafter.
A. Prohibited Acts: No person may perform any of the following acts without first obtaining from the forester a permit for which no fee shall be charged, and
nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt any person from the requirements of obtaining any additional permits as required by law:
1. Plant trees on public rights of way or in any public places.
2. Prune, cut, remove or otherwise disturb any public tree. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit owners of property adjacent to public rights
of way from watering or fertilizing such trees.
3. Attach any object to public tree(s).
4. Dig, trench, excavate or pile soil or any other materials within the critical root zone of any public tree(s).
B. Permit Application Procedure:
1. Contact the forester via mail, phone, fax or e-mail prior to commencement of the proposed work.
2. Upon inspection, the forester may issue a permit to perform any of the acts specified in subsection A of this section.
3. The forester may condition the approval of any permit.
4. Obtain a right of way permit through the city engineer's office. No person shall perform construction on a public right of way without first obtaining
such a permit. All construction shall be performed in conformance to the conditions of the permit as defined in section 9-1-4 of this code.
C. Requirements For Tree Planting Permits:
1. Each application for a planting permit shall designate the species and variety of public tree proposed. The forester shall designate the location of the
planting.
2. Approval of tree species, spacing, placement and minimum tree well sizes shall be obtained from the forester prior to issuance of a permit.
3. Whenever any tree is planted or set out in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, it shall be lawful for the forester to remove or cause removal of
the same. The cost of removal of such tree may be charged to the person responsible for the planting thereof.
D. Requirements For Tree Pruning/Removal Permits:
1. Prior to pruning or removal of any right of way tree on private property, application for a permit must be made by the property owner or private tree
firm currently licensed by the city.
2. Whenever a tree on public rights of way is removed, the applicant shall replace the tree removed as a condition of issuance of a permit for removal,
unless such requirement is waived by the forester for good cause shown. Conditions may include a requirement for compensatory payments. (Ord.
3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-5: CONTENTS OF PERMIT, VARIANCE FROM TREE LIST:
A. Each permit issued for the tree planting shall designate the type and variety of tree permitted. The forester shall designate the appropriate location of
the tree on the permit.
B. Approved species, authorized spacing information and minimum tree well sizes for trees planted in paved areas, or planter boxes aboveground shall be
obtained from the Nampa forestry street tree guide.
C. Permission for variance from the Nampa forestry street tree guide may be granted by the forester when said variance will be in the best interest of the
city. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 88/410
5-2-6: STREET TREE REMOVAL:
A. It shall be unlawful for an owner to remove any tree from the public right of way until a permit shall have first been issued by the forester. Applications
for such tree removal shall be filed with the forester and if, in the judgment of the forester such removal is desirable, a permit shall be issued. All
removal work shall be under the supervision of the forester or authorized representative but shall be at the sole expense of the applicant.
B. Any removal of trees for emergency or public safety reasons shall be supervised by the forester or his authorized representative.
C. Any removal of mature trees, for any cause, from the public right of way, as a condition of issuance of a permit for removal, shall be replaced with the
same number of trees removed by the adjacent property owner within thirty (30) days of the removal date on the site as approved by the forester or the
tree or trees may be donated to the city to be planted on public property.
D. One or more trees may be required to replace removed trees, at the discretion of the forester, based upon approved spacing recommendations.
E. Replacement trees must be of the type and variety permitted by the street tree list and are subject to approval by the forester. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-7: TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
Any person in possession of private property shall maintain the trees upon adjacent public rights of way and any trees upon private property which may
affect public property in a safe, healthy condition in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Adjacent property owners have the following
responsibilities:
A. Responsibilities For Public Trees:
1. Obtain Permits:
a. Meet all requirements and obtain all permits necessary for work done including, but not limited to, pruning and removal of trees on any public trees
as required in section 5-2-4 of this chapter.
b. Meet all requirements and obtain all permits necessary prior to commencing repair of damage done to public streets or sidewalks adjacent to any
public trees as required in section 5-2-4 of this chapter.
c. Meet all requirements and obtain all permits necessary for any tree planting on public property as required in section 5-2-4 of this chapter.
2. Routine Tree Maintenance Of Trees On Public Rights Of Way:
a. Pruning: Pruning of trees located on public rights of way adjacent to the owner's private real property:
(1) Prune and maintain such trees according to ANSI A300 standards, except sections 5.7.2 espalier and 5.7.3 pollarding, which are not permitted;
(2) Topping, heading, shearing or rounding over are not acceptable forms of tree pruning and are not allowed on public trees unless first approved
by the forester;
(3) Except as otherwise determined by the forester, branches that overhang sidewalks or streets shall be pruned to provide eight feet (8') of
vertical clearance over the sidewalk. Tree branches that overhang the street must be pruned to provide fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance
so as not to interfere with public travel. No limbs shall be trimmed or cut from any tree on public right of way, which is larger than six inches (6")
in diameter, without the forester's approval. Utility providers shall trim or cut trees in public rights of way according to ANSI A300 part 1, pruning
standards;
(4) Trees shall be pruned to remove dead limbs or other limbs that are considered a public nuisance as defined in section 5-2-22 of this chapter;
(5) All trees growing close to the sidewalk so that their presence shall raise or cause a disconnection in the sidewalk shall be evaluated for removal
or adjustments will be made to the sidewalk to accommodate the tree. When this type of situation arises, it will be evaluated on a case by case
basis, to determine the most practical solution. This prevention measure is intended to permit the sidewalk to be replaced and maintained so it
may retain a proper position and grade. If the property owner fails to respond to a city request to remove all such trees and shrubbery and
restore the sidewalk in its proper position within five (5) days from the delivery of the abatement notice, the city may remove the tree(s) and
replace the sidewalk under the general supervision of the city engineer at its proper position and grade.
b. Pest Control: Control pests on trees located on public rights of way adjacent to the owner's private real property as defined in section 5-2-20 of this
chapter.
c. Watering: Provide water sufficient to keep trees located on public rights of way adjacent to the owner's private real property in a healthy, growing
condition.
d. Protection/Preservation:
(1) Obtain a permit from the forester before performing any activity which may harm any part of a public tree (inclusive of the critical root zone);
(2) Notify the forester when any part of a public tree is damaged or destroyed.
B. Responsibilities For Private Trees:
1. Routine Tree Maintenance:
a. Removal or pruning of trees located on the owner's private real property;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 89/410
b. Pruning of trees located on the owner's private real property that are considered a public nuisance as defined in section 5-2-22 of this chapter.
Branches that overhang sidewalks or streets shall be pruned to eight feet (8') of vertical clearance over the sidewalk and fourteen feet (14') of
vertical clearance over the street so as not to interfere with public travel;
c. Control of pests and insects on trees located on the owner's private real property which may, upon determination by the forester, pose a threat to
public trees;
d. Removal of all debris (wood, branches and leaves) from public property by sunset of the day on which any tree work is done. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-
2009)
5-2-8: NOTIFICATION TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS:
If, in the process of removing any tree within the city, it is apparent that the tree will fall on a vehicular travelway, the licensed person must give prior notice
to the police and fire departments. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-9: FORESTER TO REVOKE PERMIT:
The forester is authorized and directed to stop work being performed contrary to the approved tree pruning practices or under a permit issued by the
forester. An aggrieved person may appeal the action of the forester as provided for in section 5-2-17 of this chapter. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-10: STREET TREE PRUNING:
All trees located within the public right of way shall be pruned at the expense of the owner(s) of the abutting property(ies). (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-11: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the commercial business, trade or for hire of the cutting, trimming, pruning, or removing trees located within the
public right of way without first procuring a tree pruner's license as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-12: LICENSE FEE:
A license fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the council shall be paid annually to the city clerk's office at the time of application. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-
2009)
5-2-13: LICENSING OF PRIVATE TREE SERVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the trade or commercial business of pruning or removing trees located on public property, without first
procuring a license from the forester.
A. Each applicant for a license or renewal thereof shall make application to the forester on a form to be furnished by the city. The form shall be signed by
the applicant and shall show such information as may be required by the forester. Information shall include, but is not limited to:
1. In what name the business is to be conducted as well as the name, business address, home address and telephone number of the company
president or owner(s);
2. Proof of current arborist certificate with the International Society of Arboriculture by at least one individual on staff of the business in a supervisory
position and approved by the forester;
3. Demonstration that arboricultural work is in accordance with ANSI A300 may be required prior to approval of license;
4. A certificate of liability and property damage insurance executed by an insurer authorized to transact business within the state, such policy of
insurance to provide not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for loss of life, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury
and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for damage to property or the amount currently required by Idaho Code 6-901 et seq.
B. The forester shall, after examining the applicant's qualifications, either approve or disapprove the application. If the application is approved, the
applicant shall file the application with the city clerk together with the annual license fee as established by council resolution. This license shall be
issued by the Nampa city clerk for the calendar year or balance of the calendar year only.
C. The forester with the approval of the forestry board is authorized to suspend or revoke the tree care license of any person that performs work which
does not comply with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to maintain arborist certification or required insurance shall also result in suspension or
revocation. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-14: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A tree pruner's license may be revoked by the forester, parks and recreation director, or parks superintendent for any of the following causes:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 90/410
A. Improper pruning practices;
B. Failure to obey direction of forester;
C. Failure to perform conditions of a permit issued under this chapter;
D. Any violation of this chapter. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-15: VIOLATION:
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be an infraction punishable by a fine.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who fails to comply with a lawful order of the forester shall be guilty of an infraction.
B. In addition to any criminal penalties that may be imposed, the city may pursue civil penalties and restitution for actual damages as set forth in section 5-
2-16, "Compensatory Payments", of this chapter.
C. The department of code enforcement for the city of Nampa will enforce all violations. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-16: COMPENSATORY PAYMENTS:
In the event any person removes, destroys or damages any public tree except as otherwise required by law, that person shall be required to replace such
tree with a tree(s) of equivalent dollar value on public property, unless otherwise determined by the forester. The value of a tree shall be determined by the
forester in accordance with accepted plant appraisal methods as set forth in the current edition of the "Guide For Plant Appraisal", published by the
International Society of Arboriculture or the same as amended from time to time. If no suitable location exists in the vicinity of the tree removed or if the
replacement tree(s) is of lesser value, the person causing the tree to be removed shall make a compensatory payment to the city of Nampa equal to the
difference in value between the tree removed and any replacement tree(s). Any public tree that is determined by the forester to be damaged, but not
sufficiently to justify its removal, shall be considered to be devalued. The amount of devaluation shall be paid to the city by the person causing the
damage. Compensatory payments shall be paid into a fund established for that purpose and restricted to use for community forestry programs. Nothing in
this chapter shall prohibit Nampa city from negotiating agreements with other governmental entities regarding penalties and compensatory payment for
removal, damage or destruction of public trees. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-17: APPEALS AND HEARINGS:
In the event of any suspension or revocation of a license by the city, the licensee shall have the right to appeal such suspension or revocation to the
forestry board.
A. Any person affected by an order, grant, denial, or revocation of a license or permit by the forester may appeal such order, grant, denial or revocation to
the forestry board.
B. Such appeal shall be filed in writing and submitted to the director of Nampa parks and recreation department within fifteen (15) days of the date of
notification of the forester's ruling.
C. The appeal shall be heard by the forestry board. Action by the forester and the appellant shall be delayed until the decision of the forestry board is
rendered.
D. The forestry board may in conformity with the provisions of this chapter reverse or affirm or modify wholly or partly, the order, grant, denial or revocation
of any license or permit.
E. Any person affected by the decision of the forestry board may appeal the decision to the city council.
F. Such appeal shall be filed in writing and submitted to the city clerk within ten (10) days of the date of notification of the decision of the forestry board.
G. The appeal shall be heard by the city council. Action by the forester and the appellant shall be delayed until the decision of the city council is rendered.
H. The city council may in conformity with the provisions of this chapter reverse or affirm or modify wholly or partly, the order, grant, denial or revocation of
any permit and the decision of the forestry board.
I. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-18: TREE PRUNER'S EXAMINATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 91/410
The commercial tree pruner's application shall be approved and the license issued upon successful completion of the International Society of Arboriculture
certification examination, or upon presenting a current ISA certification card at the time of application. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-19: CERTIFICATION OF LIABILITY AND PROPERTY DAMAGE INSURANCE:
There shall be on file with the city a certificate of liability and property damage insurance executed by a surety authorized to transact business within the
state of Idaho. The city shall set insurance limits by resolution. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-20: INJURIOUS PESTS AND INSECTS:
The permitting of injurious pests, or insects, or their eggs or larvae, upon any tree or trees, or shrubbery, within the corporate limits of the city, upon the
property owned or in the control of any person or dedicated street or streets adjacent thereto is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. It is hereby made
the duty of every owner and owners of any real property in the city to eradicate any and all injurious pests or insects, or their eggs or larvae from any and
all trees or shrubbery upon the property owned or controlled by them growing upon the public right of way between the property line and the street
travelway adjacent thereto, and anyone failing to do so shall be and is hereby declared to be maintaining a nuisance. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-21: DEAD, DEFACED, BROKEN, DISEASED, AND DANGEROUS TREES:
Every dead, defaced, broken, dangerous, diseased, or untrimmed tree, within any public right of way which has or may become a traffic hazard or a
hazard to adjoining property and is so determined by the city is hereby declared to be and to constitute a nuisance. It is the duty of every owner of any
premises in the city to have removed dead, defaced, diseased, broken or dangerous trees and to trim trees located upon the public right of way between
the property line and street travelway adjacent thereto. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-22: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
The following are declared public nuisances under this chapter:
A. Any tree or part thereof (public or private) which, by reason of location or condition, constitutes a hazard to public safety as determined by the forester.
B. Any tree or part thereof (on public or private property) which obstructs the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which obstructs public street
lighting.
C. Any tree or alternate host plant or part thereof (on public or private property) which harbors pests which reasonably may be expected to injure or harm
public trees. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-23: ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES:
The following are the prescribed means of abating public nuisances under this chapter:
A. Any tree or alternate host plant or part thereof (public or private) declared to be a public nuisance as set forth in section 5-2-22 of this chapter shall be
pruned, removed or otherwise treated in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Except for removal of trees from public rights of way, all
costs for nuisance abatement are the responsibility of the adjacent property owner.
The forester may cause a written notice to be personally served or sent by mail to the owner of the particular property. In the event the nuisance is not
abated by the date specified in the notice, the forester is authorized to cause the abatement of said nuisance. The reasonable cost of such abatement
may be charged to the subject property owner. Monies which have not been recovered through the city bill collection procedures may result in a lien
against the property or assessed on taxes as provided for in Idaho Code title 50. In addition, the owner of the property upon which the nuisance is
located may be subject to prosecution under this chapter, or any other chapter of this code or the Idaho Code for maintaining a public nuisance.
Nothing in this provision shall be construed to exempt any person from the requirement of obtaining permits under section 5-2-4 of this chapter.
B. The forester is empowered to cause the immediate abatement of any nuisance if it is determined by the forester to be an emergency or immediate
hazard to public safety.
C. If the forester determines that disposal of the wood, branches and soil from removal or pruning of a nuisance tree is required to complete abatement,
such disposal shall be done as required by the forester. All costs associated with the disposal of material from private trees shall be the responsibility of
the property owner. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-24: DAMAGING, DESTROYING OR MUTILATING PUBLIC TREES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Damage, mutilate or destroy any public tree.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 92/410
B. Attach any device or structure (i.e., tree houses, lights) to or on public trees unless otherwise authorized by the forester.
C. Store, spill or dump substances, whether liquid or solid, which may be harmful to trees, on any part of a public tree or within the critical root zone of a
public tree.
D. Damage public trees through construction activities in violation of the conditions of a permit issued under this chapter. Such activities include, but are
not limited to:
1. Making excavations or cuts in the soil near roots of public trees unless otherwise approved by the forester.
2. Damage roots of a public tree by compacting or placing fill within the critical root zone of a tree.
3. Engage in any pruning activity on public trees not in accordance with ANSI A300, including, but not limited to: topping, heading, rounding or shearing
unless otherwise approved by the forester. (Ord. 3843, 1-5-2009)
5-2-25: BUILDER'S PERMIT TREE OBLIGATION:
To provide for an aesthetically attractive and healthy urban forest within the city of Nampa, each applicant applying for a new one- or two-family residential
building permit shall plant a minimum of two (2) 1-inch caliper (as measured 6 inches above the ground) trees in accordance with the regulations set forth
hereinafter: (Ord. 4282, 9-19-2016)
A. Detached Sidewalk: Where a detached sidewalk abuts a property's front yard upon which a new one- or two-family residential structure is being built:
1. One tree shall be planted on the property in the front yard; the other tree shall be planted in the public right of way, in the "park strip" (i.e., the area
between the detached sidewalk and the curb) in alignment with either side property line where it intersects the front property line/street line; and
The right of way tree shall be chosen from the following species: Norway maple (various cultivars), common hackberry, Turkish filbert, ginkgo
(various cultivars), thornless common honey locust ("imperial", "shademaster" or "skyline" cultivars only), goldenrain tree, American sweetgum
(various cultivars), flowering pear ("Cleveland select" or "chanticleer" cultivars only), littleleaf linden (various cultivars), Japanese zelkova (various
cultivars), common hornbeam, American beech, common beech, green ash (various cultivars), white ash (various cultivars), English oak (various
cultivars), Chinese elm ("frontier" cultivar only), smoothleaf elm (various cultivars), or, as otherwise may be allowed by the city forester; and
2. Ornamental trees, small weeping trees, shrubs and bushes shall not be used; and
3. Pine trees may be used on the property, provided they are at least six feet (6') tall at time of planting; and
4. If mature trees already exist on the subject property, the obligation to plant one tree on the property in the front yard may be considered by the city
as satisfied.
5. Trees shall be planted at least fifty feet (50') apart, not to exceed one hundred ten feet (110') apart and in line with side property lines. Landscape
plans for single-family or two-family residential subdivisions shall depict required trees at required intervals. (Ord. 4204, 10-19-2015)
B. Attached Sidewalk: Where an attached sidewalk abuts a property's front yard upon which a new one- or two-family residential structure is being built:
(Ord. 4282, 9-19-2016)
1. Both trees shall be planted on the property in the front yard; and
2. The trees shall be of a variety that will expectedly reach a minimum height of twenty feet (20') at maturity; and
3. Ornamental trees, small weeping trees, shrubs and bushes shall not be used; and
4. Pine trees may be used provided they are at least six feet (6') tall at time of planting; and (Ord. 4204, 10-19-2015)
5. If mature trees already exist on the subject property, the obligation to plant two (2) trees on the property in the front yard may be considered by the
city as satisfied.
If trees are not able to be planted at the time of occupancy (e.g., due to weather constraints), the permit applicant will be issued a self-certification
correction notice acknowledging the applicant's legal responsibility to plant said trees within four (4) months of being issued the certificate of
occupancy. All self-certification correction notices will be forwarded to the parks department for verification and to code enforcement, as necessary,
for follow up enforcement. (Ord. 4282, 9-19-2016)
C. Replacement Trees: Trees determined by the city to be dying, of the wrong species or causing buckling of adjacent public hard surface improvements
(e.g., sidewalks, gutters, etc.) shall be replaced by the adjacent property owner(s) upon notification by the city. Replacement trees planted shall be from
the list set forth in subsection A1 of this section. (Ord. 4204, 10-19-2015)
Chapter 3
COMMERCIAL APPLICATOR
5-3-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate the business of a commercial applicator within the city without first obtaining from the city clerk a license. (Ord.
2105)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 93/410
5-3-2: PREREQUISITE:
An applicant for a license must provide a copy of his state commercial applicator's license. (Ord. 2105)
5-3-3: DEFINITION:
"Commercial applicator" is a person who owns or operates a business engaged in the application of pesticides, herbicides, or makes other chemical
applications for commercial purposes upon the land or property of another. (Ord. 2105)
Chapter 4
CONCESSIONAIRES
5-4-1: CONCESSIONAIRE DEFINED:
A "concessionaire" means a person having a license to sell goods or foods in a public park or on other public property at a community or nonprofit event.
(Ord. 2105)
5-4-2: CHANGE OF OPERATION:
Any person receiving a concessionaire's license shall not change any part of the operation described in the application, without applying for an receiving
approval of the change from the parks and recreation director. (Ord. 2105)
5-4-3: SEASON LICENSE:
Licenses for the summer season shall be limited in number and location as recommended by the parks and recreation director and approved by the mayor
and council. (Ord. 2105)
5-4-4: TEMPORARY PERMITS:
Temporary concession permits may be given for special community events as approved by the parks and recreation director. (Ord. 2105)
5-4-5: TIME OF APPLICATION:
Applications for season licenses may be submitted after November 1 of each year and must be received by the city before May 1 of each year. (Ord. 2105)
5-4-6: LICENSE FEES:
Any person who applies for a concessionaire's license must pay a license fee as established by resolution of the city council. The license fee shall be paid
to the city at the time of application. (Ord. 2105; amd. Ord. 2318)
Chapter 5
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
MOBILE VENDING CART: A movable pushcart that is operated by a vendor standing on the sidewalk. The mobile vending cart will be allowed in the DH
zoning district.
MOBILE VENDING TRAILER: A mobile trailer operated by a vendor standing on or within the frame of the trailer on the public rights of way or private
property. Mobile vending trailer will not be allowed in the DH zoning district.
MOBILE VENDING VEHICLE: A motorized vehicle operated by a vendor standing on or within the frame of the vehicle in the public rights of way or private
property. Mobile vending vehicles will not be allowed in the DH zoning district.
PEDDLER OR VENDOR: Any person traveling by foot, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from
street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, food or farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for
sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the public right of way which is between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property line intended
for the use of pedestrians in public places of the city of Nampa.
SIDEWALK VENDING: The peddling, vending, selling, displaying, or offering for sale any item of tangible personal property or other things of value from a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 94/410
mobile vending cart by a vendor to persons on the public right of way, including sidewalks.
SOLICITOR, VENDOR OR CANVASSER: Any person traveling either by foot, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from
house to house or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature
whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not.
Such definition includes any person who, for himself, or for another person hires, leases, uses or occupies any premises within the city for the sole
purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT, ITINERANT VENDOR, OR TELEPHONE SOLICITOR: Any person who engages in a temporary
business of selling and delivering goods, wares, and merchandise within the city, and who in the furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or
occupies any premises, including any parking lot, within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise. (Ord. 4034, 8-20-2012)
5-5-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person wishing to ply his trade as defined in this chapter, to engage in such business without first complying with the following
requirements and obtaining a license. (Ord. 3984, 10-3-2011)
5-5-3: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
A. Any sales under court order;
B. A bona fide auction sale;
C. Traveling salespersons, commercial travelers or the like who exclusively or primarily sell to or solicit orders for future delivery from local retailers, local
businesses, local governments, local schools or local wholesale firms;
D. The sale of farm or garden products by the person producing the same;
E. The sale of a newspaper subscription in which the seller is a person engaged in both the delivery and sale of the newspaper;
F. Contribution solicitation where the person being solicited to contribute personally knows the identity of the person soliciting the contribution, the name of
the group or organization he represents, and the nature of the services performed or offered by the group or organization;
G. The occasional sale of admission by local school students to a function of their school; or fundraising or community events sponsored by local service
clubs, or church groups, or groups such as Elks, Kiwanis, Lions, Boy or Girl Scouts and chamber of commerce;
H. Any political group seeking funds or membership;
I. Any solicitation of information for a telephone book or a city directory by a company representative;
J. A sale made pursuant to prior negotiations between the parties at a business establishment at a fixed location where goods or services are offered or
exhibited for sale;
K. A sale of goods, wares, merchandise and personal property of any nature whatsoever for resale to or by a business establishment at a fixed location
where goods or services are offered or exhibited for sale;
L. A sale of services to be furnished or performed in the future to or by a business establishment at a fixed location;
M. An occupation governed by section 10-1-10, "Home Occupations", of this code. (Ord. 3984, 10-3-2011)
5-5-4: DRIVER'S LICENSE; COLORED COPY:
Each applicant must attach a colored copy of his/her driver's license to the application. (Ord. 3984, 10-3-2011)
5-5-5: PREREQUISITE:
When the applicant proposes to peddle any food or product for human consumption, certification by the Southwest district health is required prior to
issuance of a license. (Ord. 3984, 10-3-2011)
5-5-6: FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 95/410
A. Except as provided in subsection 5-5-7A of this chapter at the time of filing an application an investigation fee shall be paid and is nonrefundable.
B. The license fee is payable upon filing of the application and the fee is nonrefundable. (Ord. 3984, 10-3-2011)
5-5-7: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
A. Upon receipt of an application for any license under this chapter, the application shall be referred to the Nampa police department which shall conduct
an investigation to determine the suitability of the applicant to be licensed. The investigation shall require an applicant to provide information and
fingerprints necessary to obtain criminal history information from the Idaho state police and the federal bureau of investigation pursuant to Idaho Code
section 67-3008 and congressional enactment public law 92544. The Nampa police department shall submit a set of fingerprints obtained from the
applicant and the required fees to the Idaho state police bureau of criminal identification for a criminal records check of state and national databases.
The submission of fingerprints and information required by this section shall be on forms prescribed by the Idaho state police. The Nampa police
department is authorized to receive criminal history information from the Idaho state police and from the federal bureau of investigation for the purpose
of evaluating the fitness of an applicant for licensure. As required by state and federal law, further dissemination or other use of the criminal history
information is prohibited. The applicant shall pay, in advance, the fees required by the Idaho state police bureau of criminal identification for the criminal
records check.
B. No person shall be issued a license when that person:
1. Is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
2. Is required to register as a sex offender, pursuant to the sexual offender registration notification and community right-to-know act, Idaho Code
section 18-8301 et seq., and the juvenile sex offender registration notification and community right-to-know act, Idaho Code section 18-8401 et seq.;
3. Has been, within five (5) years prior to the date of making application for such license, convicted of, paid any fines, been placed on probation or is
currently on probation or parole, received a deferred sentence, received a withheld judgment, completed any sentence of confinement (including
options in lieu of confinement), or suffered the forfeiture of a bond for any felony;
4. Has been, within five (5) years prior to the date of making application for such license, convicted of, paid any fine, been placed on probation or
currently is on probation or parole, received a deferred sentence, received a withheld judgment, completed any sentence of confinement (including
options in lieu of confinement), or suffered the forfeiture of a bond for any misdemeanor, involving:
a. The use of force against the persons or property of another;
b. The threat of force against the persons or property of another;
c. Theft or larceny;
d. The use, possession or sale of illicit drugs or possession of paraphernalia;
e. Possession of a concealed weapon;
f. Illicit sexual activity;
g. Driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) and/or drugs or reckless driving;
h. Stalking, telephone harassment, or violations of protection orders or no contact orders;
i. Contributing to the delinquency of a minor;
5. Has, at the time of such application an outstanding warrant;
6. Has had a similar license revoked by the city or any other city of this state or of the United States within the preceding five (5) years.
No license shall be granted to any applicant nor may a licensee maintain an existing license in good standing where satisfactory proof is submitted
that such applicant operates motor vehicles in an unskilled, dangerous or reckless manner, or habitually uses intoxicating liquor or drugs, or who
repeatedly violates the laws relating to traffic or to this chapter.
7. A peddlers and solicitors license shall not be issued to a person who, at the time of application for renewal of a license issued hereunder would not
be eligible or qualified for such license upon a first application, and a licensee must continue to have and maintain all the qualifications and none of
the disqualifications provided herein throughout the license period. It shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately notify the clerk's office if any
event, subsequent to the issuance of a peddlers and solicitors license, renders the licensee ineligible or unqualified for such a license. Failure to
continually maintain said requirements throughout the duration of the license may result in revocation of the license. (Ord. 3984, 10-3-2011)
5-5-8: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
Bonds in the following amounts and under the following conditions are required for those engaging in a business as defined in this chapter, where the
business transaction involves collecting monies, including deposits, for future delivery of goods, products or services.
Before any license is issued every applicant desiring to ply his trade under this chapter and the applicant's business involves collecting monies for future
delivery of any goods or products shall file with the city clerk a surety bond running to the city, or a cashier's check in the amount of five hundred dollars
($500.00). Every person who has one or more employees or agents acting in a capacity defined in this chapter who collects any monies for future delivery
of goods or products shall file with the city clerk a surety bond covering all such employees or agents and running to the city, or a cashier's check in the
amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each employee and/or agent.
Every bond shall be executed by the applicant as principal and at least one surety upon which service of process may be made in the state, said bond to
be approved by the city attorney, conditioned that the applicant and all of the applicant's agents and employees comply fully with all the provisions of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 96/410
chapter.
Based upon written justification and letters of reference from local persons, or being licensed during the previous or current calendar year, the above
bonding requirements may be waived when specifically approved by the council.
After expiration of a license, the city clerk shall, upon application of the licensee, return the bond or cashier's check six (6) months after receipt of
application, for return, unless the clerk has been notified of the pendency of any claim or cause of action by any person upon the bond or cashier's check.
(Ord. 3984, 10-3-2011)
5-5-9: EXHIBITION OF LICENSE:
The license shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place if the licensee is using a vehicle or a building in his business and otherwise must be kept by the
person and exhibited at any time upon request. (Ord. 3984, 10-3-2011)
5-5-10: GENERAL RESTRICTIONS:
No licensee shall have any exclusive right to any fixed, regular, or established location in a public street or right of way, nor shall he be permitted to
conduct his business in any congested area where his operations might impede or inconvenience the public. The judgment of a police officer is deemed
conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. No business activity shall be carried on in any area of the city by
any licensee where such business activity is prohibited by the city zoning code. No licensee shall be permitted to conduct his business or trade in or on
any city park, city building or adjacent grounds.
Mobile vending/pushcarts are the only vending units allowed in the DH zoning district.
Unless positioned on a designated identified vending location, a mobile vending cart shall not be located:
A. Where clear pedestrian passage on the public sidewalk is less than five feet (5') wide;
B. Within a midblock crosswalk area;
C. Within any street corner area;
D. In a manner in which the movement or visibility of vehicles using the street or other public right of way is obstructed.
Within the downtown area of the city of Nampa, there cannot be more than two (2) mobile vending carts within a block frontage area.
Mobile vending carts shall not be locked or chained to a parking meter, tree, streetlight or other street furniture.
Mobile vending carts shall not be left unattended on city streets or sidewalks for more than fifteen (15) consecutive minutes.
Utility service connections are not permitted. Electrical lines are not allowed overhead or lying in the pedestrian portion of the sidewalk. City streetlight
facilities shall not be used in any way to supply electrical service to a vendor site.
Vendors and solicitors shall keep the area of operation free of debris. Vendors selling food or beverages must provide trash receptacles and waste
removal adjacent to or as a part of their operation. All spilled food, beverages, grease or other trash or debris accumulating within twenty feet (20') of any
mobile vending cart, trailer or vehicle shall be cleaned and collected by the vendor and deposited in the vendor's trash receptacle. The vendor is prohibited
from depositing its waste, ice and any gray or waste water into sidewalk waste receptacles, privately owned dumpsters, city planters, gutters or the street
drainage system.
Mobile vending carts, trailers or vehicles shall be maintained in such a manner that prevents the spilling or splattering of grease, water, food or trash on
any public right of way where the cart, trailer, or vehicle is located. The cart, trailer or vehicle owner shall be responsible for the cleaning and repair of any
public right of way soiled, stained or damaged by the placement and operation of their mobile vending operations.
Generators on mobile vending carts, trailers or vehicles powered by gasoline are prohibited. Only generators powered by propane are acceptable. No
mobile vending cart, trailer or vehicle shall carry more than two (2) 5-gallon containers of propane on a public right of way. Generators shall not be placed
on the ground.
Mobile vending carts, trailers and vehicles must have the barbecue grill enclosed and permanently built into the structure of the cart, trailer or vehicle.
A five (5) pound "K" class handheld fire extinguisher is required if a heating or cooking appliance is used.
With the exception of merchandise or food items to be sold, mobile vending carts, trailers and vehicles presented for inspection shall be exactly as they
appear when operating on a public right of way, including any food rack.
Support equipment and accessories shall not be placed so as to impede pedestrian traffic. Umbrellas, canopies, or other covers used on mobile vending
carts, trailers or vehicles must be securely fastened.
Mobile vending carts, trailers and vehicles shall have a clean appearance at all times. (Ord. 4034, 8-20-2012)
5-5-11: UNLAWFUL CONDUCT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 97/410
No licensee shall:
A. Misrepresent the purpose of solicitation;
B. Misrepresent affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation;
C. Continue efforts to solicit from a person once that person informs the solicitor that he does not wish to give anything to or to buy anything from that
solicitor;
D. Represent the issuance of any license under this chapter as an endorsement or recommendation of the solicitation;
E. Enter upon any premises when the same is posted with a sign stating "No Peddlers Allowed" or "No Solicitation Allowed" or other words to such effect;
F. Knowingly make any false statement on an application for a license. (Ord. 3984, 10-3-2011)
5-5-12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The council has the power to revoke any license granted in accordance with this chapter for any of the following causes:
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license;
B. Fraud or misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of conducting the business or trade;
C. Any other violation of this chapter;
D. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
E. Conducting business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or
general welfare of the public. (Ord. 3984, 10-3-2011)
5-5-13: APPEALS:
Appeals may be submitted in writing (including, but not limited to, court documents) to the clerk's office within five (5) days of the denial of the license. The
clerk's office shall have up to five (5) days to determine the final disposition. (Ord. 3984, 10-3-2011)
Chapter 6
CARNIVALS AND AMUSEMENT RIDES
5-6-1: LICENSE AND FEES:
Any person operating any of the following businesses shall obtain a license before commencing such business and shall tender to the clerk with his
application for a license the following amounts:
Carnival, includes more than 3 mechanical rides $35.00 per day
Mechanical rides, includes merry go rounds,
ferris wheels or other mechanical rides and
consists of 3 or less rides
10.00 per day
Pony rides, or other animal rides 10.00 per day
(Ord. 2116)
5-6-2: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Insurance is required as specified in section 5-1-11 of this title. (Ord. 2116)
Chapter 7
TAXICABS AND COMMERCIAL TRANSPORTATION SERVICES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 98/410
(Rep. by Ord. 4297, 1-17-2017)
Chapter 8
RESERVED
(Ord. 3953, 2-22-2011)
Chapter 9
VEHICLE ESCORT SERVICE
5-9-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPROVAL:
No person shall engage in the business of vehicle escort service without first obtaining a license. All licenses shall be submitted to the council for their
approval. (Ord. 2117)
5-9-2: ESCORT DRIVER; PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall be engaged as, or shall perform the services of, a vehicle escort driver until he obtains a permit to do so. (Ord. 2117)
5-9-3: PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR PERMIT:
No permit shall be issued to any person to act as an escort driver who:
A. Is not over twenty one (21) years of age.
B. Has not resided within the state for a continuous period of at least six (6) months preceding the date of application.
C. Has been convicted in any court within a period of two (2) years of an offense of driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, reckless driving,
failing to stop at or report an accident, or any felony. (Ord. 2117)
5-9-4: LIMITATIONS:
Any license or permit shall be limited to the licensee to provide escort service for, and to escort funeral processions and moving buildings only, unless
special permission is obtained from the chief of police to escort other types of traffic movement. (Ord. 2117)
5-9-5: DRIVING THROUGH PROCESSION PROHIBITED:
No driver of any vehicle shall drive such vehicle between vehicles comprising a funeral procession, while such procession is in motion, if the vehicles
comprising the funeral procession are designated and escorted as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 2117)
5-9-6: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS TO BE IDENTIFIED:
Each motor vehicle participating in a funeral procession shall display illuminated headlights and shall follow not to exceed thirty feet (30') behind the
proceeding vehicle, and when accompanied by an escort service shall have the right of way at street intersections over other vehicles, except authorized
emergency vehicles. (Ord. 2117)
5-9-7: TRAFFIC DIRECTION PERMITTED:
Persons holding a permit and engaged in escort services are authorized to direct traffic in accordance with the provisions of this code and the statutes of
the state. It is unlawful for any person to refuse to comply with any order, signal or direction of an escort. (Ord. 2117)
5-9-8: VEHICLES AND LIGHTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 99/410
Vehicles used by an escort service shall not be made to look the same as or similar to any vehicle of the Nampa police department. Lights on escort
service vehicles shall be as prescribed by state code. (Ord. 2117)
5-9-9: PENALTIES; REVOCATION:
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Any license or permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked upon conviction of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2117)
Chapter 10
PAWNBROKERS
5-10-1: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
A. Authority: This chapter is adopted pursuant to article 2, section 12 of the Idaho constitution, and authorized by Idaho Code sections 50-201, 50-302 and
50-307.
B. Purpose: This chapter is intended to regulate pawnbrokers and to aid the Nampa police department in the identification and the recovery of stolen
property. (Ord. 2949)
5-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
CITY: The city of Nampa, an Idaho municipal corporation.
LAW ENFORCEMENT: Nampa city police department and its designees.
MELTED METALS: Metals derived from metal junk or precious metals that have been reduced to a melted state from other than ore or ingots, which are
produced from ore that has not previously been processed.
METAL JUNK: Any metal that has previously been milled, shaped, stamped, or forged and that is no longer useful in its original form, except precious
metals.
NONMETAL JUNK: Any nonmetal, commonly discarded item that is worn out, or has outlasted its usefulness as intended in its original form; except that
nonmetal junk does not include any item which has enhanced value because of its age and because its is commonly recognized as an antique.
PAWNBROKER: Every person, firm, association or corporation who: makes it a business to loan money on deposit or purchases personal property or
other valuables for the purpose of selling the same back again at a stipulated price; loans money secured by chattel mortgage or personal property,
keeping possession of the property, on which any portion or part thereof is mortgaged for all intents and purposes under this chapter; purchases and sells
personal property during the course of business as defined herein, shall be declared to be a pawnbroker within the meaning of this chapter.
PERSON: Includes any natural person, individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, concern, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver,
syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
PROPERTY: Anything tangible or intangible that can be owned, brought, sold or traded, except for real estate.
TRANSACTION: A pledge, or the purchase of, or consignment of, or the trade of any item of personal property by a pawnbroker from a member of the
general public. (Ord. 2949)
5-10-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
A. Annual License; Fee:
1. License Required: No person shall do business in the city as a pawnbroker without first obtaining a license from the city and paying the license fee
set forth herein.
2. License Fee; License Tax: The annual license processing fee for each pawnbroker shall be determined by resolution.
3. Term Of License: The license shall expire at the end of each calendar year, unless sooner revoked or suspended.
4. Investigation: An application for a license shall be made to the city clerk, in such form and manner as may be prescribed. An applicant who is not
licensed by this chapter for the year immediately preceding the concurrent application shall be required to be fingerprinted by an appropriate agency
to be designated by the city clerk. Cost of taking and processing such fingerprints shall be borne by the applicant. The city clerk, in his/her discretion,
may require additional information and history from an applicant including, without limitation, criminal history from other states.
5. Grounds For Denial:
a. Conviction or withheld judgment of any felony within five (5) years prior to the application may be grounds for denial of a license.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 100/410
b. Conviction or withheld judgment of any misdemeanor involving the crime of theft, wilful concealment, or similar crimes within five (5) years prior to
the application may be grounds for denial of a license.
6. Prior License/Permit Denied, Revoked Or Suspended: No license shall be issued if the applicant has had any pawnbroker business license or other
similar permit or license denied, revoked, or suspended by any city, county, state or other agency within three (3) years prior to the date of the
application.
7. Application: Applications for pawnbroker licenses shall be filed with the city clerk.
8. Age Of Applicant: No license shall be issued to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
B. Denial Of License: Whenever the city clerk denies an application, the clerk shall specify in writing:
1. The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application;
2. The reasons for denial; and
3. The action, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the license.
C. Appeal: A person or entity whose application is denied may appeal the denial decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city
clerk within fifteen (15) days of the date of the clerk's signed denial decision. Failure to timely appeal the denial decision will be a waiver of the right to
appeal that denial decision. The person or entity appealing a decision shall have a right to a hearing before the city council; shall have a right to notice
of the hearing before the city council; and shall have an opportunity to be heard and present evidence before the city council.
D. Revocation: Failure to meet or maintain any of the requirements of this chapter is cause for revocation of an issued license by the city clerk. In addition,
any license holder who is convicted of a criminal offense as specified in subsection A5 of this section may be subject to license revocation. A person or
entity whose license is revoked may appeal the revocation pursuant to the process outlined in subsection C of this section.
E. Motor Vehicle Sales: Motor vehicle sales in excess of five (5) per year must comply with Idaho Code section 49-1601, et seq., Idaho state dealer and
salesman licensing act. (Ord. 2949)
5-10-4: FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS REQUIRED:
No person or entity may operate as a pawnbroker unless the person or entity maintains a fixed place of business within the city. (Ord. 2949)
5-10-5: DUTY OF RECORD TRANSACTIONS:
A. Maintenance Of Permanent Record: It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker doing business in the city to maintain in the place of business an electronic
permanent record which shall be compatible with the software used by the Nampa police department, and shall include a record containing:
1. The date of transaction;
2. The name of the person or employee or the identification number of the person or employee conducting the transaction;
3. The name, date of birth, sex, height, weight, race, address and telephone number of the person with whom the transaction is made;
4. A complete description of the property pledged, bought, or consigned, including the brand name, serial number, model number or name, any initials,
or engravings, size, pattern, and color of stone or stones, and in the case of firearms, the caliber, barrel length, type of action, and whether it is a
pistol, rifle, or shotgun;
5. The type and identifying number of the personal identification used by the person with whom the transaction was made, which shall consist of a valid
driver's license or identification card issued by any state, or any two (2) other pieces of identification, one of which shall contain a photograph. At all
times, one piece of current government issued picture identification will be required; and
6. The nature of the transaction, a number identifying the transaction, the store identification as designated by the Nampa police department, or the
name and address of the business and the name of the person or employee conducting the transaction, and the location of the property.
B. Signature Of Person Making Transaction: The original document containing the signature of the person making transaction shall be retained by the
pawnbroker for a reasonable period of time, unless otherwise authorized by the Nampa police department. (Ord. 2949)
5-10-6: DAILY REPORTS; SUSPECT PROPERTY; INSPECTIONS:
A. Transmittal To The Nampa Police Department: Every pawnbroker doing business in the city shall furnish to the Nampa police department a full, true and
correct transcript of the record of all transactions conducted on the preceding date no later than the next business day. These transactions shall be
recorded on such forms as may be provided and in such format as may be required by the Nampa police department. This information shall be
transmitted to the Nampa police department by electronic data transfer, or by modem or similar device, or by delivery of computer disks subject to the
requirements of, and approval by the Nampa police department.
B. Suspect Property: If a pawnbroker has good cause to believe that any property in his/her/its possession has been previously lost or stolen, the
pawnbroker shall promptly report that fact to the Nampa police department, together with the name of the owner, if known, and the date and the name
of the person from whom it was received.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 101/410
C. Inspections: Every pawnbroker shall, upon request of the Nampa police department, produce any records required to be kept pursuant to this chapter
and shall permit the Nampa police department to examine the records, the pawnbroker's inventory, and all property kept or stored therein. Any
inspection performed pursuant to this provision shall take place during the pawnbroker's regular and usual business hours. (Ord. 2949)
5-10-7: DUTIES UPON NOTIFICATION OF PROPERTY REPORTED STOLEN:
A. Notification; Identifying Tag: Following notification from the Nampa police department that an item of property has been reported as stolen, the
pawnbroker shall hold the item of property intact and safe from alteration, damage or commingling. The pawnbroker shall place an identifying tag or
other suitable identification upon the property so held.
B. Holding Period; Release: Property held shall not be released for sixty (60) days from the date of the Nampa police department written notification unless
released by written consent of the Nampa police department or by written order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The Nampa police department
may, upon written notification, renew the holding period for up to sixty (60) days per each written renewal notification.
C. Verbal Hold: In cases where the Nampa police department has placed a verbal hold on an item, the Nampa police department must then give written
notice to the pawnbroker within fifteen (15) business days of making the verbal hold. If such written notice is not received within that period of time by
the pawnbroker, then the hold order will cease.
D. Renewal Notice: If an additional holding period is required, the Nampa police department shall give the pawnbroker written notice, prior to the expiration
of the existing hold order.
E. Effect Of Provisions: The provisions set forth in this section supersede any other provisions of this chapter.
F. Reasonable Basis For Hold: The Nampa police department shall not place on hold any item of property unless the Nampa police department reasonably
suspects that the item of personal property is lost or stolen. Any hold that is placed on an item of property will be removed as soon as practicable if the
item on hold is determined by the Nampa police department not to be stolen or lost. (Ord. 2949)
5-10-8: PROPERTY AS EVIDENCE:
A. Production For Court/Nampa Police Department: Whenever property that is in the possession of a pawnbroker is subject to a hold and the property is
required by the Nampa police department in a criminal investigation, and if it is unreasonable or impracticable for the Nampa police department to pick
up the property, the pawnbroker, upon reasonable notice, shall produce the property at reasonable times and places for the Nampa police department
or a court of competent jurisdiction, or may deliver the property to the Nampa police department. In the event property is seized pursuant to this section
the pawnbroker will be entitled to restitution in the criminal case.
B. Nampa Police Department's Receipt: Whenever any property which is alleged to be lost, embezzled or stolen, is taken from a pawnbroker; the Nampa
police department shall give the pawnbroker a receipt for the property, which shall contain a description of the property, the reason for seizure and the
names of the pawnbroker and the Nampa police department or designee receiving the property.
C. Property In Custody Of The Nampa Police Department: Property, alleged to be lost, stolen or embezzled, coming into the custody of the Nampa police
department shall be held by the Nampa police department subject to an order of a magistrate as provided by Idaho Code sections 19-3801 through 19-
3807. (Ord. 2949)
5-10-9: RETENTION OF RECORDS; RETENTION OF PROPERTY; INSPECTION:
A. Records: All records of a pawn, purchase or pledge of property, including sales of motor vehicles, shall be retained by the pawnbroker for one year.
B. Pawnbroker: Property pledged or pawned with a pawnbroker shall not be removed from the pawnbroker's place of business the first thirty (30) days
after receipt by the pawnbroker, except when redeemed by, or returned to, the owner and except when seized by law enforcement. The property shall
at all times during the ordinary hours of business of the pawnbroker be available for inspection by the Nampa police department.
C. Sales: No personal property purchased by a pawnbroker may be sold from the pawnbroker's business for a period of at least fifteen (15) days after
being purchased. (Ord. 2949)
5-10-10: PAWNBROKERS, DOCUMENTATION OF TRANSACTIONS; SALE OF PLEDGED PROPERTY:
A. Written Documents Required For Transactions: In addition to the duty to record and maintain an electronic permanent record, a pawnbroker shall record
every transaction with a written document (which may be a hard copy of the electronic permanent record of the transaction), a copy of which shall be
furnished to the person making the transaction. The document shall set forth the term of the loan, the date on which the loan is due and payable, and
shall inform the person making the transaction of the right by the person making the transaction to redeem the pledge prior to the expiration of the loan.
B. Sale Of Pledged Property: A pawnbroker shall not sell any property received in pledge until the term of the loan has expired. (Ord. 2949)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 102/410
5-10-11: CONTESTED PROPERTY ISSUES; HEARING PROCEDURE:
A. In the event an item of property is held or seized pursuant to this chapter, and the pawnbroker has a legitimate belief that the holding or seizure of the
property is improper, the pawnbroker may request in writing a hearing pursuant to the procedures in this section.
B. The hearing shall be held promptly within twenty (20) days after receipt of the written request for a hearing by a pawnbroker. The pawnbroker shall have
an opportunity to be heard and to present evidence why the property held or seized should be released back to the pawnbroker. The hearing shall be
informal and open to the public.
C. The hearing shall be conducted by the chief of police or his designee, or by a citizens volunteer panel, appointed by the chief of police, and consisting
of three (3) members. A written decision shall be made and provided to the pawnbroker within ten (10) days after the hearing.
D. If a decision is adverse to the pawnbroker, the pawnbroker may appeal the decision to the magistrate court pursuant to judicial review procedures and
time limits of the Idaho administrative procedures act. (Ord. 2949)
5-10-12: PROHIBITED ACTS; PENALTY:
A. Misdemeanor: It is a misdemeanor for:
1. Any person to knowingly make, cause or allow to be made any false entry or misstatement of any material matter in any book, record, electronic
permanent record or writing required to be kept under this chapter;
2. Any pawnbroker to receive any property from any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, or from any person who appears to be under the
influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs; or
3. Any person to knowingly violate any other provisions of this chapter.
B. Criminal Penalty: Any person found guilty of a misdemeanor as described and prohibited in this chapter shall be punished as provided for in Idaho Code
section 18-113. Each day an offense continues shall be considered a separate, punishable offense. All court proceedings shall be processed and
adjudicated in accordance with the Idaho misdemeanor criminal rules.
C. Civil Remedies: In addition to the provisions in this chapter creating criminal violations, the city may seek any civil remedies available for violations of
this chapter, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief. (Ord. 2949)
Chapter 11
FIREWORKS
5-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, these terms shall have the following meanings:
DEPARTMENT: The department of insurance, division of the state fire marshal.
FIREWORKS: Any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing
a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation. Fireworks include items classified as common or special fireworks by the
United States bureau of explosives or contained in the regulations of the United States department of transportation and designated as UN 0335 1.3G or
UN 0336 1.4G. The term "fireworks" shall not include any automotive safety flares, toy guns, toy cannons, caps or other items designed for use with toy
guns or toy cannons, party poppers, pop-its or other devices which contain twenty five hundredths (25/100) of a grain or less of explosive substance.
IMPORTER: Any person who, for any purpose other than personal use, or a use associated with a specific public display or other event permit, is the first
receiver of any fireworks in this state.
LICENSE: A nontransferable, formal authorization issued by the department to engage in the acts of importing fireworks into this state or operating a
wholesale fireworks business within this state.
NONAERIAL COMMON FIREWORKS: Any fireworks, such as ground spinners, fountains, sparklers, smoke devices or snakes, designed to remain on or
near the ground and not to travel outside a fifteen foot (15') diameter circle or emit sparks or other burning material which land outside a twenty foot (20')
diameter circle or above a height of twenty feet (20'). Nonaerial common fireworks do not include firecrackers, jumping jacks, or similar products.
PERMIT: An authorization given by the city of Nampa for retail sales or for public display.
SPECIAL FIREWORKS: Any fireworks designed primarily for display and classified as special fireworks by the United States bureau of explosives or
designated as UN 0335 1.3G.
WHOLESALE: The sale of fireworks to a retailer or wholesaler. (Ord. 2637)
5-11-2: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR RETAIL SALES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 103/410
A. The city of Nampa requires a permit for the retail sale of nonaerial common fireworks.
B. Applications for retail sales permits shall be on a form approved by the city of Nampa and shall include the name and address of the applicant (or the
names of all partners, if a partnership, the name of the corporation and the corporate officers if a corporation, or the name of the limited liability
company and all of its members, if a limited liability company), the primary location of the business, each location at which fireworks are to be stored,
and the applicant's Idaho sales tax seller's permit number, if applicable. An application fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid at the time
application is made. A separate application and fee is required for each location at which fireworks are to be sold.
C. A bond or valid certificate of public liability and property casualty insurance providing coverage of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for
personal injury and property damage must accompany each application.
D. The permit shall be issued if the application is complete and in compliance with applicable law, shall be valid for twelve (12) months from the date of
issuance and shall be nontransferable.
E. The permit required under this section may be revoked if the permittee violates any provisions of this chapter. A permit revocation proceeding shall
comply with the provisions for chapter 52, title 67, Idaho Code.
F. The permit shall be displayed in public view at the location listed on the permit.
G. An inspection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall also be paid at the time of permit application, pursuant to section 5-11-5 of this chapter. (Ord.
2637)
5-11-3: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR PUBLIC DISPLAY OR OTHER EVENT USING FIREWORKS:
A. Applications for public display or event permits shall be on a form approved by the city of Nampa and shall include the name and address of an
applicant (or the names of all partners, if a partnership, the name of the corporation and the corporate officers if a corporation, or the name of the
limited liability company and all of its members, if a limited liability company). Public display or event permits shall not be issued to or held by any
person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
B. An application fee of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) shall be paid at the time application is made.
C. A bond or valid certificate of public liability and property casualty insurance providing coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury
and property damage must accompany each application.
D. Said application shall include sufficient information to allow the city of Nampa to determine that:
1. The public display or event will be supervised by a qualified person.
2. The public display or event will not constitute an unreasonable hazard to persons or property.
3. Said permit shall be nontransferable, shall list the specific date or dates upon which the display or event shall occur, and the types of fireworks and
uses that will be allowed.
4. Alteration of fireworks may be performed by a person in possession of a valid public display permit. (Ord. 3557, 3-20-2006)
5-11-4: AUTHORIZED DATES FOR THE SALE AND THE USE OF FIREWORKS:
A. Nonaerial common fireworks may be sold at retail and used beginning at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight June 23 and ending at twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight July 5, and beginning at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight December 26 and ending twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight January 1.
B. Fireworks may be sold and used at any time if in compliance with a valid public display permit issued under the provisions of section 5-11-3 of this
chapter.
C. Subject to the provisions of subsection B of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person at any time to use or discharge any fireworks other than
nonaerial common fireworks as defined by Idaho Code section 39-2602(6). A violation of this subsection shall be an infraction punishable by a civil
penalty of seventy five dollars ($75.00). (Ord. 3235, 6-16-2003)
5-11-5: TEMPORARY FIREWORKS STANDS:
A. Retail sales of nonaerial common fireworks shall be allowed only from within a temporary fireworks stand unless the city of Nampa finds appropriate
circumstances justifying reasonable variance from strict compliance with this section.
B. Temporary fireworks stands shall be subject to the following provisions:
1. A stand shall not be located within twenty five feet (25') of any building or within one hundred feet (100') of the nearest fuel dispensing device.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 104/410
2. A stand shall meet the minimum structural stability requirements for temporary buildings as required by the currently adopted edition of the uniform
building code.
3. A stand shall meet the minimum requirements for temporary buildings for all lighting circuits or other electrical equipment used in conjunction with
the operation of the stand as required by the currently adopted edition of the uniform building code.
4. A stand shall have two (2) exits, each a minimum of thirty inches (30") wide at each end of the stand or as near the ends as is practical in a mobile
home conversion. One additional door is required for each thirty two feet (32') of rear wall in excess of thirty two feet (32'). All doors shall open
outward from the stand and shall be kept unlocked and unlatched during the hours of operation and free and clear of supplies and materials at all
times.
5. A stand shall have at least two (2) fire extinguishers with a 2A minimum rating, in good working order, with a current inspection tag in place, placed
near the exits in a visible and readily accessible manner.
6. "No smoking within twenty five feet" signs shall be prominently displayed on all four (4) sides of the stand. Smoking shall not be permitted inside the
stand.
7. A stand shall not be erected before May 5 nor remain up after July 20 for the first sales period; nor shall it be erected before December 7 or remain
up after January 16 for the second sales period. The premises on which the stand is erected shall be cleared of all structures and debris no later than
July 20 or January 16, respectively.
8. The fireworks stand operator shall not permit the discharge of fireworks within twenty five feet (25') of the stand.
9. The stand operator shall not allow any rubbish to accumulate in or around the stand causing a fire nuisance.
10. Only noncombustible waste containers shall be permitted within the stand.
11. Fireworks shall not be left in the stand when it is not open for business unless the stand is locked or secured. If fireworks are not stored in the
stand, they shall be stored in compliance with section 5-11-6 of this chapter.
12. Notice as provided by the city of Nampa cautioning each person purchasing fireworks of the prohibitions, liabilities and penalties incorporated in this
chapter shall be posted at all retail locations.
13. Temporary fireworks stands must be inspected by the city of Nampa fire department prior to opening for business on the first day of each sales
period authorized by section 5-11-4 of this chapter.
14. Applicant shall pay a onetime twenty five dollar ($25.00) inspection fee for each stand, payable at the time of application for a retail sales permit for
that location. (Ord. 2637)
5-11-6: SHORT TERM STORAGE OF NONAERIAL COMMON FIREWORKS:
A. A short term storage facility may be used for the storage of nonaerial common fireworks for a period of sixty (60) days prior to, fifteen (15) days after,
any authorized retail sales date. The city of Nampa shall be notified of the address or location of all short term storage facilities when fireworks will not
be stored in a temporary fireworks stand.
B. If the short term storage facility is not within the boundaries of the city of Nampa, the permittee shall notify the authority having jurisdiction where the
storage is to take place.
C. Short term storage is allowed in any of the following, provided it is locked or otherwise secured: a temporary fireworks stand; truck; trailer; or other
vehicle. A truck, trailer or other vehicle used for short term storage must remain at least twenty five feet (25') from the stand during any time the stand
is open for business, but may abut the stand when it is closed. A truck, trailer or vehicle used for short term storage must be at least twenty five feet
(25') from any other inhabited building.
D. Short term storage may occur in a locked or secured shed, garage, barn or other building or storage container which is detached from an inhabited
building and contains no open flames, including heating and lighting sources.
E. Any person storing nonaerial common fireworks pursuant to this section shall be subject to the age requirements and restrictions of section 5-11-12 of
this chapter.
F. This section allows the short term storage of nonaerial common fireworks only. A special fireworks permit shall be required to possess, store, use, or
transport "special fireworks" as defined in section 5-11-1 of this chapter. Applications for a special fireworks permit shall be made in the manner set
forth in section 5-11-3 of this chapter. Special fireworks permits shall not be issued to or held by any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord.
3557, 3-20-2006)
5-11-7: GENERAL PROHIBITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except in compliance with this chapter, and subject to age restrictions and permit requirements of this chapter, to:
A. Alter any fireworks.
B. Throw any fireworks from, into, or at a moving vehicle or at any person.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 105/410
C. Sell or use any fireworks at any time not permitted under this chapter.
D. Use fireworks in any area that constitutes a severe fire threat based on the vegetative conditions during the current fire season as determined by the
city of Nampa fire chief, provided that notice of such areas is given in advance.
E. Purchase or possess fireworks as defined under Idaho Code section 39-2602(3) of the Idaho fireworks act of 1997, without proper authority or license
pursuant to Idaho Code section 39-2603.
F. Possess, store, use, transport, or sell fireworks other than "nonaerial common fireworks" as defined in section 5-11-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 3557, 3-20-
2006)
5-11-8: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to and shall not prohibit:
A. The use of flares, noisemakers or signals designed and used for the purpose of protecting the public;
B. The use of blank cartridges;
C. The use of flares or noisemakers designed and labeled specifically for pest control purposes and approved by the Idaho department of fish and game;
D. The continued use of existing facilities for long term storage of fireworks by wholesalers;
E. Manufacturing of fireworks in this state; and
F. The importation, storage and sale of fireworks for export from this state, or interstate commerce in fireworks. (Ord. 2637)
5-11-9: LIABILITY OF PARENTS OR GUARDIANS:
The parents, guardians or other persons having custody or control of a minor shall be liable for damage caused by the use of fireworks by the minor. (Ord.
2637)
5-11-10: ENFORCEMENT:
This chapter shall be enforced by the city of Nampa. (Ord. 2637)
5-11-11: PENALTIES; INJUNCTIONS:
A. Unless specifically otherwise designated in the provision, any person violating the provisions of this chapter or any rules issued hereunder is guilty of a
misdemeanor. Notwithstanding the existence or use of any other penalty or remedy, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter or any of the
rules promulgated pursuant to this chapter may, upon application to or with written consent of the city of Nampa, be enjoined in the manner provided by
law from continuing the violation.
B. Fireworks being used in violation of this chapter may be confiscated by the city of Nampa. (Ord. 3351, 5-17-2004)
C. Any permit issued by the city under this chapter is subject to immediate revocation by an enforcement officer if it is determined by the officer that a
permit holder, or agent or employee of a permit holder, has violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter. (Ord. 3356, 6-7-2004)
5-11-12: MINORS PURCHASING AND SELLING FIREWORKS; WORKING IN FIREWORKS STANDS; VERIFICATION OF AGE:
It is unlawful for any person under the age of sixteen (16) years to purchase or possess fireworks unless accompanied by or in the presence of their parent
or guardian. It is unlawful for any permit holder, or agent or employee of a permit holder, to sell fireworks to any person who is under the age of sixteen
(16) years unless accompanied by or in the presence of their parent or guardian. Only persons who are over the age of eighteen (18) years are permitted
to sell fireworks or work in a fireworks stand. Verification of age of workers, sellers and purchasers of fireworks shall be by picture identification only and
shall be the responsibility of the permit holder, agent or employee of a permit holder. (Ord. 3557, 3-20-2006)
Chapter 12
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
5-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 106/410
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any liquor, wine and/or beer as defined by title 23, state code.
BEER GARDEN: A particular location at a formal or social gathering, generally held at a park, but not limited to, where liquor, beer or wine can be donated
or sold to the public with a catering permit if stipulated upon by the parks and recreation director and the event coordinator; and if they are in compliance
with the specific regulations for the city parks.
CATERING PERMIT: Permit issued, which authorizes the permittee to serve and sell liquor by the drink, beer or wine, at a party or a convention, not to
exceed five (5) consecutive days.
CONVENTION: A formal meeting of members, representatives or delegates, as of a political party, fraternal society, profession or industry.
PARTY: A social gathering especially for pleasure or amusement and includes, but is not limited to, social events such as weddings, birthdays, family
gatherings, and special holiday celebrations. (Ord. 3986, 10-3-2011; amd. Ord. 4264, 6-20-2016, eff. 7-1-2016)
5-12-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to offer for sale, sell or in any manner dispose of or keep for sale liquor by the drink, wine, or beer without first obtaining the
appropriate license as required by this chapter and title 23, Idaho Code. (Ord. 3986, 10-3-2011)
5-12-3: INVESTIGATION:
Upon receipt of an application for an alcoholic beverage license an investigation shall be made by the proper city officials of the statements contained in
the application, the premises where the applicant proposes to do business, and make such other and further investigations as may be deemed necessary.
(Ord. 3986, 10-3-2011)
5-12-4: PREREQUISITE:
No city alcoholic beverage license shall be issued until the applicant provides the applicable state and county license numbers. (Ord. 3986, 10-3-2011)
5-12-5: AGE REQUIREMENT:
No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to anyone who is under the age of twenty one (21). (Ord. 3986, 10-3-2011)
5-12-6: COUNCIL APPROVAL:
Applications for an alcoholic beverage license shall be submitted to council for approval or denial. A decision shall be made by the council within thirty (30)
days of the final submission of an application1. (Ord. 3986, 10-3-2011)
5-12-7: TERM OF LICENSE:
Licenses issued under this chapter shall expire at one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on June 1 of the following year. (Ord. 3986, 10-3-2011)
5-12-8: FEES:
Fees are established by council resolution as complies with state code. All fees shall be submitted at the time the application is presented to the clerk and
such fees are refundable, however, in case of a denial of license an administrative fee shall be assessed. Beer and wine licenses shall be prorated by the
calendar quarter. (Ord. 3986, 10-3-2011)
5-12-9: POSTING OF LICENSE:
Alcoholic beverage licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises and kept and posted during the full period of time for which the
license was issued. (Ord. 3986, 10-3-2011)
5-12-10: REVOCATION OR DENIAL:
The mayor and council may revoke or deny a license for fraud and misrepresentation in its procurement, or for a violation of the letter spirit of the laws of
the city, or the laws of the state of Idaho, or United States regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages, or for a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, or for any conduct or act of the licensee or any employees or any conduct or act permitted by him or them on the premises where such business
is conducted, tending to render such business or such premises where the same is conducted as a public nuisance or a menace to the health, peace,
safety or general welfare of the city.
When the council revokes or denies a license they shall specify in writing:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 107/410
A. The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application;
B. The reasons for denial; and
C. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer or renewal. (Ord. 3986, 10-3-2011)
5-12-11: RESTRICTIONS:
Location in distance from schools and churches shall be as complies with title 23, state code. Additional restrictions may be placed on the business under
the planning and zoning code of the city. (Ord. 3986, 10-3-2011)
5-12-12: TRANSFERS:
Any licensed person desiring to change his place of business from one location to another or from one person to another shall file with the city clerk an
application and transfer fee. The clerk shall make investigation of the new proposed place of business and/or of the new licensee and submit the
application to council for approval. (Ord. 3986, 10-3-2011)
5-12-13: HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE:
A. Liquor By The Drink: No liquor may be sold, offered for sale or given away upon any licensed premises on the following days or during the following
hours:
1. Memorial Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas from one o'clock (1:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. the following day.
2. On any other day between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. (Ord. 3986, 10-3-2011)
5-12-14: VIOLATION:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 3986, 10-3-2011)
5-12-15: CATERING PERMITS:
An alcoholic beverage catering permit shall be limited to authorization to sell liquor or beer or wine, or any combination thereof, based upon the type of
license which the applicant possesses. A catering permit is required to have a beer garden.
Applications for such a permit shall be made to the city clerk, on such form as prescribed by the city, which shall contain at a minimum, but not limited to,
the following information:
A. The name and address of the applicant and the number of his/her state liquor, beer or wine license.
B. The dates and hours during which the permit is to be effective, not to exceed five (5) consecutive days.
C. The names of the organizations, groups, or persons sponsoring the event.
D. The address at which the liquor, beer or wine is to be served, and if a public building, the rooms in which the liquor, beer or wine is to be served.
E. The purpose for the party or convention. (Ord. 4264, 6-20-2016, eff. 7-1-2016)
5-12-16: CATERING PERMIT RESTRICTIONS:
An alcoholic beverage catering permit is subject to the following restrictions:
A. The catering permit is designed for special occasions; applicants will not be allowed to request catering permits on a continuous basis such as social
gatherings week after week at one establishment.
B. Large parties or conventions held outdoors need to have a security plan in place. This information needs to be presented to the parks and recreation
department. (Ord. 3986, 10-3-2011)
Chapter 13
RESERVED
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 108/410
Chapter 14
RESERVED
Chapter 15
RESERVED
Chapter 16
RESERVED
Chapter 17
RESERVED
Chapter 18
ADULT BUSINESSES
5-18-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult businesses, commonly called sexually oriented businesses, in order to promote the health,
safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city of Nampa, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious
location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing
a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of
this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors
and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene material.
B. Findings: Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made
available to the city council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v.
American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991);
City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 120 S. Ct. 1382 (2000); State of Idaho v. Morris, Rocky Mountain Videos, Adult Shoppe, Northwest Films Inc., RAN
Enterprises, Inc., Canyon County third judicial district court case #CV 2000-02792 (2000); and on studies in other communities including, but not limited
to, Cleburne, Texas; Newport News, Virginia; Garden Grove, California; Adams County, Colorado; Seattle, Washington; Phoenix, Arizona; Indianapolis,
Indiana; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Las Vegas, Nevada; and Cleveland, Ohio, the city council finds:
1. Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the
establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for some of the activities that
occur on their premises.
2. Employees of some sexually oriented businesses currently in operation in the city of Nampa may be unable to observe the activities of their
customers at all times, thereby increasing the likelihood of ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities on their premises.
3. Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses may engage in higher incidences of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of
other establishments.
4. Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or
semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows.
5. Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions.
6. Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the
premises of such sexually oriented businesses.
7. At least fifty (50) communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis,
gonorrhea, chlamydia, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, non A, non B amebiasis, salmonella
infections and shigella infections.
8. Since 1982, there has been an increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the
United States - 600 in 1982; 2,200 in 1983; 4,600 in 1984; 8,555 in 1985; 733,374 in 1999; and 859,000 in 2002.
9. From April 1986, when HIV became a reportable disease by Idaho Code section 39-602, through December 31, 2000, there were seven hundred
thirty six (736) cases of HIV/AIDS in the state of Idaho1.
10. From January 1, 2001, through December 31, 2001, reported cases of HIV/AIDS in the state of Idaho decreased to seven hundred two (702), but
that has been the last decrease seen in the statistics2.
11. From January 1, 2002, through the second quarter of 2004, there has been an increasing cumulative number of cases of HIV/AIDS in the state of
Idaho3.
12. At the end of the second quarter of 2004, there were seven hundred sixty one (761) reported cases of HIV/AIDS in the state of Idaho4.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 109/410
13. The number of cases of syphilis reported in Idaho in 2003, was forty five (45), with twenty one (21) of those cases being in region 3 (Adams,
Canyon, Gem, Owyhee, Payette and Washington Counties); for the first half of 2004, twenty eight (28) new cases of syphilis have been reported in
region 3 (Adams, Canyon, Gem, Owyhee, Payette and Washington Counties)5.
14. The number of cases of genital chlamydia in Idaho reported annually has risen steadily, since 1999, with two thousand six hundred nine (2,609)
statewide cases reported in 2003, making chlamydia the most reported of all notifiable infectious diseases in the United States. Of the two thousand
six hundred nine (2,609) cases reported in 2003, four hundred seventy five (475) were in region 3 (Adams, Canyon, Gem, Owyhee, Payette and
Washington Counties); for the first half of 2004, two hundred forty three (243) new cases of genital chlamydia have been reported in region 3
(Adams, Canyon, Gem, Owyhee, Payette and Washington Counties)6.
15. The number of cases of gonorrhea reported in Idaho in 2003, was seventy six (76), with fourteen (14) of those cases being in region 3 (Adams,
Canyon, Gem, Owyhee, Payette and Washington Counties); for the first half of 2004, nine (9) new cases of gonorrhea have been reported in region
3 (Adams, Canyon, Gem, Owyhee, Payette and Washington Counties)7.
16. The surgeon general of the United States in his report of October 22, 1986, advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be
transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her
newborn.
17. According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis, chlamydia, and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by
sexual acts.
18. Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part,
because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and
maintain those facilities.
19. Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult"
oriented films.
20. The findings noted in this section raise substantial governmental concerns.
21. Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial
governmental concerns.
22. A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators
of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that the
sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of
the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in
possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein.
23. Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in
curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in sexually oriented businesses.
24. Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce
the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from
working in such establishments.
25. The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented
business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing
the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
26. It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who
may engage in the conduct which this chapter is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity.
27. The fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption
that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter.
28. The barring of such individuals from the management of sexually oriented businesses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to, and prevents
conduct which leads to, the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
29. The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the city will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
ADULT ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin operated or slug operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are regularly maintained to show films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, DVDs, CD-ROMs, slides, computer generated images, or other photographic reproductions to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at
any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial establishment which has as a significant or substantial
portion of its stock in trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business
or advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the
following:
A. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas";
B. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse by individuals of themselves or others.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 110/410
ADULT BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult
theater, sexual encounter establishment or nude model studio. The definition of "adult businesses" shall not include an establishment where a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
A. Persons who appear seminude; or
B. Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or
C. Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the exhibition or display of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT MOTEL: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
A. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the exhibition or display of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right of way which advertises the availability of this adult type of
photographic reproductions; and either:
1. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours, or
2. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or
similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of
nudity or seminude, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities".
DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON: The dominant or principal theme of the object referenced. For instance, when the
phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas", the films so described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or display of "specified anatomical
areas" or "specified sexual activities".
EMPLOYEE, EMPLOY, AND EMPLOYMENT: Describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented
business, on a full time, part time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or
other status. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the
premises.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The chief of police, or the sworn officers in his or her charge as he or she may designate, or such other person as may be
designated by the city council.
ESCORT: A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately
model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
ESCORT AGENCY: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
ESTABLISH OR ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any of the following:
A. The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
B. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
C. The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
LICENSEE: A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on
the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually
oriented business.
LICENSING OFFICER: The city clerk.
MANAGER: An operator, other than a licensee, who is employed by an adult business to act as a manager or supervisor of employees or is otherwise
responsible for the operation of the business.
NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft with less than a fully opaque
covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
OPERATE OR CAUSE TO BE OPERATED: To cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. "Operator" means any person on the
premises of a sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise operational control of the business or who causes to function or who puts or keeps
in operation the business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business regardless of whether that
person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.
OPERATOR: Includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.
PEEP BOOTH: A viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space.
PERMITTEE AND/OR LICENSEE: A person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate an adult business has been issued, as well as the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 111/410
individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association, or other legal entity.
PREMISES OR PERMITTED OR LICENSED PREMISES: Any premises that requires a license and/or permit and that is classified as an adult business.
PRINCIPAL OWNER: Any person owning, directly or beneficially: a) ten percent (10%) or more of a corporation's equity securities; b) ten percent (10%) or
more of the membership interests in a limited liability company; or c) in the case of any other legal entity, ten percent (10%) or more of the ownership
interests in the entity.
SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO: Any place where a person appears seminude and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, or
photographed by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. Seminude model studio shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the
state of Idaho or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a
structure:
A. That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person is available for viewing;
and
B. Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll in the class; and
C. Where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at any one time.
SEMINUDE OR IN A SEMINUDE CONDITION: The showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or
the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any
portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola
is not exposed in whole or in part.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: A business or commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration, a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of "specified sexual activities". The definition
of sexual encounter establishment or any sexually oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, seminude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or
B. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: Any of the following offenses:
A. Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance
by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized
criminal activity relating to a sexually oriented business; sexual assault; molestation of a child; crimes against nature; any other sexual offense
prohibited by Idaho Code not otherwise specified herein; or distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above
under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries;
B. For which:
1. Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
2. Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
3. Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any twenty four (24) month period.
C. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following:
A. The fondling of another person's genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts;
B. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
C. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections A and B of this definition.
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT: Of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than twenty five
percent (25%), as the floor areas exist on the date this chapter takes effect.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL: Of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following:
A. The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
B. The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
C. The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal devise which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 112/410
5-18-3: CLASSIFICATION:
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
A. Adult arcades;
B. Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores;
C. Adult cabarets;
D. Adult motels;
E. Adult motion picture theaters;
F. Adult theaters;
G. Escort agencies;
H. Seminude model studios; and
I. Sexual encounter centers. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. It is unlawful:
1. For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter.
2. For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a
sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to this chapter.
3. For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license
pursuant to this chapter.
B. An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the city. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter.
C. An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall file with the enforcement officer a
completed application made on a form prescribed and provided by the city treasurer. An application shall be considered complete if it includes the
information required in this section. The applicant shall be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. The application shall be notarized. The
application shall include the information called for in subsections C1 through C7 of this section as follows:
1. The full true name and any other names used in the preceding five (5) years.
2. Current business address.
3. A set of fingerprints suitable for conducting necessary background checks pursuant to this chapter and the applicant's social security number to be
used for the same purpose.
4. If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name, principal owner or owners, business location, legal description, business
mailing address and phone number of the proposed sexually oriented business.
5. Written proof of age, in the form of either: a) a copy of a birth certificate and current photo, b) current driver's license with picture, or c) other picture
identification document issued by a governmental agency.
6. The issuing jurisdiction and the effective dates of any license or permit held by the applicant relating to a sexually oriented business, whether any
such license or permit has been denied, revoked or suspended and, if so, the reason or reasons therefor.
7. If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name and address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service
of process. The information provided pursuant to subsections C1 through C6 of this section and this subsection C7 shall be supplemented in writing
by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the enforcement officer within ten (10) working days of a change of circumstances which would render
the information originally submitted false or incomplete.
D. The application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6").
E. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who
wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, such as a corporation, each principal owner, officer, director, general partner
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 113/410
or other person who will participate directly in decisions relating to management of the business shall sign the application for a license as applicant.
Each applicant must be qualified under section 5-18-5 of this chapter and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
F. A person who possesses a valid business license is not exempt from the requirement of obtaining any required sexually oriented business license. A
person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses a business license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this chapter,
where applicable.
G. The information provided by an applicant in connection with the application for a license under this chapter shall be maintained by the enforcement
officer on a confidential basis, and may be disclosed only: 1) to other governmental agencies in connection with a law enforcement or public safety
function, or 2) as may otherwise be required by law or court order. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-5: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, the enforcement
officer shall issue a temporary license to the applicant, which temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the enforcement officer to deny
or grant the license. Within twenty (20) days after the receipt of a completed application, the enforcement officer shall either issue a license or issue a
written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The enforcement officer shall approve the issuance of a license unless one or more of the
following is found to be true:
1. An applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age.
2. An applicant is delinquent in the payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant in relation
to a sexually oriented business.
3. An applicant has failed to provide information as required by section 5-18-4 of this chapter for issuance of the license.
4. A business entity for which the applicant had, at the time of an offense leading to a criminal conviction described herein, a management
responsibility or a controlling interest, has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in this chapter. The fact that a conviction is
being appealed shall have no effect.
5. The license application fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
6. An applicant has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form.
7. The proposed sexually oriented business is located in a zoning district other than a district in which sexually oriented businesses are allowed to
operate under the city of Nampa's zoning ordinance or is not in compliance with the location restrictions established for sexually oriented businesses
in the appropriate zoning district(s).
B. An applicant ineligible for a license due to subsection A4 of this section may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period
required by the applicable subsection has elapsed.
C. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to that
applicant, the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. A sexually oriented
business employee license shall contain a photograph of the licensee. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at
or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the
employee's license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or performing and shall produce such license for
inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or other authorized city official. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-6: FEES:
A. The nonrefundable initial license fee and annual renewal fee for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license
shall be set by the city council at an amount determined to be sufficient to pay the cost of administering this program, subject to subsection B of this
section.
B. In no event shall the fees exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the initial license and one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) for the renewal
fee for a sexually oriented business license. In no event shall the fees exceed seventy five dollars ($75.00) for the initial license and fifty dollars
($50.00) for the renewal fee for a sexually oriented business employee license. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-7: INSPECTION:
A. The application for an adult business license shall constitute consent of the licensee and his/her agents or employees to permit the city's police
department or any other agent of the city to conduct routine inspections of any licensed adult business during the hours the establishment is conducting
business. An applicant, operator, licensee, or employee, or any agent of an applicant, operator, licensee, or employee, shall permit law enforcement
officers, and any other federal, state, county or city agency in the performance of any function connected with the enforcement of this chapter, to
inspect those portions of the premises of a sexually oriented business where patrons or customers are permitted to occupy for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with this chapter, at any time the business is occupied or open for business.
B. The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or
temporary habitation. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 114/410
5-18-8: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
A. Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 5-18-4 of this
chapter. Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before the
expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected.
B. When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the
city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least ninety (90)
days have elapsed since the date denial became final. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-9: SUSPENSION:
The city shall issue a written intent to suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a
licensee has:
A. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;
B. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-10: REVOCATION:
A. The enforcement officer shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 5-18-9 of this chapter occurs and
the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months.
B. The enforcement officer shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke a license if the officer determines that:
1. A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process;
2. A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
3. A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
4. A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
5. A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed
premises. This subsection B5 will not apply to an adult motel, unless the licensee knowingly allowed sexual activities to occur either: a) in exchange
for money, or b) in a public place or within public view.
C. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.
D. When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in section 5-18-11 of this chapter, the enforcement officer revokes a license, the revocation
shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation becomes
effective, provided that, if the conditions of subsection 5-18-11B of this chapter are met, a provisional license will be granted pursuant to that section. If,
subsequent to revocation, the enforcement officer finds that the basis for the revocation found in subsections B1 and B4 of this section has been
corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
(Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-11: HEARING; LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION; APPEAL; JUDICIAL REVIEW:
A. If the enforcement officer determines that facts exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license under this chapter, the enforcement officer shall
notify the applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of the intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license, including the grounds therefor, by personal
delivery, or by certified mail. The notification shall be directed to the most current business address on file with the enforcement officer. Within five (5)
working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide to the mayor and city council in writing a response that shall include a statement of
reasons why the license or permit should not be denied, suspended, or revoked. Within three (3) days of the receipt of respondent's written response,
the mayor shall notify respondent in writing of the hearing date on respondent's denial, suspension, or revocation proceeding.
Within ten (10) working days of the receipt of respondent's written response, the mayor and city council shall conduct a hearing at which respondent
shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf. If a response is not received by the
mayor and city council in the time stated or, if after the hearing the city council finds that grounds as specified in this chapter exist for denial,
suspension, or revocation, then such denial, suspension, or revocation shall become final five (5) days after the mayor sends, by certified mail, written
notice that the license has been denied, suspended, or revoked. Such notice shall include a statement advising the applicant or licensee of the right to
appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
If the city council finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license, then within five (5) days after the hearing, the mayor
shall withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and shall so notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action and shall
contemporaneously therewith issue the license.
B. When a decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license becomes final, the applicant or licensee (aggrieved party) whose application for a license has
been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal such action by filing a petition for judicial review with the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 115/410
district court for Canyon County, Idaho, following the procedures set out in rule 84 of the Idaho rules of civil procedure. Upon the filing of any court
action to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the city shall immediately issue
the aggrieved party a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the aggrieved party to continue operation of the sexually oriented business
or to continue employment as a sexually oriented business employee and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the aggrieved party's
action to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-12: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address designated in the application. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-13: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to ensure that there does not develop a pattern of adult businesses which, by their location or concentration,
would have a deleterious effect on the peace, safety and economy of the surrounding neighborhood.
B. Location: No adult store, adult theater, or business operating an adult arcade machine may be located:
1. Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any school or park; or
2. Within five hundred feet (500') of any existing adult store, adult theater, or business operating an adult arcade machine.
3. Within those areas of the city designated residential or within one thousand feet (1,000') of the boundaries of such areas or within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the boundaries of those areas of the county designated residential.
4. Within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the right of way for Interstate 80N or any state highway.
C. Exception: An adult business may be allowed to locate in the areas prohibited above upon receiving approval from the city council. Such approval shall
be given only after:
1. It is determined by the city that the adult business shall retain at least one-third (1/3) of the above stated separation from any school, park, residential
area, interstate or state highway;
2. A public hearing had been held, after notice of said hearing has been published in the official city newspaper and actual written notice of the hearing
has been given to those businesses and residents within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed business site and notice to the individual
business and residents shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing and shall state the purpose, time and date and location of said
hearing. All city costs of the public hearing shall be borne by the applicant; and
3. A finding by the city council that the proposed location will not:
a. Materially interfere with activities of nearby parks, schools, churches or residential districts;
b. Create an undue concentration of adult businesses;
c. Materially interfere with the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
d. Create an undue burden in controlling and policing the illegal activities in the vicinity;
e. Create a nuisance to the community;
f. Adversely affect the health and safety and welfare of the residents of the city of Nampa; or
g. Have a deleterious impact on adjacent residents or businesses.
D. Proper Zoning: Any adult store, adult theater or business operating an adult arcade machine must be located only where proper zoning exists. (Ord.
1598, 10-16-1978; amd. Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-14: REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS, VIDEOS OR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT
IN VIEWING ROOMS:
A. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing
room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction which depicts
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof
specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should
be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6"). The city may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts
a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
2. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 116/410
3. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city.
4. It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all
times that any patron is present inside the premises.
5. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If
the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is
an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's
stations. The view required in this subsection A5 must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
6. It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in subsection A5 of this section remains unobstructed by any doors,
curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of
the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection A1 of this
section.
7. No viewing booth may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
8. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access
at an illumination of not less than five (5.0) foot-candles as measured at the floor level.
9. It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the
premises.
10. No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing booths.
11. No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths.
12. The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist.
13. The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
14. The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily
cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within forty eight inches (48") of the floor.
B. A person having a duty under subsections A1 through A14 of this section commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. (Ord. 3392, 10-
18-2004)
5-18-15: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ESCORT AGENCIES:
A. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
B. A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord.
3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-16: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING PUBLIC NUDITY:
A. It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appears in a state of nudity or engages in
specified sexual activities.
B. It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly or intentionally in a sexually oriented business appears in a seminude condition unless the
person is an employee who, while seminude, shall be at least ten feet (10') from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet (2') from the
floor.
C. It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while seminude in a sexually oriented business, to receive directly any pay or gratuity from any patron or
customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity directly to any employee, while said employee is seminude in a sexually oriented
business.
D. It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while seminude, to knowingly and intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer. (Ord. 3392,
10-18-2004)
5-18-17: PROHIBITION AGAINST CHILDREN IN A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS:
A person commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of eighteen (18) years on the premises of a sexually oriented
business. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-18: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. on weekdays and Saturdays, and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 117/410
5-18-19: EXEMPTIONS:
A. It is a defense to prosecution under section 5-18-16 of this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
1. By a proprietary school, licensed by the state of Idaho; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
2. By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
3. In a structure:
a. Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
b. Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll in the class; and
c. Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-20: INJUNCTION:
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of section 5-18-12 of this chapter is
subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Such violations shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to three
hundred dollars ($300.00) and/or six (6) months' incarceration. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a separate offense or violation. (Ord.
3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-21: LICENSE APPLICATION:
A. All owners of sexually oriented businesses existing on the date of publication of the ordinance codified herein and their employees shall have thirty (30)
days from the date of publication of the ordinance codified herein to file their licensing applications with the planning and development services
department of the city of Nampa. Owners and employees of sexually oriented businesses in existence on the date of publication of the ordinance
codified herein shall, upon application, be issued temporary licenses and permitted to continue operation of and employment by said sexually oriented
businesses while their license applications are pending final decision by the enforcement officer in accordance with subsection 5-18-5A of this chapter.
B. All owners and employees of new sexually oriented businesses that are not in existence on the date of publication of the ordinance codified herein shall
not conduct business without a license issued by the enforcement officer. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-22: PROHIBITION AGAINST WARNING DEVICES AND OTHER MECHANISMS:
Warning devices and other mechanisms used to alert anyone within a sexually oriented business to the presence of law enforcement, or used to permit
operation of a sexually oriented business in violation of this code and then quickly restore lighting, configuration, or any other part of a sexually oriented
business to permissible standards under this chapter, are prohibited in all sexually oriented businesses including adult motels. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-23: OFF STREET PARKING; MONITORING OF ACTIVITIES; VIDEO SURVEILLANCE:
It shall be the duty of an operator of a sexually oriented business to designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of persons in any off street
parking under the control of the operator. Such employees shall visually inspect the off street parking not less often than every thirty (30) minutes during
the hours of operation of the business, and for thirty (30) minutes after the close of business or until all patrons have left the parking area. In lieu of visual
inspection in person, the operator may install video cameras and monitors and regularly check the monitors, not less often than every thirty (30) minutes.
The video camera surveillance system shall be equipped with recording devices which shall record during hours of operation. The recording media must
be kept for thirty (30) days after recording and made available to law enforcement personnel upon request. All areas under video surveillance must be
signed with metal signs, using conspicuous lettering, informing persons in that area of the existence of the video surveillance. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-24: SEVERABILITY:
Each section and provision of this chapter are hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, notwithstanding any other evidence of
legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of said chapter, or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person or circumstances
other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such sections and provisions would have been
passed independently of such section or provision so known to be invalid. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-25: CONFLICTING ORDINANCES REPEALED:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
5-18-26: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval, and publication according to law, the rule requiring that an ordinance be
read on three (3) separate occasions having been dispensed with. (Ord. 3392, 10-18-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 118/410
Chapter 19
PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICE
5-19-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meaning given herein. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
APPLICANT: The person making application for a license or the renewal of a license for a:
A. Private patrol agent; or
B. Private security agent; or
C. Private patrol or private security service or system or employee or potential employee thereof; or
D. Private detective or private investigator service or employee or potential employee thereof; or
E. Private detective or private investigator; or
F. Security alarm installer; or
G. Security alarm installation service or employee or potential employee thereof.
LICENSING OFFICER: The Nampa city clerk.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association or joint stock association.
PRIVATE DETECTIVE OR PRIVATE INVESTIGATOR: A. Any person or service, except collection agencies and credit reporting agencies, that, for
consideration or otherwise, engages in business or accepts employment to conduct any investigation for the purpose of obtaining information with
reference to:
1. Crime, wrongful acts, or threats against the United States or any state or territory of the United States;
2. The identity, reputation, character, habits, conduct, business occupation, honesty, integrity, credibility, knowledge, trustworthiness, efficiency,
loyalty, activity, movements, whereabouts, affiliations, associations, or transactions of any person or group of persons;
3. The credibility of witnesses or other persons;
4. The whereabouts of missing persons or owners of abandoned property;
5. The causes and origin of, or responsibility for a fire, libel, slander, a loss, an accident, damage, or an injury to real or personal property;
6. The business of securing evidence to be used before investigating committees or boards of award or arbitration or in the trial of civil or criminal
cases and the trial preparation;
7. The prevention, detection, and removal of installed devices for eavesdropping or observation;
8. The business of "skip tracing" persons who have become delinquent in their lawful debts, either when hired by an individual, collection agency, or
through the direct purchase of the debt from a financial institution or entity owning the debt or judgment; or
9. Serving civil process;
or any employee of a private investigator or private detective service or any person who performs individually the functions of a private investigator
or private detective.
B. "Private detective or private investigator" does not include:
1. Any person or employee conducting an investigation on the person's or employee's own behalf or on behalf of the employer if the employer is not
a private investigator under this chapter; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 119/410
2. An employee of an attorney licensed to practice law in this state.
PRIVATE PATROL AGENT: Any person employed by a private patrol service or system or who performs individually the functions of a private patrol
service or system.
PRIVATE PATROL SERVICE OR SYSTEM: Any service or system which purports to furnish, or does furnish, for a consideration or otherwise, any
watchman or guard, either uniformed or otherwise, to patrol any district in the city or to guard or watch any property, or which employs any person to
perform any type of duty to guard, protect or maintain peace and order at any public function, dance hall, theater, tavern or lounge, or any other place of
public amusement or entertainment open to and frequented by the general public.
PRIVATE SECURITY AGENT: Any person employed by a private security service or system or who performs individually the functions of a private security
service or system.
PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICE OR SYSTEM: Any service or system which purports to furnish, or does furnish, for a consideration or otherwise, any
watchman or guard, either uniformed or otherwise, to guard or watch any property.
SECURITY ALARM INSTALLATION SERVICE: Any service or system which purports to furnish, or does furnish, for a consideration or otherwise, any
installation, servicing, or monitoring of any type of security, burglar, or fire alarm protection system.
SECURITY ALARM INSTALLER: Any person employed by the service or who performs individually the functions of a security alarm installation service.
(Ord. 4022, 6-4-2012)
5-19-2: LICENSES REQUIRED AND EXEMPTIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate or maintain, or permit to be conducted, operated or maintained, or to participate in the conduct,
operation, maintenance or monitoring of, a private patrol system or service, private patrol agent service, private security service or system, private
security agent service, private investigator or private detective service, or security alarm installation service unless a valid license therefor has been
issued as provided for in this chapter and which is in full force and effect.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate or maintain, or permit to be conducted, operated or maintained, or to participate in the conduct,
operation, maintenance or monitoring of, a private patrol system or service, private patrol agent service, private security service or system, private
security agent service, private investigator or private detective service, or security alarm installation service unless each employee thereof has been
issued a valid license as provided for in this chapter and which is in full force and effect.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to act or to offer to act, as a private patrol agent, private security agent, private investigator, private detective, or
security alarm installer, within the city unless a valid license has been issued to that individual agent, investigator, detective, or installer as provided for
in this chapter and which is in full force and effect.
D. It shall be unlawful for any private patrol or private security service or system, private investigator or private detective service or system, or security
alarm installation service to employ or hire employees until and unless said proposed employee has been duly licensed as required by this chapter.
E. This chapter shall not apply to or include regularly appointed police officers of Nampa city or to any regularly appointed police officer or law enforcement
agent of the United States and of this state, or any political subdivision thereof while acting as their agent.
F. Any owner/operator of a validly licensed:
1. Private patrol or private security service or system may act as a private patrol agent or private security agent for their service or system,
2. Private detective or private investigator service may act as a private detective or private investigator for their service,
3. Security alarm installation service may act as a security alarm installer for their service or system,
without additional bond or fee and shall be issued a license accordingly, provided, that such owner/operator shall have complied with the
requirements of section 5-19-6 of this chapter and shall not be otherwise disqualified. (Ord. 4022, 6-4-2012)
5-19-3: UNIFORMS AND EMBLEMS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any private patrol agent, private security agent, private patrol or private security service or system or any employee thereof,
private investigator or private detective service or any employee thereof, private investigator, private detective, security alarm installer, security alarm
installation service or any employee thereof, to use or authorize the use of:
1. Any uniform, clothing, uniform emblems or shoulder patches having a color, design and/or shape such as makes any of them individually, or some or
all of them in the aggregate, appear indistinguishable from any uniform, uniform emblems and/or shoulder patches of the Nampa police department.
B. Every private patrol agent, private security agent, private patrol or private security service or system or any employee thereof, private investigator or
private detective service or any employee thereof, private investigator or private detective, security alarm installer, security alarm installation service or
any employee thereof, prior to being licensed under this chapter, shall obtain from the Nampa police department its approval and authorization of any
color, design or shape of any uniform, clothing, uniform emblems, badges and/or shoulder patches, to be utilized by such licensee. Application for such
approval shall be made to the Nampa police department in writing in accordance with guidelines issued by the Nampa police department. Written
approval and authorization hereunder shall be attached to the application for license required by section 5-19-4 of this chapter and shall describe the
color, design and shape of the uniform, patches, badges and/or emblems, as the case may be.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 120/410
C. Every private patrol agent, private security agent, private patrol or private security service or system or any employee thereof, private investigator or
private detective service or any employee thereof, private investigator or private detective, security alarm installer, security alarm installation service or
any employee thereof, prior to being licensed under this chapter, shall submit color photographs of a size no less than three and one-half inches by
three and one-half inches (31/2" x 31/2") depicting the following:
1. A full figure view showing:
a. The entire uniform, front side facing without coat, as approved under subsection B of this section;
b. The entire uniform, left side facing without coat, as approved under subsection B of this section.
2. If a coat or other outer garment is to be worn at any time:
a. The entire uniform, front side facing with coat or garment, as approved under subsection B of this section;
b. The entire uniform, left side facing with coat or garment, as approved under subsection B of this section.
3. A close up view of each and every badge, patch, or emblem to be worn by a private patrol agent, of sufficient clarity and detail to permit reading all
wording on the badge, patch, or emblem from the photograph.
These photographs shall be filed with the application in the office of the licensing officer and shall be available to the Nampa police department upon
request.
D. Approval and authorization of uniform clothing, uniform emblems, badges, and/or patches shall be obtained from the Nampa police department before
the addition, deletion, or change of any previously approved and authorized item, or every three (3) years, whichever comes first.
E. Every private patrol agent, private security agent, private patrol or private security service or system or any employee thereof, private investigator or
private detective service or any employee thereof, private investigator, private detective, security alarm installer, security alarm installation service or
any employee thereof, licensed and operating within the corporate city limits of the city of Nampa as of September 7, 2010, shall be granted
grandfather rights in the use of only the uniform, patches, badge, and emblems previously approved; and shall have until January 1, 2011, to meet the
guidelines set forth herein by the Nampa police department. (Ord. 4022, 6-4-2012)
5-19-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for such license shall be made to the city clerk in such form and manner as he or she may prescribe. An applicant shall be required to be
fingerprinted by an appropriate agency to be designated by the city clerk on a biennial basis. The cost of taking and processing such fingerprints shall be
borne by the applicant. The city clerk is authorized to perform or request criminal history checks of any applicant including a national background check by
the federal bureau of investigation. Pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-3008, the city clerk may forward an applicant's fingerprints through the Idaho state
police to the federal bureau of investigation identification bureau for a national background check. Unless otherwise provided by law, criminal history
records shall not be disseminated to a private entity. Such application shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following information:
A. The name and address of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names and addresses of each partner, and if a corporation or association, the names
and addresses of the principal stockholders, and the name of the operating manager of the business;
B. Whether the applicant has had a similar license revoked by the city of Nampa or any other city of this state or of the United States or any state of the
United States within the past five (5) years;
C. Whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor, other than minor traffic violations, the nature of the offense, and the date, and
the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
At the time of filing an application, an application fee shall be paid to the licensing officer pursuant to fee schedule in section 5-19-9 of this chapter.
(Ord. 4022, 6-4-2012)
5-19-5: QUALIFICATIONS:
No person shall be issued a license who:
A. Is not over eighteen (18) years of age.
B. Has been, within five (5) years prior to the date of making application for such license, convicted of, paid any fine, placed on probation or is currently on
probation or parole, received a deferred sentence, received a withheld judgment, sentenced to confinement (including options in lieu of confinement),
or suffered the forfeiture of a bond for a felony involving the use of threat of violence against another, or any felony involving the sexual enticement of
minors.
C. Has been, within five (5) years prior to the date of making application for such license, convicted of, paid any fine, placed on probation or is currently on
probation or parole, received a deferred sentence, received a withheld judgment, or sentenced to confinement (including options in lieu of
confinement), or suffered the forfeiture of a bond for any misdemeanor, involving:
1. Driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) and/or drugs or reckless driving;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 121/410
2. The use of force against the person or property of another;
3. The threat of force against the persons of another;
4. Theft or larceny;
5. Stalking, telephone harassment, or violations of protection orders or no contact orders;
6. The use, possession or sale of illicit drugs or possession of paraphernalia;
7. Contributing to the delinquency of a minor;
8. Possession of a concealed weapon; or
9. Illicit sexual activity.
D. Has an outstanding warrant at the time of such application.
E. Has had a similar license revoked by the city or any other city of this state or of the United States within the preceding five (5) years.
F. Fails or refuses to provide the information or fingerprints requested during the investigative portion. (Ord. 4022, 6-4-2012)
5-19-6: INVESTIGATION:
Upon receipt of an application for any license under this chapter, the application shall be referred to the Nampa police department which shall conduct an
investigation to determine the suitability of the applicant to be licensed. The investigation shall require an applicant to provide information and fingerprints
necessary to obtain criminal history information from the Idaho state police and the federal bureau of investigation pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-3008
and congressional enactment public law 92544. The Nampa police department shall submit a set of fingerprints obtained from the applicant and the
required fees to the Idaho state police bureau of criminal identification for a criminal records check of state and national databases. The submission of
fingerprints and information required by this section shall be on forms prescribed by the Idaho state police. The Nampa police department is authorized to
receive criminal history information from the Idaho state police and from the federal bureau of investigation for the purpose of evaluating the fitness of an
applicant for licensure. As required by state and federal law, further dissemination or other use of the criminal history information is prohibited. The
applicant shall pay, in advance, the fees required by the Idaho state police bureau of criminal identification for the criminal records check. (Ord. 4022, 6-4-
2012)
5-19-7: STANDARDS:
The Nampa police department shall approve the issuance of a license provided in section 5-19-4 of this chapter whenever it shall find that the applicant
has complied with the provisions of this chapter and is otherwise qualified. Such approval shall be communicated to the licensing officer for finalization of
the application and issuance of the license. (Ord. 4022, 6-4-2012)
5-19-8: BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Before any license shall be issued to any applicant:
A. The applicant shall be required to provide the licensing officer a fiduciary bond running to the city of Nampa in the sum of:
1. Private patrol or private security service, private investigator or private detective service, or security alarm installation service, ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00);
2. Private patrol agent, private security agent, private investigator, private detective, or security alarm installer, two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
B. The applicant shall carry general and personal liability insurance for bodily injury, sickness, disease or death sustained by persons and arising out of
assault, battery, false imprisonment, false arrest, malicious prosecution, abuse of process, libel, slander, misrepresentation, deceit, or interference with
property and contract rights. The minimum limits for such insurance shall be five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). Said policy shall be issued
by an insurance carrier duly authorized to do business in the state of Idaho and a certificate of insurance shall accompany each application, specifying
as the certificate holder the city of Nampa, 411 3rd Street South, Nampa, ID 83651. (Ord. 4022, 6-4-2012)
5-19-9: LICENSE FEES:
The licensing officer shall collect, before the acceptance of an application for a license under this chapter, the annual license fee in an amount established
by the Nampa city council and listed on the most current city clerk license fee schedule. (Ord. 4022, 6-4-2012)
5-19-10: LICENSE; EXPIRATION:
All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each year. All licensees holding licenses issued under the
provisions of this chapter must renew such license for the following year by paying the licensing officer the annual license fee required by this chapter on
or before the expiration date. (Ord. 4022, 6-4-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 122/410
5-19-11: LICENSE; FORM:
The license issued to an applicant shall be in the form of a card which shall contain the words "private patrol or security agent", "private detective or
investigator", or "security alarm installer", and shall also bear numerals designating the year in which such license is in force and effect. (Ord. 4022, 6-4-
2012)
5-19-12: UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wear or display any license required or provided for by this chapter unless such person is duly licensed therefor. (Ord.
4022, 6-4-2012)
5-19-13: LICENSES; AUTHORITY:
The granting or issuance of any license under the provisions of this chapter shall not be construed in any manner as granting or providing any additional or
further power of arrest than that granted under the provisions of the statutes of the state, and the provisions of this code, nor shall the provisions of this
chapter be construed in any manner as authority or power to carry weapons contrary to the statutes of the state. (Ord. 4022, 6-4-2012)
5-19-14: SEVERANCE CLAUSE:
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. If any section be found to be invalid, such finding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter, but they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that this chapter shall stand
notwithstanding the invalidity of any part. (Ord. 4022, 6-4-2012)
5-19-15: APPEAL OF LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION:
A. If an enforcement officer determines that facts exist for the denial, suspension, or revocation of a license under this chapter, the licensing officer shall
notify the applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of the intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license, including the grounds therefor, by personal
delivery, or by certified mail. The notification shall be directed to the most current business address on file with the licensing officer. Within five (5)
working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide to the licensing officer, in writing, a response that shall include a statement of
reasons why the license should not be denied, suspended, or revoked. Within three (3) days of the receipt of respondent's written response, the
licensing officer shall notify respondent, in writing, of the hearing date on respondent's denial, suspension, or revocation proceeding.
Within ten (10) working days of the receipt of respondent's written response, the mayor and city council shall conduct a hearing at which respondent
shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and present evidence and witnesses on respondent's behalf. If a response is not received by
the licensing officer within the time stated, or if, after the hearing, the city council finds that grounds as specified in this chapter exist for denial,
suspension, or revocation, then such denial, suspension, or revocation shall become final five (5) days after the licensing officer sends, by certified
mail, written notice that the license has been denied, suspended, or revoked.
If the city council finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license then, within five (5) days after the hearing, the licensing
officer shall withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and shall so notify the respondent, in writing, by certified mail of such action
and shall, contemporaneously therewith, issue the license. (Ord. 4022, 6-4-2012)
5-19-16: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 4022, 6-4-2012)
Chapter 20
USED PRECIOUS METAL JEWELRY AND GEM DEALERS
5-20-1: DEFINITIONS:
ESTABLISHED DEALER: Any jewelry dealer conducting business at a fixed location within the city of Nampa on a permanent basis. "Permanent" shall
mean thirty (30) consecutive days or more.
GEMS: Precious and semiprecious stones customarily used in jewelry and any item containing such stones.
ITINERANT DEALER: Any used precious metal jewelry dealer engaged in any temporary or transient business conducted in a shop, room, motel room or
other premises rented for less than thirty (30) consecutive days or used on a temporary basis.
PRECIOUS METAL: Any uncommon and highly valuable metal characterized by superior resistance to corrosion and oxidation, including gold, silver and
the platinum group metals, i.e., platinum, palladium, rhodium, iridium, ruthenium, and osmium.
PRECIOUS METAL JEWELRY: Any item composed in whole or in part of gold, silver or platinum, including, but not limited to: jewelry, watches, flatware
and hollow ware. The term precious metal jewelry shall not include any coin (except where the coin is incorporated into a piece of jewelry) or any ingot or
bar made from precious metal.
PURCHASE: The acquisition of previously owned precious metal jewelry or gems for a consideration of cash, goods or other precious metal jewelry or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 123/410
gems. Except as specified in section 5-20-3 of this chapter, trade ins shall be covered by the provisions of this chapter.
USED PRECIOUS METAL JEWELRY DEALER: Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation who buys previously owned precious metal jewelry or gems
from the general public with the intent to obtain a monetary profit for himself or for a principal. (Ord. 4153, 11-17-2014)
5-20-2: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be applicable to the principals of any entity performing any activity regulated by this chapter and to their agents and employees and to
persons forming a partnership, corporation, or limited liability company for the purpose of engaging in any activity subject to regulation by this chapter.
Every dealer regulated hereunder shall be liable for all the penalties provided herein for violation of any provision of this chapter, whether such violation be
committed by himself or his agent, clerk or employee. (Ord. 4153, 11-17-2014)
5-20-3: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to:
A. Licensed pawnbrokers.
B. Persons or transactions associated with bona fide trade shows or conventions where all transactions of purchase, sale or exchange are made in
connection with such trade shows or conventions and within the confines of the trade show or convention site.
C. Purchases of precious metal jewelry or gems directly from manufacturers or wholesalers for retail or wholesale inventories or from other dealers
provided that the selling dealer has complied with the provisions of this chapter.
D. Purchases of precious metal jewelry or gems from a duly qualified fiduciary who, in the administration of an estate or trust, is disposing of the assets of
the estate or trust.
E. Acceptance by a retail merchant or dealer of trade in merchandise previously sold by such retail merchant or dealer to the person presenting that
merchandise for trade in. (Ord. 4153, 11-17-2014)
5-20-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to engage in the business of an itinerant or established used precious metal jewelry
dealer unless a valid license therefor has been issued as herein provided and said license is in full force and effect.
B. Application for a new license shall be made to the city clerk in such form and manner as he or she may prescribe. An applicant shall be required to be
fingerprinted by an appropriate agency to be designated by the city clerk. The cost of taking and processing such fingerprints shall be borne by the
applicant. The city clerk is authorized to perform or request criminal history checks of any applicant including a national background check by the
federal bureau of investigation. Pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-3008 the city clerk may forward an applicant's fingerprints through the Idaho state
police to the federal bureau of investigation identification division for a national background check.
Unless otherwise provided for by law, criminal history records shall not be disseminated to a private entity. Such application shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, the following information:
1. The name and address of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names and addresses of each partner, and if a corporation or association, the
names and addresses of the officers and principal stockholders owning more than fifty percent (50%) of the stock of the corporation, and if a limited
liability company, the names of all managers and principal members holding more than fifty percent (50%) of the membership interests in the limited
liability company, and the name of the operating manager of the business;
2. Whether the applicant is seeking a license to do business as an established or itinerant used precious metal jewelry dealer, the length of time for
which the right to do business is desired;
3. Whether the applicant has had a similar license revoked by the city of Nampa or any other city or of the United States or any state of the United
States within the past five (5) years;
4. Whether within five (5) years of the date of the application the applicant has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor, other than minor traffic
violations, the nature of the offense, and the date, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
C. Upon receipt of an application for a license, the city clerk shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant or applicants. Such investigation shall
be completed within thirty (30) days; provided, however, that investigation of an application by an itinerant used precious metal jewelry dealer shall be
completed within five (5) working days. A provisional license may be issued pending completion of the required investigation.
D. No person shall be issued a license to engage in the business of a used precious metal jewelry dealer if the person:
1. Is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
2. Is not the bona fide owner of such business;
3. Has had a similar license revoked by this city or any other city or of the United States or any other state of the United States within the five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 124/410
4. Has been convicted of any felony, or has been convicted of any other crime, whether felony or misdemeanor, involving moral turpitude within the five
(5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application;
5. Has misrepresented or made a false or fraudulent statement of material or relevant facts contained in the application;
6. Has engaged in a fraudulent transaction or enterprise; or
7. Is not registered to do business with the Idaho secretary of state. Out of state business entities must be registered as a foreign business entity and
shall have an Idaho registered agent as required by state law.
E. An affirmative showing with respect to the qualifications herein specified shall be required to be made with respect to each applicant and to each partner
of a partnership applicant and to each officer, director or member of the governing board of a corporation or association.
F. Upon completion of the investigation, the city clerk shall notify the applicant whether his application is approved and upon payment of the prescribed
license fee shall issue a license. Such license shall show the name and address of said licensee, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the
date of expiration.
G. The city clerk shall notify the applicant if his application is disapproved, the reasons therefor and advise him of the appeal procedure.
H. Licenses shall not be transferable, either as to person or place. The license issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business
named therein. (Ord. 4153, 11-17-2014)
5-20-5: LICENSE FEE:
The nonrefundable license fee for an established used precious metal jewelry dealer in an amount established by the Nampa city council and listed on the
most current city clerk license fee schedule shall be paid to the city clerk. The license to conduct the business of an established used precious metal
jewelry dealer shall expire on December 31 of each year. Renewal of the license and payment of the license fee shall be made on or before January 1 of
the year for which such renewal is desired.
The nonrefundable license fee for an itinerant used precious metal jewelry dealer in an amount established by the Nampa city council and listed on the
most current city clerk license fee schedule shall be paid to the city clerk. The license shall be issued only for the period specified in the application and
shall specify the date or dates upon which business may be conducted. (Ord. 4153, 11-17-2014)
5-20-6: INVESTIGATION:
Upon receipt of an application for any license under this chapter, the application shall be referred to the Nampa police department which shall conduct an
investigation to determine the suitability of the applicant to be licensed. The Nampa police department shall submit a set of fingerprints obtained from the
applicant and the required fees to the Idaho state police bureau of criminal identification for a criminal records check of state and national databases. The
submission of fingerprints and information required by this section shall be on forms prescribed by the Idaho state police. The Nampa police department is
authorized to receive criminal history information from the Idaho state police and from the federal bureau of investigation for the purpose of evaluating the
fitness of an applicant for licensure. As required by state and federal law, further dissemination or other use of the criminal history information is prohibited.
The applicant shall pay, in advance, the fees required by the Idaho state police bureau of criminal identification for the criminal records check. (Ord. 4153,
11-17-2014)
5-20-7: STANDARDS:
The Nampa city council shall approve the issuance of a license whenever it shall find that the applicant has complied with the provisions of this chapter
and is otherwise qualified. Such approval shall be communicated to the licensing officer for finalization of the application and issuance of the license. (Ord.
4153, 11-17-2014)
5-20-8: RECORDS:
A. Every used precious metal jewelry dealer shall keep a record of every previously owned or used precious metal jewelry purchased by him or her. Such
record shall provide the following information:
1. Name and address of the used precious metal jewelry dealer.
2. The name, age, sex, driver's license photocopy or photo identification number and state of issue, and street address of the person with whom the
transaction is conducted.
3. The date of the transaction, the article consigned or sold together with its description, serial number or other identification, and the amount and terms
of the transaction.
4. Signature for the transaction by both the used precious metal jewelry dealer and the seller or consignor.
The requirement for identification and recordkeeping will not apply to buyers of used precious metal jewelry.
B. Every record shall be executed by the used precious metal jewelry dealer at the time of purchase or sale, and the used precious metal jewelry dealer
shall compare the picture and signature upon the motor vehicle operator's license or state issued identification card with that upon the record.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 125/410
C. All records of purchase or sale shall be retained by the used precious metal jewelry dealer for a one year period and with probable cause shall be
subject to inspection by any member of the city of Nampa police department during normal hours of business.
D. Every used precious metal jewelry dealer having good cause to believe that any property in his possession has been previously lost or stolen shall
forthwith report such fact to the Nampa police department, together with the name of the owner, if known, and the date when and the name of the
person from whom the property was received. (Ord. 4153, 11-17-2014)
5-20-9: GOODS TO BE RETAINED FOR FIVE CALENDAR DAYS:
The used precious metal jewelry dealer shall retain all used precious metal jewelry or gems purchased for a minimum of five (5) calendar days from the
date of purchase. Until the expiration of this period, the dealer shall not sell, alter or dispose of a purchased item in whole or in part, or remove it from the
city of Nampa. All articles required to be held under this section shall be open to and made available for inspection by any Nampa police officer during
normal business hours. (Ord. 4153, 11-17-2014)
5-20-10: VIOLATIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any itinerant or established used precious metal jewelry dealer and any clerk, agent or employee of a used precious metal
jewelry dealer to:
1. Acquire, by purchase, trade, exchange or otherwise, used precious metal jewelry bearing evidence of a serial number which has been tampered with
or scratched or obliterated or melted or mutilated in any manner, unless such person immediately contacts the Nampa police department.
2. Accept, buy or exchange any used precious metal jewelry prior to examining the identifying credentials of the person selling or exchanging said
items.
3. Fail to maintain the record required under section 5-20-8 of this chapter or fail to maintain such record as to any item of which record is required to
be maintained under section 5-20-8 of this chapter or fail to make an entry of any material matter in the record of any transaction.
4. Make any false entry in the record required by section 5-20-8 of this chapter.
5. Obliterate or destroy the record required by section 5-20-8 of this chapter; provided, however, that such records may be destroyed at the expiration
of the one year retention period prescribed in section 5-20-8 of this chapter.
6. Report any material matter falsely to a law enforcement officer.
7. Acquire by purchase, trade, exchange or otherwise, any used precious metal jewelry from any person under eighteen (18) years of age, without the
express written consent of his or her parent or guardian or unless said minor is the head of a family.
8. Fail to report forthwith to the Nampa police department the receipt of any used precious metal jewelry which he has good cause to believe has been
lost or stolen, together with the name of the owner, if known, and the date when and the name of the person from whom the property was received.
9. Commit fraud, misrepresentation or make any false statement in the course of carrying on the business of a used precious metal jewelry dealer.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to use a false name, a fictitious address, or any address other than the true address, or to furnish any false, untrue or
misleading information or statement relating to the information required by section 5-20-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 4153, 11-17-2014)
5-20-11: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not
more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than thirty (30) days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 4153, 11-17-2014)
5-20-12: SEVERANCE CLAUSE:
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is declared invalid or
unconstitutional, such partial invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter but they shall
remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that this chapter shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part. (Ord. 4153, 11-17-2014)
5-20-13: NOTICE OF SUSPENSION, REVOCATION AND DENIAL AND APPEALS:
A. If an enforcement officer determines that facts exist for the denial, suspension, or revocation of a license under this chapter, the licensing officer shall
notify the applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of the intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license, including the grounds therefor, by personal
delivery, or by certified mail. The notification shall be directed to the most current business address on file with the licensing officer. Within five (5)
working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide to the licensing officer, in writing, a response that shall include a statement of
reasons why the license should not be denied, suspended, or revoked. Within three (3) days of the receipt of respondent's written response, the
licensing officer shall notify respondent, in writing, of the hearing date on respondent's denial, suspension, or revocation proceeding.
B. Within ten (10) working days of the receipt of respondent's written response, the mayor and city council shall conduct a hearing at which respondent
shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and present evidence and witnesses on respondent's behalf. If a response is not received by
the licensing officer within the time stated, or if, after the hearing, the city council finds that grounds as specified in this chapter exist for denial,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 126/410
suspension, or revocation, then such denial, suspension, or revocation shall become final five (5) days after the licensing officer sends, by certified
mail, written notice that the license has been denied, suspended, or revoked.
C. If the mayor and city council find that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license then, within five (5) days after the hearing, the
licensing officer shall withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and shall so notify the respondent, in writing, by certified mail of such
action and shall, contemporaneously therewith, issue the license. (Ord. 4153, 11-17-2014)
Title 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
6-1-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to engage in disorderly conduct within the City limits of Nampa. Every person is guilty of disorderly conduct when he:
A. Solicits anyone to engage in, or engages in, lewd or dissolute conduct in any public place or in any place open to the public or exposed to public view;
or
B. Accosts other persons in any public place or in any place open to the public for the purpose of begging or soliciting alms; or
C. Loiters in, about or upon any street, alley or other public way or public place, or in any place open to the public, without permission or invitation by the
owner or the lawful occupants thereof, without lawful and legitimate business with the property owner or occupant thereof, creating or maintaining a
hazardous or physically offensive condition detrimental to normal business done by the property owner or occupant thereof; or
D. Conducts himself in a lewd, wanton or lascivious manner in speech or behavior in any street, alley or other public way or public place, or in any place
open to the public; or
E. Has in possession any instrument, tool or other implement for picking locks or pockets or any implement that is usually employed or that reasonably
may be inferred to have been designed to be employed in the commission of any felony, misdemeanor or the violation of any ordinance, and who fails
to account for the possession of same; or
F. Occupies, lodges or sleeps in any building, structure or place, whether public or private, or any automobile, truck, railroad car or other similar vehicles or
equipment without the permission of the owner or person entitled to the possession or in control thereof; or
G. Loiters, prowls or wanders upon the private property of another, without visible or lawful business with the owner or occupants thereof; or
H. Loiters or remains, without a legitimate reason, in or about a school, not having any reason or relationship involving custody of or responsibility for a
student. (Ord. 4345, 11-6-2017)
6-1-2: WORM GATHERING:
No person shall place or attempt to place an electric probe or similar device for the purpose of collecting worms or night crawlers within a cemetery, park
or upon any property belonging to the City of Nampa. Any violation of this provision shall be an infraction. (Ord. 4165, 3-2-2015)
6-1-3: OPEN CONTAINER:
No person shall consume any beer, wine or liquor, or have in his possession any opened container or receptacle, containing any beer, wine or liquor on
any public park grounds, or thoroughfares within the City, or at any other place therein, other than a private residence or upon premises licensed for the
sale and consumption of beer, wine or liquor, or upon premises where beer, wine or liquor is sold by a licensee under an Idaho liquor catering permit, as
authorized by the law. Any violation of this provision shall be an infraction. (Ord. 4165, 3-2-2015)
6-1-4: DISCHARGING FIREARMS, FLIPPERS OR SIMILAR DEVICES:
Any person, not a police officer, discharging any firearm, air gun, sparrow gun, flipper, bow and arrow, or other similar contrivance in the City, except by
permission of the Chief of Police or for self-defense, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 4144, 9-15-2014)
6-1-5: METAL DETECTING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 127/410
Metal detecting within a cemetery or upon a golf course is prohibited and no person shall use or attempt to use a metal detector or similar device within a
cemetery or upon a golf course.
No person shall use or attempt to use a metal detector or similar device in a park unless that person has a current permit for metal detecting issued by the
Nampa Department of Parks and Recreation. There shall be no fee charged for such permit. Any violation of this provision shall be an infraction. (Ord.
4165, 3-2-2015)
Chapter 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, each of the terms defined has the meaning given in this section unless a different meaning is clearly required by the context. The
word "shall" is mandatory, not directory.
ABUSE: Any case in which an animal has been the victim of intentional or negligent conduct resulting in harm to the animal including the animal's bruising,
bleeding, malnutrition, dehydration, burns, fractures or breaks of any bones, subdural hematoma, soft tissue swelling or death.
ANIMAL: Any organism other than human beings needing food to maintain and sustain its life which generally has mobility and a developed central
nervous system.
ANIMAL CONTROL: The personnel within the City authorized to provide animal control enforcement services.
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner, and not under the immediate control of the owner, a member of his immediate family, or other responsible
person, either by leash, cord or chain.
CRUELTY: "Cruel" or "cruelty" shall mean any or all of the following:
A. The intentional and malicious infliction of pain, physical suffering, injury or death upon an animal;
B. To maliciously kill, maim, wound, torment, deprive of necessary sustenance, drink or shelter, cruelly beat, mutilate or cruelly kill an animal;
C. To subject an animal to needless suffering or inflict unnecessary cruelty;
D. To knowingly abandon an animal;
E. To negligently confine an animal in unsanitary conditions or to negligently house an animal in inadequate facilities; to negligently fail to provide
sustenance, water or shelter to an animal.
DOG: Shall include both male and female domestic canines, whether neutered or spayed.
DOMESTICATED ANIMAL: An animal of a species of vertebrates that has been domesticated by humans so as to live and breed in a tame condition and
depend on humankind for survival.
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming or causing containment suitable to prevent the entry of young children and
non-owner adults, and suitable to confine an animal in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner such as tethering of the animal.
Such enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal from
escaping.
IMPOUNDED: Taken into the custody of law enforcement or animal control personnel.
LICENSING AUTHORITY: The City of Nampa and its designated agents, including those entities and veterinarians authorized to issue licenses.
LIVESTOCK: Domesticated animals raised in an agricultural setting to produce commodities such as food, fiber, and labor.
MISUSE: The intentional causing of an animal to perform a noncustomary task which could be dangerous or harmful to the animal.
NUISANCE: Any animal which molests passerby, or chases vehicles, or attacks other domestic animal(s), or trespasses upon public or private property in
such a manner as to damage the property.
NUISANCE NOISE: Any animal which commits excessive, continuous, or untimely barking or noise.
OWNER: Any person keeping, harboring, possessing, providing care for or having any custodial duties over any animal.
SERVICE ANIMAL: Dog(s) that are individually trained to do work or perform tasks for people with disabilities. The tasks performed by the dog must be
directly related to the person's disability, per the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements.
SIGN: Any structure used to attract attention to any object, place, activity, person, animal, business which shall display or include any letter, word, insignia,
device or representation used as, or which is in the nature of an announcement, direction or advertisement. For the purposes of this chapter the sign shall
be constructed of wood, metal or other similar weatherproof material, at least twenty four inches by twenty four inches (24" x 24") in size, with letters in
indelible or fluorescent ink with the words in clear, capital letters as follows: "VICIOUS ANIMAL ON PREMISES", "VICIOUS DOG ON PROPERTY", or
words of similar meaning; and shall be posted at all visible entryways onto the owner's property, or where dog is lodged.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 128/410
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any dog which, when not provoked, physically attacks, wounds, bites or otherwise injures any person who is not trespassing.
WILD ANIMAL: An animal living in a state of nature; not tamed or domesticated. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6-2-2: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
Any person who commits cruelty to an animal as defined in section 6-2-1 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. It is the duty of any police officer,
animal control officer, or other designated City employee to take possession of any animal for which he has probable cause to believe has been cruelly
treated under the terms of this chapter, and deliver such animal to an animal shelter or a veterinarian. All costs incurred for the maintenance of such
animal will be paid by the person charged with the offense. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6-2-3: COMMANDING AN ANIMAL TO ATTACK; PROHIBITED:
Except where great bodily harm or death is likely to immediately ensue, it is unlawful for any person to command, encourage or aid by word or conduct,
any animal to bite, chase, attack, or attempt to bite, chase or attack another person or animal. (Ord. 2110)
6-2-4: INTERFERING WITH ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER; UNLAWFUL:
Every person who willfully resists, delays or obstructs any animal control officer in the discharge or attempt to discharge, of any duty of his office or
knowingly gives a false report to any animal control officer is punishable according to section 6-2-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6-2-5: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF SECTIONS 6-2-3 AND 6-2-4:
A violation of section 6-2-3 or 6-2-4 of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. Regardless of the form of judgment, the court shall impose not less than a ten
(10) day jail sentence. (Ord. 4035, 9-4-2012)
6-2-6: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
A. Definition: Any dog which, when not provoked, physically attacks, wounds, bites or otherwise injures any person who is not trespassing. It shall be
unlawful for the owner of any dog which has been declared vicious, or for the owner of any premises on which the dog that has been declared vicious
is present, to harbor a vicious dog outside of a secure enclosure. Persons guilty of a violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Exceptions:
1. Notwithstanding this definition, no animal may be declared vicious if an injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time such injury or
damage was sustained, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal, or was teasing,
tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. No animal may be declared vicious if the animal
was protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the animal from an unjustified attack or assault.
2. Working dogs including, but not limited to, guard dogs, police dogs and stock dogs, are exempt from this classification while performing their
specified duties. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6-2-7: DETERMINATION OF VICIOUS ANIMAL:
A. Power To Seize And Impound Animal: In the event that an animal control officer or law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that any
animal is a threat or may pose a threat of serious harm to human beings, the animal control officer or law enforcement officer may seize and impound
the animal pending a determination hearing to determine if the animal should be declared a vicious animal. The owner of the animal shall be liable to
the animal shelter for the costs and expenses of impoundment of such animal.
B. Initial Hearing: The Chief of Police or his designee shall be empowered to convene a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the animal
in question should be declared vicious. The animal control officer or Chief of Police shall conduct or cause to be conducted an investigation and notify
the owner of the animal that a hearing will be held, at which time he may have the opportunity to present evidence why the animal should not be
declared vicious.
1. Hearing: The hearing shall be held promptly within no less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) days after service of notice upon the owner of the
animal. The hearing shall be informal and open to the public.
2. Determination: After the hearing, the owner of the animal shall be notified in writing of the determination. If a determination is made that the animal is
vicious, the hearing panel shall determine whether the animal is capable of meeting the requirements in section 6-2-8 of this chapter, or whether it
shall be destroyed.
3. Compliance With Decision: The owner shall comply with the decision of the hearing panel and provisions of this chapter in accordance with a time
schedule established by the Chief of Police or his designee. In any case, compliance must be achieved in less than fifteen (15) days subsequent to
the date of the postmark on the written notification of determination if the same is mailed to the owner, or the date of the determination if the owner is
present at the hearing and provided with the written notification of determination on the day of the hearing. If an owner fails to comply with the
decision of the hearing panel within the fifteen (15) days, or fails to appeal the decision within five (5) days, then the animal shall be destroyed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 129/410
4. Appeal: The owner may appeal the hearing panel's determination by filing with the Nampa City Clerk either a written appeal of the determination or a
written petition not to destroy within five (5) days subsequent to the date of the postmark of the written notification of determination if the same is
mailed to the owner, or the date of the determination if the owner is present at the hearing and provided with the written notification of determination
at the hearing. The appeal may request that the Nampa City Council conduct its own hearing on whether or not the animal should be declared
vicious, and the conditions to be imposed. At the time of the filing of the appeal or petition, the Nampa City Clerk shall notify the animal control officer
for the City of Nampa, and further proceedings shall be stayed pending the hearing by the Nampa City Council. The victim or their legal guardian
may also appeal a decision of "not vicious" to the Nampa City Council. The timeline for the victim or legal guardian to file an appeal is the same as
that of the owner or claimant.
C. City Council Appeal Hearing: The Nampa City Council shall conduct a hearing and make its own determination as to whether the animal should be
determined vicious and whether the animal is capable of licensing and registration in accordance with section 6-2-8 of this chapter. The hearing shall
be conducted within thirty (30) days of the filing of the appeal or petition with the Nampa City Clerk. If the Nampa City Council determines the animal to
be vicious according to the definitions and provisions within this chapter and the facts presented, the Nampa City Council may establish a time
schedule to ensure compliance with this chapter, but in no case shall remedial action occur more than thirty (30) days subsequent to the date of the
Nampa City Council's determination.
1. The Nampa City Council may decide all issues for or against the owner of the animal regardless of the fact that said owner fails to appear at said
hearing.
2. The determination of the Nampa City Council shall be final and conclusive upon all parties. However, the animal control officer or any law
enforcement officer shall have the right to declare an animal to be vicious for any subsequent actions of the animal.
3. The animal shall remain impounded pending the appeal in an animal shelter at the owner's expense. During the appeal process and not when
contrary to public safety, the Chief of Police or his designees shall permit the animal to be confined at the owner's expense in a department approved
commercial kennel or veterinary facility.
D. Final Disposition: If the final disposition of the animal is for it to be released to the owner, written notice of the release will be delivered to the
impounding facility and the owner will be notified that the animal can now be retrieved from the impounding facility. The owner will have five (5) days
from the time of the notification of release to pay all the costs and fees associated with the animal's stay at the impounding facility and remove the
animal from the facility. If the owner fails to pay the costs and fees and remove their animal from the impounding facility before the expiration of the
five-day period, the owner will lose all rights and responsibilities to the animal and the final disposition of the animal will be decided by the impounding
authority. In addition, the owner or agent of the owner will not be granted adoption opportunities after final disposition. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6-2-8: REGISTRATION AND LICENSING OF VICIOUS ANIMALS:
A. Requirements: Any animal determined a vicious animal that is allowed the option of licensing and registration shall only be licensed and registered as
follows:
1. No vicious animal shall be licensed for any licensing period commencing after October 1, 1988, unless the owner or keeper of such vicious animal
meets the following requirements:
a. The owner shall present to the licensing authority, proof that the owner or keeper has procured liability insurance in the amount of not less than
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) covering any damage or injury which may be caused by such vicious animal during the twelve (12)
month period for which licensing is sought. The policy shall contain a provision requiring the licensing authority, or other entity required by the
licensing authority, to be named as additional insured for the sole purpose of the licensing authority where such animal is licensed to be notified by
the insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of the liability insurance policy; and
b. The owner shall, at his own expense, have the licensing number assigned to such vicious animal, or such other identification number as the
licensing authority determines, recorded upon an electronic microchip, the type of which is standard in the veterinary community, and then
implanted within the vicious animal by a licensed veterinarian, or someone trained and licensed for the implantation of electronic microchips. The
electronic microchip shall be implanted within the vicious animal in a location that is standard within the industry for placement of such chips. The
identification number recorded on the microchip shall be the same number that is noted on the licensing files for such vicious animal, if that
number cannot be utilized, the number contained on the microchip shall be noted in the file of the vicious animal; and
c. The owner shall have and maintain an enclosure in conformance with section 6-2-1 of this chapter, for the vicious animal where the vicious animal
will be kept or maintained; and
d. The owner shall display a sign in conformance with section 6-2-1 of this chapter on his premises warning there is a vicious animal on the
premises. Said sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public highway; and
e. The owner shall sign a statement attesting that:
(1) The owner shall maintain and not voluntarily cancel the liability insurance required by this section during the twelve (12) month period for which
licensing is sought, unless the owner ceases to own or keep the vicious animal prior to expiration of such license;
(2) The owner shall, on or prior to the effective date of such license for which application is being made, have an enclosure for the vicious animal
on the property where the vicious animal will be kept or maintained;
(3) The owner shall notify the licensing authority and the animal control officer within twenty four (24) hours if a vicious animal is on the loose, is
unconfined, has attacked another animal or has attacked a human being, or has died or has been sold or given away. If the vicious animal has
been sold or given away the owner shall also provide the licensing authority with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of
the vicious animal; and
(4) The owner of the vicious animal will comply with all provisions of this chapter in keeping and maintaining the vicious animal.
B. Compliance: An animal control officer is empowered to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, and any such animal control officer is hereby empowered to seize and impound any vicious animal whose owner fails to comply with the
provisions hereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 130/410
In the event that the owner of the animal refuses to surrender the animal to the animal control officer, the animal control officer may obtain a search
warrant and seize the animal upon execution of the warrant. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6-2-9: CONTROL OF VICIOUS ANIMALS:
A. All vicious animals shall be confined in an enclosure except as otherwise permitted herein. It is unlawful for any owner to maintain a vicious animal upon
any premises which does not have a locked enclosure.
B. It is unlawful for any owner to allow any vicious animal to be outside of the dwelling of the owner or outside of the enclosure unless it is necessary for
the owner to obtain veterinary care for the vicious animal or to sell or give away the vicious animal or to comply with commands or directions of the
animal control officer with respect to the vicious animal, or to comply with the provisions of section 6-2-8 of this chapter. In such event, the vicious
animal shall be securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of three hundred (300) pounds and not exceeding
three feet (3') in length, and shall be under the direct control and supervision of the owner of the vicious animal. (Ord. 4035, 9-4-2012; amd. Ord. 4359,
2-5-2018)
6-2-10: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
A. Any animal determined to be a vicious animal, whose owner fails to comply with the provisions contained in sections 6-2-8 and 6-2-9 of this chapter
shall be confiscated by the animal control officer and following a hearing to determine noncompliance, said animal shall be destroyed in an expeditious
and humane manner. In addition, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. No fine and/or microchip requirement shall be suspended by any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6-2-11: PURPOSE OR INTENT; HARBORING:
No person shall own or harbor any animal for the purpose of animal fighting, or train, torment, badger, bait or use any animal for the purpose or causing or
encouraging said animal to unprovoked attacks upon a human being or a domestic animal. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6-2-12: DESTRUCTION OF OFFENDING VICIOUS ANIMALS:
If any vicious animal, which unprovoked, kills or wounds, attacks, assaults, bites or otherwise injures any human being or assists in attacking, assaulting,
biting or otherwise injuring any human being while out of or within the enclosure of the owner or keeper of such vicious animal, or while otherwise, on or off
the property of the owner whether or not such vicious animal was on a leash and securely muzzled or whether the vicious animal escaped without fault of
the owner or keeper, the owner or keeper of such animal shall be liable to the person aggrieved as aforesaid, for all damages sustained, to be recovered in
a civil action, with cost of suit. It is reputably presumed as a matter of law that the owning, keeping or harboring of a vicious animal in violation of this
chapter is a nuisance. It shall not be necessary, in order to sustain any such action, to prove that the owner of such vicious animal knew that such vicious
animal possessed the propensity to cause such damage or that the vicious animal had a vicious nature. Upon such attack or assault, the animal control
officer is empowered to confiscate and destroy such vicious animal, after review and permission is given by an administrative supervisor of animal control
immediately upon impounding the vicious animal, if the conduct of such vicious animal or its owner constituted a violation of the provisions of this chapter,
punishable by the confiscation and destruction of the animal. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6-2-13: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to K-9 or other animals owned by any Police Department or any law enforcement officer which are used in
the performance of law enforcement work. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6-2-14: UNIFORM SUMMONS; PROSECUTION; FINE SCHEDULE:
A. Citation:
1. Violations: Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punished as set forth in Idaho Code section 18-113, as
amended, or in accordance with any more specific section(s) of this chapter.
2. Idaho Uniform Citation: The Idaho uniform citation shall be used by the animal control officer, or peace officer in the enforcement of this chapter.
B. Fine Schedule: Unless otherwise stated within this chapter, the fine schedule for a dog, for no license and/or rabies shot, for failure to confine a canine
in heat, and/or for failure to confine a canine shall be a minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus court costs for a first offense. The fine schedule for a
second offense within five (5) years shall be a minimum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). The fine schedule for a third, and any subsequent offense,
shall be a minimum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). These fines may be paid to the court or as provided by rule 14 of the Misdemeanor Criminal
Rules. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6-2-15: LIABILITY OF PARENTS:
In the event that the owner of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor is liable for all injuries, property damage, fines and impoundment
fees caused or incurred by said animal. (Ord. 2110; amd. Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 131/410
6-2-16: DOGS; SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Training And Exercise Grounds: The Council may designate such areas of the public park or other public grounds of the City which may be used,
subject to the rules and regulations as may be prescribed, for the training or exercise of dogs. Dogs within such areas so designated need not be
controlled by leash, but shall be under the control of a responsible person and controlled by whistle, voice, or other effective command.
B. Running At Large Prohibited: Any person who owns, harbors, keeps, claims, or possesses an animal, whether the animal is licensed or not, which
animal if found at large upon the streets or alleys of the City, or in any public place in the City or upon any other premises without the consent of the
person in possession of such premises, is responsible for such animal being at large and in violation of this section; except:
1. When such animal is controlled by a leash not exceeding eight feet (8') in length; or
2. Such animal is confined in a motor vehicle; or
3. When written permission is obtained in advance from the City to have a dog or dogs at large; or
4. When such animal is within a designated "training and exercise ground" and is properly controlled as set forth in subsection A of this section; or
5. When such animal is under the immediate control of a responsible person and immediately responsive to that person's command; however
6. Animals within a "park" as defined in section 9-5-1 of this Code shall be subject to the restrictions set forth in section 9-5-9 of this Code.
C. Dogs In Pre-Estrus State: It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, or possessor of a female canine in the pre-estrus state (in heat) to fail, neglect, or
refuse to confine such animal indoors in a type of kennel preventing nuisance or undesired fertilization by male canines unless restrained by a leash
not exceeding eight feet (8') in length, and under the immediate control of the owner, keeper, or possessor (e.g., in their accompaniment if off the
property). (Ord. 4075, 11-4-2013; amd. Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
D. Penalties: Any person who pleads guilty to, or is found guilty of, a violation of the provisions of subsection B, "Running At Large Prohibited", of this
section, shall be guilty of an infraction. Any person who pleads guilty to, or is found guilty of, a third or subsequent violation of the provisions of
subsection B, "Running At Large Prohibited", of this section, within a period of three (3) years of the first conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for
each offense.
Any person who pleads guilty to, or is found guilty of, a violation of the provisions of any other provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
for each offense. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6-2-17: ANIMALS AT LARGE:
It is unlawful for any animal(s), owned, kept, or possessed by an individual, to be at large upon the streets, alleys or other public places of the City, or upon
the property of any person without the consent of the owner. Waterfowl in City parks are exempt from this section. Apprehension of animals including
domestic pets (except cats), agricultural animals as pets, agricultural animals, or exotic animals as defined in section 10-1-2, "Definitions", of this Code,
running at large shall be made the duty of the animal control officer or any other game or peace officer of the City or participating municipalities to take up
and confine the same in an animal shelter or livestock yard.
An animal shall not be considered at large if it is on public property, property of its owner, keeper, or harborer, so long as such animal is confined to a
chain, leash, or other lead which is of sufficient strength to hold the animal, secured within a fence, or under the control of a responsible person and
obedient to that person's command. Animals in "parks" as defined in section 9-5-1 of this Code shall be subject to the restrictions set forth in section 9-5-9
of this Code. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6-2-18: PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND ASSISTANCE DOGS:
A. It is unlawful for any person to permit, allow, keep or carry any animal in, upon or within a public transportation facility, or any other public building or
facility, particularly a building or facility in which food or drink is prepared or stored, except that a disabled person shall not be denied the use of any
common carrier or public transportation facility or admittance to any other public building or place within the City by reason of his being accompanied
by a seeing eye, assistance, or guide dog specially trained for such a purpose. It is the intent of this chapter to permit and authorize a disabled person
to have a seeing eye, assistance, or guide dog with him in such places and while using such facilities without being required to pay any additional
charges for the dog, but such disabled person is liable for any damage or disturbances caused by such dog.
B. It is unlawful for any person to permit, allow, keep or carry any animal in, upon or within a public transportation facility, or any other public building or
facility, particularly a building or facility in which food or drink is prepared or stored, except a certified assistance dog trainer shall not be denied the use
of such facilities if accompanied by a seeing eye, guide, or assistance dog in training. Such dog shall be properly leashed at all times so that the trainer
may at all times maintain control of the dog. Access to public places shall be denied for seeing eye, guide, or assistance dogs in training if the dog is
poorly groomed so as to create a health hazard or the person accompanying the dog cannot maintain control of the dog. The person accompanying the
seeing eye, guide, or assistance dog in training shall be liable for any damages or injuries caused by the dog. (Ord. 4035, 9-4-2012; amd. Ord. 4359, 2-
5-2018)
6-2-19: DRIVING OR RIDING ANIMALS:
No person shall lead, drive or ride any horse, pig, sheep, goat, mule, cattle or other animal over, across or upon any street, alley or public ground within
the City limits except upon roadways, trails, or areas designated for such use. (Ord. 2110; amd. Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 132/410
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
6-2-20: LICENSING:
A. Canine License Required; Application:
1. Licenses:
a. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor, keep or possess a canine more than six (6) months of age within the City of
Nampa without first procuring a license therefor, as provided by this section.
b. Exception: The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person visiting the City of Nampa for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days.
c. Term Of License: Canine licenses may be purchased for a one year or three (3) year period. All canine licenses shall begin on the date when
issued and shall remain in effect until either one or three (3) years following payment of the appropriate license fee or the date the current rabies
vaccination expires, whichever comes first. (Ord. 4076, 11-4-2013; amd. Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
d. License; Application; Fees: All dogs shall be licensed as set forth in this section. Canine licenses may be purchased for a one year or three (3)
year period. All canine licenses shall begin on the date when issued and shall remain in effect until either one or three (3) years following payment
of the appropriate license fee or the date the current rabies vaccination expires, whichever comes first. Licenses shall be issued by the City of
Nampa for either one year or three (3) years effective from the date of issue. The owner or person having charge of any canine within the City shall
make application for such license and pay a license fee according to the schedule adopted by the City. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
(1) Upon receipt of such application and payment of fees, the person issuing the license shall issue a receipt designating the owner's name and
the number of the license, the sex (or status of spayed or neutered) of the dog and the amount paid by him together with a metal tag bearing the
number corresponding to the number on the receipt. No dog will be licensed as spayed or neutered without proof that such surgery was
performed. If a license is lost, the animal shelter director or other designated agent shall, upon application and payment of two dollars fifty cents
($2.50), issue a duplicate license. Licenses for the following year may be purchased within ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date. If a dog
is licensed as a male or female, and is spayed or neutered within the licensing period, the licensing authority shall, upon presentation of a
veterinarian's statement of spaying or neutering, refund the difference in license fee. Each applicant for license shall certify on the application
form that the dog is currently vaccinated for rabies. (Ord. 4076, 11-4-2013; amd. Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
(2) License fees shall be waived for any trained service or guide dog that has been properly trained for the purpose of and is used to guide a blind
or partially blind person, a person with impaired hearing, or any other severely disabled person who requires a trained service or guide dog.
e. Proof Of Spay/Neuter And Rabies Vaccination Required: No canine will be licensed as spayed or neutered without proof that such surgery was
performed. No canine will be licensed without proof of current rabies vaccination.
f. Receipt, Tags; Duplicate License: Upon receipt of application for license and payment of fees, the person issuing the license shall issue a receipt
designating the owner's name and the number of the license, the sex (or status of spayed or neutered) of the canine and the amount paid by him
together with a metal tag bearing the number corresponding to the number of the receipt. If a license is lost, the designated agent, through the City
of Nampa, shall issue a duplicate license. Licenses for the following year may be purchased within ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date.
g. Trained Service Or Guide Canine Fees Waived: License fees shall be waived for any trained service or guide canine that has been properly
trained for the purpose of and is used by a disabled person who requires a service dog to provide specific tasks related to the person's disability.
h. Kennel License: It is unlawful to keep, maintain or possess upon the premises of any one dwelling unit more than two (2) dogs over the age of six
(6) months or potbellied pigs as described in section 10-21-3 of this Code, unless the owner or person in charge thereof obtains a kennel license
and any conditional use permit required according to the City of Nampa, Idaho, zoning ordinance. If a kennel license is issued, the holder shall pay
to the City an annual license fee established by Council resolution. Such kennel license shall only be permitted and issued in accordance with the
terms and provisions of this section as hereafter noted:
(1) Conditions: The permit shall be issued or renewed only if the department determines that the following conditions have been met:
(A) Rabies Vaccination: The animals are vaccinated for rabies and other common diseases;
(B) Safe Habitation: The animals are housed properly providing that the property may be inspected by animal control to determine if the animal's
habitation and living conditions are safe, healthy and do not present a nuisance;
(C) Running At Large: The animals have not been impounded more than twice at the shelter for running at large within the past calendar year.
Further, the following conditions shall be allowed by Nampa City Council:
(D) Duration Of Permit: The duration of the conditional use permit may be affixed to the ownership or possession of the animals by the applicant
such that the conditional use expires if the property where the animals are kept changes by way of ownership, rent or lease.
(E) Noticing: Notice of any public hearing required on any application for a kennel license shall be mailed to all surrounding property owners in a
three hundred foot (300') radius. If a kennel license is issued, the holder shall pay to the City an annual license fee established by Council
resolution. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
i. Imitation License Tags: It is unlawful for any person to allow any dog owned, kept or harbored by him to wear a license tag received on account of a
former licensee or to wear any imitation of the license tag issued for that year.
j. Collar; Tag: Every dog shall at all times wear a substantial, durable collar, to which is securely attached the required license tag.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 133/410
B. Nonsterilized Canine: It shall be unlawful to own, possess or keep in the City any dog over the age of six (6) months that has not been spayed or
neutered except as provided as follows:
1. Statement Of A Veterinarian: If a licensed veterinarian states in writing that an animal is unfit to undergo the required surgical procedure because of
an extreme health condition of the animal. Such extreme health condition shall include, but not be limited to: severe cardiovascular compromise,
bleeding disorder, respiratory disease and hepatic disease. The old age of an animal shall not, of itself, constitute an extreme health condition for
purposes of this section; or
2. Show Or Event: If an animal is temporarily in Nampa to participate in a show or event sponsored by a sanctioned animal organization; or
3. Imported Or Visiting Canine: If an animal is owned, possessed or kept in the City for fewer than thirty (30) days in a one year period; or
4. Public Service Or Guide Dog: The canine is a public service dog or guide dog; or
5. Kennel License: The owner or possessor has obtained a kennel license from the City of Nampa; or
6. Paid Fees: The owner or possessor of the canine has made payment of all necessary unaltered animal fees to the animal shelter. (Ord. 4076, 11-4-
2013; amd. Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
C. Penalty: Any violation of this provision shall be an infraction. Any person who pleads guilty to, or is found guilty of, a third or subsequent violation of this
provision within a period of one year of the first conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each offense. (Ord. 4165, 3-2-2015; amd. Ord. 4359, 2-
5-2018)
6-2-21: RABIES, DISEASES AND QUARANTINE:
A. Rabies Affliction: It is unlawful for a person other than a veterinarian, or the animal shelter to own, keep or harbor any animal afflicted with rabies.
B. Securing Disposition Of Animal: The Chief of Police, or his designee, the Animal Shelter Director, or the owner shall secure disposition of any animal
afflicted with rabies. (Ord. 2110; amd. Ord. 2334; Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
C. Quarantine, Surrendering Of Animal:
1. It is the duty of every owner of an unvaccinated animal showing symptoms of rabies, or which has bitten any person causing an abrasion of the skin,
to surrender the animal for confinement and isolation at the animal shelter or to a licensed veterinarian or a home quarantine at the discretion of
animal control or its designee for a period not less than ten (10) days. If such animal is determined free of rabies, it shall be returned to the owner
upon payment of the regular fee for keeping such animal impounded. If such fee is not paid the animal shall be subject to disposal as provided in this
chapter.
2. It is the duty of every owner of an animal, which has bitten any person causing an abrasion of the skin, to quarantine the animal at a location that will
provide confinement and isolation for a period not less than ten (10) days.
D. Contagious Disease Animals: Any animal, which has a contagious disease, shall not be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner of such
animal except under the supervision of the Animal Shelter Director. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6-2-22: RABIES INOCULATION:
It is unlawful to keep or harbor any dog over the age of six (6) months in the City unless such dog has been inoculated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian within the preceding three (3) years. No license shall be issued for any dog over the age of six (6) months unless the applicant for such
license presents a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian establishing that the canine will be immune from rabies for the license period. (Ord. 4359, 2-
5-2018)
6-2-23: NUISANCE ANIMAL:
A. First Violation: It is unlawful for any owner to fail to exercise proper care and control of his animal to prevent it from becoming a nuisance. An owner of
or person responsible for a nuisance animal will be guilty of a misdemeanor for a first violation of this section.
Every person shall be guilty of allowing an animal to become a nuisance when the following is allowed:
1. Molesting passersby, chasing vehicles;
2. Attacking another domestic animal; or
3. Trespassing upon public or private property in such a manner as to damage the property.
B. Second Violation: Any owner, or persons responsible, who plead guilty to or is found guilty of a second violation of nuisance, must meet the following
requirements:
1. The owner shall present to the licensing authority, proof that the owner or keeper has procured liability insurance in the amount of not less than one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) covering any damage or injury which may be caused by such nuisance animal during the twelve (12) month
period for which licensing is sought. The policy shall contain a provision requiring the licensing authority, or other entity required by the licensing
authority, to be named as additional insured for the sole purpose of the licensing authority where such animal is licensed to be notified by the
insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of the liability insurance policy; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 134/410
2. The owner shall, at his own expense, have the licensing number assigned to such nuisance animal, or such other identification number as the
licensing authority determines, recorded upon an electronic microchip, the type of which is standard in the veterinary community, and then implanted
within the nuisance animal by a licensed veterinarian, or someone trained and licensed for the implantation of electronic microchips. The electronic
microchip shall be implanted within the nuisance animal in a location that is standard within the industry for placement of such chips. The
identification number recorded on the microchip shall be the same number that is noted on the licensing files for such nuisance animal, if that number
cannot be utilized, the number contained on the microchip shall be noted in the file of the nuisance animal.
C. Third Violation: Any owner, or persons responsible, who plead guilty to or is found guilty of a third or subsequent violation of this provision must meet
the previous requirements in addition to the following requirements:
1. The owner shall have and maintain an enclosure (in conformance with section 6-2-1 of this chapter) for the nuisance animal where the nuisance
animal will be kept or maintained; and
2. The owner shall display a sign in conformance with section 6-2-1 of this chapter on his premises warning there is a nuisance animal on the
premises. Said sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public highway; and
3. The owner shall sign a statement attesting that:
a. The owner shall maintain and not voluntarily cancel the liability insurance required by this section during the twelve (12) month period for which
licensing is sought, unless the owner ceases to own or keep the nuisance animal prior to expiration of such license;
b. The owner shall, on or prior to the effective date of such license for which application is being made, have an enclosure for the nuisance animal on
the property where the nuisance animal will be kept or maintained;
c. The owner shall notify the licensing authority and the animal control officer within twenty four (24) hours if a nuisance animal is on the loose, is
unconfined, has attacked another animal or has attacked a human being, or has died or has been sold or given away. If the nuisance animal has
been sold or given away the owner shall also provide the licensing authority with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of
the nuisance animal; and
d. It is unlawful for any owner to allow any nuisance animal to be outside of the dwelling of the owner or outside of the enclosure unless the nuisance
animal is under the direct control and supervision of the owner of the nuisance animal or to sell or give away the nuisance animal or to comply with
commands or directions of the animal control officer with respect to the nuisance animal, or to comply with the provisions of section 6-2-8 of this
chapter. In such event, the nuisance animal shall be securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of three
hundred (300) pounds and not exceeding three feet (3') in length.
D. Owner Compliance: The owner of the nuisance animal will comply with all provisions of this chapter in keeping and maintaining the nuisance animal.
E. Compliance: An animal control officer is empowered to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, and any such animal control officer is hereby empowered to seize and impound any nuisance animal whose owner fails to comply with the
provisions hereof.
In the event that the owner of the animal refuses to surrender the animal to the animal control officer, the animal control officer may obtain a search
warrant and seize the animal upon execution of the warrant. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6-2-24: NUISANCE NOISE:
A person shall be guilty of allowing an animal to be a noise nuisance if the animal commits excessive, continuous, or untimely barking or noise. A violation
of this section shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6-2-25: REDEMPTION; IMPOUNDED ANIMAL:
Any animal, which is not a vicious animal, impounded because it was found running at large, or without a license, may be redeemed by the owner or
claimant prior to the sale or destruction of such animal, by paying all charges against the same (as noted in section 6-2-28 of this chapter). Additionally, if a
canine over six (6) months of age is impounded and has not been sterilized, the owner or claimant must pay additional fees at the animal shelter to claim it
as an unsterilized animal. If the owner or claimant requests the canine be transported to a veterinarian to be sterilized, then the claimant becomes
responsible for payment of sterilization costs incurred at that veterinarian facility. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6-2-26: FEES; IMPOUNDING:
The animal shelter is entitled to charge a fee for the keeping and selling of any animal, which fees shall be retained by the animal shelter as payment
toward the costs and expenses incurred in the keeping and selling of such animal. The fees which may be charged by the animal shelter for impounding,
sterilization, keeping and selling any animal, to be paid upon redemption or sale of such animal, shall be established by the animal shelter. (Ord. 4359, 2-
5-2018)
6-2-27: SALE; NOTICE:
At any time after any horse, mule, any kind of cattle, hog, or any stock animal has been impounded, the animal shelter shall give notice of sale by posting
a notice at the shelter, describing the animal impounded and notifying the owner to pay the charges thereon and remove same prior to the time fixed for
the sale thereof; and that, otherwise, the animal will be sold at a public sale at a time and place named in said notice, which time shall be not less than five
(5) days from the date of the posting of such notices. If no owner is known, the shelter must hold the animal for fifteen (15) days prior to selling it. (Ord.
4359, 2-5-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 135/410
6-2-28: IMPOUNDMENT:
A. A police officer, animal control officer, or any other person may seize and impound all dogs at large. All animals seized that are not returned to their
registered owner(s) must be immediately delivered to the animal shelter for impoundment.
B. The owner of any animal impounded may recover possession of such animal upon payment of all required fees. If the owner or representative of the
owner of any animal impounded fails to pay the required fees within twenty four (24) hours after actual notice to the owner or representative of the
owner, or within five (5) days after reasonable and diligent effort to notify the owner or representative of the owner, the animal shelter may dispose of
an animal either through adoption, provided the new owner pays the required fees, sending to another animal shelter or rescue, or through euthanasia.
(Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6-2-29: DISEASED ANIMALS; DESTRUCTION:
Any animal impounded and suffering from serious injury or disease, may be euthanized at the discretion of animal control, the animal shelter, or a licensed
veterinarian. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
6-2-30: TRAPS:
Animal control officers are authorized to place humane animal traps on public or private property upon request and permission of the owner. Such traps
shall be checked daily by the animal control officers or their designees. No person shall disturb or injure such trap or animal confined therein. (Ord. 4359,
2-5-2018)
6-2-31: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter for which a fixed penalty has not been designated is guilty of a misdemeanor which is punishable
as prescribed in title 1, chapter 1 of this Code. (Ord. 4359, 2-5-2018)
Chapter 3
MINORS
6-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is as follows:
A. To provide for and further the health, safety and welfare of the public.
B. To protect juveniles' health and welfare which include their care, guidance and control.
C. That parents, guardians and/or other persons having legal custody are responsible for providing for the physical custody, welfare and control of a child
and to determine where and with whom the child shall live, and to provide the child with care, education and discipline.
D. To reduce instances of juvenile nocturnal crime.
E. A child who is unaccompanied by an adult having custodial rights or an adult person designated by a person having custodial rights and who remains
upon public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, places, buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant
lots or other locations, unsupervised by such adult, having unlawful authority to be at such place during certain evening and early morning hours is at
greater risk for injury, becoming a victim of crime, being involved in criminal activity, being a danger to persons or property or otherwise being subject to
danger. (Ord. 2579)
6-3-2: JUVENILE VIOLATION OF CURFEW DECLARED UNLAWFUL:
A. Juvenile Under Sixteen Years Of Age: It is unlawful for any juvenile who is under sixteen (16) years of age to remain upon any street, highway, road,
alley, park, playground or other public places, or buildings or places of amusement, eating establishments, vacant lots and/or any other place, without
being accompanied by an adult having custodial rights or an adult person designated by an adult having custodial rights of said child between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day, provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the
instances noted in subsection D of this section.
B. Juvenile Sixteen To Eighteen Years Of Age: It is unlawful for any juvenile who is between sixteen (16) and eighteen (18) years of age, to remain upon
any street, highway, road, alley, park, playground or other public places, or buildings or places of amusement, eating establishments, vacant lots and/or
any other place, without being accompanied by an adult having custodial rights or an adult person designated by the adult having custodial rights of
said child during the weekdays, specifically Sunday through Thursday, between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of
the following day, provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the instances noted in subsection D of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 136/410
C. Friday And Saturday: It is unlawful for any juvenile who is between sixteen (16) and eighteen (18) years of age, to remain upon any street, highway,
road, alley, park, playground or other public places, or buildings or places of amusement, eating establishments, vacant lots and/or any other place,
without being accompanied by an adult having custodial rights or an adult person designated by the adult having custodial rights of said child during the
weekends, specifically Friday and Saturday, between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day,
provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the instances noted in subsection D of this section.
D. Exceptions: Subsections A through C of this section shall not apply in the following instances:
1. When the child is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of
such juvenile.
2. When the child is returning directly home from a school activity, school entertainment, school or recreational activity or school dance.
3. When the child is either going to or going from his or her place of residence to lawful employment and/or is working at the child's place of
employment.
4. When the child is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the lawful exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom
of assembly or free exercise of religion.
5. When the child is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel with interstate travel through the country. (Ord. 3821, 9-15-2008)
6-3-3: REGULATIONS OF MINORS:
It is unlawful for any person or persons under the age of eighteen (18) years living or found in the city to be or to remain a person who has run away from
his or her parents, guardian, or other legal custodian or who commits or has committed any act placing him beyond the control of his or her parents,
guardian, or other legal custodian. (Ord. 2579)
6-3-4: FAILURE TO SUPERVISE A CHILD:
A. Any person who is the parent, lawful guardian or other person, except a foster parent, lawfully charged with the care or custody of a child under sixteen
(16) years of age commits the offense of failure to supervise a child, if the child commits any of the following acts:
1. Commits an act bringing the child within the purview of the juvenile corrections act, chapter 5, title 20, Idaho Code, or commits a crime for which the
child is required to be tried as an adult, or for which jurisdiction under the juvenile corrections act is subject to waiver, pursuant to chapter 5, title 20,
Idaho Code; or
2. Fails to attend school or is not comparably instructed, as provided in section 33-202, Idaho Code; or
3. Violates the curfew law under subsection 6-3-2A of this chapter.
B. A person shall not be subject to prosecution under this section if the person demonstrates to the court upon appearance any of the following:
1. The person is the victim of the act bringing the child within the purview of the provisions of chapter 5, title 20, Idaho Code; or
2. The person reported the act of the child to the law enforcement agency, the juvenile court, the department of health and welfare, or other appropriate
agency; or
3. The person took reasonable steps to control the conduct of the child at the time the person is alleged to have failed to supervise the child.
C. When a child commits any of the acts set forth in subsection A of this section, the parent, lawful guardian or other person lawfully charged with the care
or custody of the child may be charged, by citation or summons, with the offense of failure to supervise a child. Upon a first offense, the person shall be
advised by an officer of the Nampa police department, in writing, of the contents of this chapter and the penalties for violation of this chapter.
Documentation of this service shall be recorded by the Nampa police department.
D. If the person pleads guilty or is found guilty to the offense of failure to supervise a child, the person shall be declared guilty of a misdemeanor and be
subject to the following penalty:
1. A fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). In lieu of the fine, the court, with consent of the person, may order the person to complete
parenting classes or undertake other treatment or counseling, as approved by the court, and upon the person's completion of the classes, treatment
or counseling to the satisfaction of the court, the court may discharge the person or if the person fails to complete the program to the satisfaction of
the court, the court may impose the penalty provided in this section.
2. The court may order the person to pay restitution or make whole any victim who suffers an economic loss as a result of the child's conduct in
accordance with the standards and requirements of sections 19-5304 and 19-5305, Idaho Code, provided that the restitution ordered to be paid shall
not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). (Ord. 2579; amd. Ord. 2677)
6-3-5: INFLUENCING MINORS:
It is unlawful for any person, by any act or neglect, to encourage, aid, or cause any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to come within the purview
of this chapter. (Ord. 2579)
6-3-6: VIOLATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 137/410
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a misdemeanor and punishable as a misdemeanor pursuant to Idaho Code section 18-113, as
amended, with the following qualifications:
A. Upon the second conviction of a parent, guardian or legal custodian for a violation of section 6-3-4 of this chapter, the parent, guardian or legal
custodian shall be fined no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) in conjunction with any period of incarceration, term of probation, or other sanction
or requirement as ordered by the court.
B. Upon conviction of a third violation of section 6-3-5 of this chapter by a parent, guardian or legal custodian, the convicted person shall pay a fine of no
less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) in conjunction with any period of incarceration, term of probation, or other sanction or requirement as ordered
by the court.
C. Each conviction thereafter shall be considered a separate offense punishable by no less than a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fine and no less than
one day in the Canyon County jail in conjunction with any term of probation, or other sanction or requirement ordered by the court.
D. Upon conviction, juveniles shall be punished in accordance with the terms of the juvenile correction act, title 20, chapter 5 of the Idaho Code, as
amended, and the other applicable rules and regulations pertaining to juvenile offenders in the state of Idaho. (Ord. 2579)
Chapter 4
SKATEBOARDS
6-4-1: DEFINITION:
The term "skateboard" is defined as a vehicle or toy usually consisting of a short oblong board with a pair of small wheels at each end, and usually ridden
in a standing position. (Ord. 2125; amd. Ord. 2177)
6-4-2: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of the city to place reasonable limits on the recreation of skateboarding in congested areas to protect the public and public improvements
from damage or liability occasioned as a result of the exercise of that recreational activity. (Ord. 2125; amd. Ord. 2177)
6-4-3: SKATEBOARDING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
The riding of skateboards by any person is prohibited upon certain public improvements within the delimitation area on a map which is incorporated herein
and made a part of this chapter. Those areas where skateboarding shall be prohibited include:
A. The area surrounding the Nampa city hall and civic center buildings including all entrances, approaches and sidewalks.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 138/410
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 139/410
B. That area in downtown Nampa, bounded by 10th Avenue South and 15th Avenue South between 4th Street South and Front Street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 140/410
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 141/410
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 142/410
C. The area surrounding the Nampa Recreation Center buildings including all entrances, approaches and sidewalks.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 143/410
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 144/410
D. The interior area of softball and/or baseball complexes within the city of Nampa parks system. (Ord. 3384, 10-4-2004)
6-4-4: PUBLICATION OF SKATEBOARD RESTRICTED MAP:
The city clerk shall cause the map referred to in section 6-4-3 of this chapter to be published in the official newspaper of the city. A copy of said map shall
be kept at all times in the office of the city clerk and at the law enforcement center for examination by any citizen. The map may be amended from time to
time by ordinance. (Ord. 2125; amd. Ord. 2177)
6-4-5: PENALTY:
A violation of any provision of this chapter, other than nonpayment of fees and charges, shall be an infraction. (Ord. 4027, 7-2-2012)
Chapter 5
BICYCLES
6-5-1: DEFINITION:
The term "bicycle" is defined as a vehicle consisting of a tubular metal frame mounted on two (2) large, wire spoked wheels, one behind the other, and
equipped with handlebars and a saddlelike seat. It is propelled by foot pedals or, sometimes, by a small gasoline motor. (Ord. 2362; amd. Ord. 2716)
6-5-2: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of the city to place reasonable limits on the use of bicycles in congested areas to protect the public and public improvements from injury
and/or damage. (Ord. 2362; amd. Ord. 2716)
6-5-3: BICYCLING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
The riding of bicycles by any person is prohibited in certain areas. Those areas where bicycling shall be prohibited include, except where there are
designated parking areas for bicycles:
A. All sidewalk, approaches and entrance areas surrounding the Nampa City Hall and civic center buildings. (Ord. 4017, 5-21-2012)
B. All sidewalk areas in downtown Nampa, bounded by 10th Avenue South and 15th Avenue South between 4th Street South and the centerline of Front
Street, excluding the sidewalk under and adjacent to 11th Avenue underpass from Front Street to 1st Street South.
1. Sidewalks located along the north side of Front Street and under and adjacent to the 11th Avenue underpass and the 16th Avenue bridge shall be
designated as multiuse pathways from 1st Street South to 2nd Street North. (Ord. 4024, 6-18-2012)
C. The interior area of softball and/or baseball complexes within the city of Nampa parks system.
D. All sidewalk, approaches and entrance areas surrounding the building at the Nampa Recreation Center.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 145/410
E. This provision shall not apply to the Nampa city police department on duty bicycle patrol.
F. The interior area within the Stampede Skatepark. (Ord. 4017, 5-21-2012)
G. All areas within and surrounding Library Square and its parking garage. (Ord. 4168, 4-6-2015)
6-5-4: PENALTY:
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be an infraction. (Ord. 4026, 7-2-2012)
Chapter 6
GRAFFITI
6-6-1: GRAFFITI PROHIBITED:
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and to be unlawful for any person to place or put, by any means, any drawing, inscription, figure, symbol, or mark or
any type commonly known as graffiti on any public or private property without the permission of the owner of the premises on which the surface is located,
or upon any natural surfaces such as rocks or trees, or any other surface whatsoever. Any violation of this provision shall be an infraction. (Ord. 4165, 3-2-
2015)
6-6-2: GRAFFITI REMOVAL REQUIRED:
Any person found to be in violation of section 6-6-1 of this chapter shall be required to remove or cause to be removed the graffiti from the surface on
which it was placed. Inasmuch as it is often not possible to determine the identity of the person who applied the graffiti, it shall be the duty of the owner or
person in control of the premises on which the graffiti has been applied to promptly remove the graffiti after notice as hereinafter set forth. If, after notice as
hereinafter provided, the graffiti nuisance is not abated, the city shall proceed to abate the graffiti nuisance and the costs of same shall be assessable
against the property. (Ord. 2363)
6-6-3: GRAFFITI NOTICE TO REMOVE:
A. Whenever the chief of police or his designated representative discovers graffiti on any public or private property or any surfaces visible to persons
utilizing public rights of way within the city, he shall, whenever seasonal temperatures permit the painting of exterior surfaces, cause a notice to be
issued to the owner or person in control of the premises to abate the nuisance and remove the graffiti or cover it with paint or other suitable substance.
B. Said notice shall be served upon the owner(s) of the affected premises, as shown on the last property tax assessment rolls of Canyon County, Idaho,
with a copy to the occupant of the premises. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice shall be served at the property address. Service of
the notice may be accomplished through personal service on the owner, occupant, or person in charge or control of the property or by certified mail.
C. Notice shall be in writing and shall clearly state that the owner or person in charge or control of the property is required by this chapter to remove from
public view or paint over the graffiti within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice; that failure to so abate will cause the city to abate the nuisance and
to assess the costs to the owner; that failure to pay said costs within thirty (30) days of receipt of billing shall result in an assessment against the
property, collectible with the property taxes; that the owner or person served may, within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice, deliver in writing to the
chief of police his objections to the removal requirement and request a hearing before the city council. (Ord. 2363)
6-6-4: CITY ABATEMENT OPTION:
Nuisances which remain unabated after notice, may, at the option of the city, be removed, abated or destroyed by the city or its agents, after the following
steps have been taken:
A. If after fifteen (15) calendar days from the date a written notice is personally delivered to the property owner, or mailed to the property owner's address
as shown in current official Canyon County assessor records, no abatement of the nuisance has occurred, the designated enforcement officer shall
provide a second ten (10) day notice to be delivered to the property owner by certified mail or personal service, which shall indicate the following:
1. That if the property owner fails to abate the nuisance, the city shall take steps to abate the same.
2. That the property owner may contract with the city to abate the nuisance and pay costs of the same.
3. That if the city abates the nuisance, all costs and expenses of abatement shall be billed and assessed against the property owner, and if unpaid,
shall become collectable as a special assessment with property taxes.
4. That the property owner has a right to appear before the city council to show cause as to why he or she should not be forced to abate or pay for
abatement of the nuisance; furthermore, that if the property owner desires such a hearing, a request for hearing, in writing, shall be given to the
designated enforcement officer prior to expiration of the ten (10) day notice, and that abatement by the city will proceed if the property owner has not
exercised this option to request a hearing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 146/410
5. If said certified notice is returned as undeliverable, or is unclaimed by the property owner, nothing shall preclude the city from exercising its
abatement option as specified herein.
B. When the ten (10) day notice has expired without a request for hearing, the mayor's designated enforcement officer is authorized to remove, abate or
destroy the nuisance. The designated enforcement officer is authorized to utilize city personnel to abate the nuisance or to contact the mayor or chief of
police in regard to contracting for an outside party to abate the nuisance.
C. If the city abates any nuisance under the provisions of this chapter, a statement of charges billed to the property owner shall be mailed or personally
delivered to the property owner.
D. If payment is not received from the property owner within thirty (30) days, the amount billed shall, in accordance with state law, be assessed as a
special assessment collectable against the subject property as other state, county and municipal taxes.
E. If the property owner requests a hearing to show cause before the city council, the hearing shall, if feasible, be placed on the agenda of the next
regularly scheduled city council meeting. The decision of the city council shall be final. A ten (10) day period shall be given the property owner after the
council decision so that the property owner shall have additional opportunity to abate the nuisance or to pursue any legal remedies or defenses at the
district court level. (Ord. 2363)
6-6-5: PENALTY:
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor as prescribed in section 1-1-7 of this code. (Ord. 2363)
Chapter 7
PUBLIC NOISE DISTURBANCE
6-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city. It is determined that sound can and does
constitute a hazard to the health, safety, welfare, and quality of life of residents of the city. The mayor and council, by way of Idaho Code section 50-308,
are empowered to impose reasonable limitations and regulations upon the production of sound to reduce the harmful effects thereof. Now, therefore, it is
hereafter the policy of this city to prevent and regulate sound generated by loud amplification devices wherever it is deemed to be harmful to the health,
safety, welfare, or quality of life of the residents of the city, and this chapter shall be liberally construed to effectuate that purpose. (Ord. 2415)
6-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CITY: Nampa city, Idaho, or the area within the city limits of Nampa city, Idaho.
COMMON AREA(S): The area of a facility, complex, apartment unit, hotel, motel or the like that are open either to the general public or persons with the
permission of the owner or agent of the owner of the area. This definition would include, but not be limited to, the following: swimming pools, restaurants,
patios, hot tubs, saunas, laundry rooms, meeting rooms, lobbies, lounges, bars, and other areas within the facility that are either constructed or designed
for use in this manner.
LOUD AMPLIFICATION DEVICE: Any equipment designed or used for sound production, reproduction, or amplification, including, but not limited to, any
radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument, stereo, tape player, compact disc player, loudspeaker, public address (PA) system, sound amplifier, or
comparable sound broadcasting device.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, or entity having legally recognized existence, whether public or private.
PLACE OF RESIDENCE: Any building or portion thereof adapted or used and intended for the overnight accommodation of persons. In the event the
building is used for multiple individual units (i.e., apartment, condominium, hotel, motel, duplex, triplex, etc.), each individual unit shall be considered a
separate residence for the purpose of this chapter.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE: Sound for which the information content is clearly communicated to the listener, including, but not limited to, understandable spoken
speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or normal, comprehensible musical rhythms, melody, or instrumentation, and the source of which is
identifiable to the listener. (Ord. 2415)
6-7-3: PUBLIC DISTURBANCE NOISE PROHIBITED:
Between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. one day and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. the next day, it shall be unlawful for any person, or business to
make, cause, or allow loud or offensive noise by means of voice, musical instrument, horn, radio, loudspeaker, automobile, machinery, other sound
amplifying equipment, or any other means which disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the
area. Loud or offensive noise is that which is plainly audible within any place of residence, business, hospital, farm property with animals, or restaurant
other than the source of the sound, or upon a public right of way or street at a distance of one hundred feet (100') or more from the source of such sound.
(Ord. 2415)
6-7-4: LOUD AMPLIFICATION DEVICES UPON OR WITHIN MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 147/410
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit the operation of any loud amplification device upon or within a motor vehicle in such a manner that
the sound therefrom is plainly audible upon a public right of way or street at a distance of fifty feet (50') or more from the source of the sound. (Ord. 2415)
6-7-5: EXCEPTIONS:
The following sounds are exempted from the provisions of this chapter:
A. Sounds caused by any emergency vehicle or personnel when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency.
B. Sounds caused by activities upon any municipal, school, religious, or publicly owned property or facility provided that such activities have been
authorized by the owner of such property or facility or its agent.
C. Sounds caused by parades, firework displays, or any other event for which a permit for that type of activity is required and has been obtained from the
authorized governmental entity within such hours as may be imposed as a condition for the issuance of said permit.
D. Sounds caused by locomotives or other railroad equipment.
E. Sounds caused by burglar alarms that are not in violation of this code.
F. Sounds caused by safety warning devices required by law.
G. Sounds caused by devices approved for use within the confines of the particular zoning designation that the device is located or pursuant to a
conditional use permit (i.e., drive-through window speakers, ice cream vendors, car lot PA systems).
H. Sounds emanating from devices used within the common areas of a multi-unit facility whose use has been approved by the owners or management of
the facility. Said use must be in compliance with any regulations imposed by the owners or management of the facility to be exempt under this chapter.
This exemption only applies in relation to other units within the same facility. (Ord. 4114, 4-21-2014)
I. Sounds caused by construction during the period prohibited by section 6-7-3 of this chapter pursuant to a special permit approved by the building
department or the city engineer. (Ord. 4150, 11-3-2014)
6-7-6: PENALTY:
A violation of any provision on this chapter shall be an infraction. Any person who pleads guilty to, or is found guilty of, a third or subsequent violation of
the provisions of this chapter within a period of one year of the first conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each offense. (Ord. 4165, 3-2-2015)
Chapter 8
INOPERATIVE, UNAUTHORIZED AND UNREGISTERED VEHICLES
6-8-1: PREVENTION OF VEHICULAR NUISANCES:
The streets of the city are available for use by persons for vehicular travel and may also be used for short term and long term parking of legally registered,
operating motor vehicles provided that the motor vehicles are parked in conformance with the provisions of this chapter and of the provisions set forth in
title 7, chapter 2, of this code. The use of the streets to park inoperative, unauthorized, or unregistered vehicles is inimical to the well being of the citizens
of the city and constitutes a public nuisance. The long term presence of inoperative, wrecked, partially dismantled, junked and unregistered vehicles on
private property in the residential districts is also inimical to the well being of the citizens of the city. This chapter is intended to provide measures for
removal of such vehicles and motor vehicles from locations prohibited herein. (Ord. 2427)
6-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the certain definitions are as follows:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE OR OTHER PERSONAL PROPERTY: An automobile or personal property including any recreational vehicles, which
remains upon the street or other public property for a period of time longer than forty eight (48) hours, the owner of which cannot be located or the owner
refuses to remove the same.
STOLEN MOTOR VEHICLE: That vehicle which the police department has reasonable grounds to believe to be stolen.
UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE: Any truck camper not mounted on a truck, any snowmobile, boat, boat trailer, snowmobile trailer, or any trailer which is not
connected by means of a lawful hitch to an operating, lawfully registered motor vehicle or is not blocked from the view of neighboring properties and city
streets/alleys by means of privacy fencing or other screening that adheres to this code.
UNIDENTIFIED MOTOR VEHICLE OR OTHER PERSONAL PROPERTY: As used herein is hereby defined to be such motor vehicles or other personal
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 148/410
property including any recreational vehicles, where ownership thereof cannot be ascertained.
UNREGISTERED VEHICLE: Any vehicle which does not bear current annual Idaho license plate(s) or decals or is not currently registered in Idaho as
provided in chapter 4, title 49, Idaho Code, or is not currently registered in any other state.
WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PART THEREOF: Hereinafter called an inoperative motor vehicle, shall be defined as an
unsightly motor vehicle or a part or parts therefrom, which meets any one of the following qualifications:
A. It does not carry a current valid state registration and license plates.
B. It cannot be safely operated under its own power.
C. It is not in a fully enclosed structure.
D. Any vehicle which is visibly missing any part essential for movement, or on which such essential parts are broken or defective, including flat tires, foot
brakes, hand brakes, headlights, taillights, horn, muffler, rearview mirrors, windshield wipers or adequate fenders. (Ord. 3371, 8-2-2004)
6-8-3: UNLAWFUL TO PARK ON RIGHT OF WAY:
It is unlawful for any person to park any inoperative, unauthorized, wrecked, dismantled, abandoned, or unregistered vehicle as defined in this chapter on
the public right of way for any length of time; provided, however, that, upon notification to the police department that a motor vehicle has become disabled
while being operated, such vehicle may be lawfully parked against the curb area of a public right of way for a period not to exceed twenty four (24) hours
for effecting repairs or arranging for removal. No vehicles are to be parked beyond the curb line of a street (i.e., outside of the street's boundaries and thus
off the street) for any amount of time unless in designated driveways or parking lots. Vehicles parked on driveways shall be parked such that no portion of
a vehicle is overhanging (and thereby blocking) any portion of a public sidewalk or walkway. (Ord. 3371, 8-2-2004)
6-8-4: REMOVAL FROM PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
Any unregistered vehicle or any vehicle reported as stolen and not recovered found parked on any street or right of way in violation of this chapter may be
removed immediately by the police department. Any "inoperative vehicle" as defined in section 6-8-2 of this chapter may be removed in accordance with
procedures set forth in chapter 18, title 49, Idaho Code. (Ord. 2427)
6-8-5: UNLAWFUL TO LEAVE INOPERATIVE VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
Inasmuch as inoperative, wrecked, discarded, or partially dismantled vehicles may be detrimental to public health, safety and welfare due to broken glass,
standing water, accumulation of rusted parts and potential for breeding of vermin, no person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as
owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, inoperative, wrecked, junked, or discarded vehicle to remain on such
property longer than forty eight (48) hours; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building; a vehicle
on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or a vehicle
in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city; or to a vehicle under special permit as provided in
section 6-8-6 of this chapter.
A. Exemption: This section shall not apply to:
1. A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or
private property; or
2. A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler,
licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial
enterprise and properly screened from view as may be required by other provisions of this code.
B. Removal Within Forty Eight Hours: Any member of the police department or code enforcement division may order any inoperative motor vehicle,
vehicles or parts thereof removed within forty eight (48) hours in accordance with Idaho Code sections 49-1804 and 49-1806.
C. Notice Of Order: Notice of such order shall be placed upon said inoperative motor vehicle, vehicles or parts thereof. Copies of said notice shall be sent
via certified mail to any adult occupying the real estate on which the inoperative motor vehicle, vehicles or parts thereof are located and upon the owner
of the junk, if known. If no occupant of the real estate or owner of the inoperative vehicle, vehicles or parts thereof can be found, a notice affixed to any
building on the real estate shall constitute notice to the owner or occupant of the real estate and to the owner of the inoperative motor vehicle, vehicles
or parts thereof. If there is no building on the real estate said notice may be affixed elsewhere on the real estate.
D. Penalty: It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove a wrecked, inoperative motor vehicle, vehicles or parts
thereof or refuse to remove a wrecked, inoperative motor vehicle, vehicles or parts thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
E. Removal And Storage Charges: If said inoperative vehicle, vehicles or parts thereof are not removed within the time so fixed, the police department or
code enforcement division may cause said inoperative vehicle, vehicles or parts thereof to be removed and the actual costs of removal or tow in charge
and a storage charge of the actual cost per day for so long as the same is in the possession and custody of the city shall be charged to the owner. In
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 149/410
the event said inoperative vehicle, vehicles or parts thereof are not claimed by the lawful owner within thirty (30) days from the first date of possession
by the city official, then and in that event, the same shall be sold according to Idaho Code sections 49-1804 and 49-1806.
F. Property Currently Held: All unidentified, stolen, wrecked or abandoned motor vehicles or other personal property which now is in the possession of the
police department shall be subject to the actual costs of removal or tow in charge from the public place and a storage charge of the actual cost per day
for as long as the same is in the possession and custody of the city. (Ord. 3371, 8-2-2004)
6-8-6: SALVAGE PERMIT:
Upon application of any person for a special permit and the payment of a nonrefundable sum of seven dollars ($7.00), the city may cause a permit to be
issued to such applicant for salvage of parts from one vehicle for necessary repairs of an existing vehicle registered to that person. The permit will allow
the presence of two (2) inoperative vehicles on the property: one vehicle being used as salvage and one vehicle being repaired.
The length of time the permit can be issued will be determined by the following:
A. Salvage Permit For Thirty Days: If the conditions in subsection B of this section cannot be met, a thirty (30) day permit may be issued. At the end of the
thirty (30) day period, a city official may inspect the property and determine if the conditions for a six (6) month permit have been met. If those
conditions have not been met, forty eight (48) hour notice will be given to have the vehicles and property in compliance or removed from the premises.
If the inoperative vehicle or any parts remain on the premises after the forty eight (48) hour notice, the same shall be removed and the cost thereof
charged to the permittee. A city official may also deny a permit for a good cause, including, but not limited to, the applicant's failure to comply with the
requirements of this chapter. In no case will a permit be issued if it appears that the applicant is or may be maintaining a business on the property, nor
more than one permit may be issued to any property address.
B. Salvage Permit For Six Months: Vehicles and the property on which they reside must meet the following conditions before the salvage permit for six (6)
months can be issued:
1. Vehicles under salvage permit must be parked in compliance with general provisions and exceptions set forth in title 10, chapter 22 of this code, and
the appropriate zoning district parking requirements.
2. Vehicles under salvage permit are declared to require sight obstruction from public view and from adjoining properties. Such sight obstruction must
meet:
a. Current fence regulations in section 10-1-8, "Fences And Walls", of this code.
b. Plant selection considerations in this code.
c. Screening requirements in this code.
3. Vehicles and the respective property on which they are located, that are maintained in a manner deemed to be detrimental to public health, safety, or
welfare due to broken glass, standing water, accumulation of rusted parts or potential for breeding of vermin, will have their salvage permits revoked.
4. The above conditions must be maintained at all times or the permit will be revoked, and forty eight (48) hour notice given to have the vehicles and
property in compliance.
At the end of the six (6) month period, a city official may inspect the property. Upon demonstrating that significant progress has been made on the
repair or restoration of the vehicles under permit, up to three (3) further six (6) month renewals may be granted. At the end of a renewal period(s),
one or both vehicles must be in operating condition or removed, and all parts and waste removed from the property. Failure to demonstrate
significant progress will result in the permit being revoked and forty eight (48) hour notice is given to have the vehicles and property in compliance or
removed from the premises. If the inoperative vehicle or any parts remain on the premises after the forty eight (48) hour notice, the same shall be
removed and the cost thereof charged to the permittee.
A city official may also deny a permit for a good cause, including, but not limited to, the applicant's failure to comply with the requirements of this
chapter. In no case will a permit be issued if it appears that the applicant is or may be maintaining a business on the property, nor more than one
permit may be in force or issued to any property address in any twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 3371, 8-2-2004)
6-8-7: PENALTY:
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be an infraction. (Ord. 4165, 3-2-2015)
Chapter 9
PUBLIC FOUNTAINS
6-9-1: TRESPASSING IN PUBLIC FOUNTAINS PROHIBITED:
No person shall trespass in any public fountain of the city of Nampa, provided such fountain has a sign in or near said fountain indicating trespassing in
said fountain is prohibited. (Ord. 2651)
6-9-2: SIGNAGE:
The appropriate city officials are directed to install signs at public fountains indicating trespassing in said fountain is prohibited. (Ord. 2651)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 150/410
6-9-3: PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter shall be an infraction as defined in Idaho Code section 18-111, punishable by a penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars
($100.00) and for which no period of incarceration may be imposed. (Ord. 2651)
Chapter 10
FALSE BURGLAR ALARMS
6-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to reduce the number of false burglar and robbery alarms, thereby enhancing response time on other critical calls for
service. (Ord. 2944)
6-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
ALARM AGENT: Any person employed by an alarm business whose duties include the installation, maintenance, repair, service, response to, or
summoning of others to respond to an alarm system. When the alarm system is the sole responsibility of the user and no contractual agreements with
another company exist for the maintenance of alarm equipment, the user shall be considered the alarm agent for purposes of this chapter.
ALARM BUSINESS: The business of any individual, partnership, corporation and/or other entity involving the selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing of any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced,
moved or installed, any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility.
ALARM COMPANY DIRECTOR: Any person who receives an activation of an alarm system as provided by this chapter and then transmits the information
to the police department.
ALARM OFFICER: The chief of police of the city of Nampa or his designee.
ALARM SUBSCRIBER: Any person who purchases, leases, contracts for, or otherwise obtains an alarm system or contracts for the servicing or
maintenance of an alarm system.
ALARM SYSTEM: An assembly of equipment and devices arranged to send a signal to a remote receiving station to make known the occurrence of an
emergency situation such as, but not limited to, an attempted robbery, unauthorized intrusion, and/or a fire or medical problem requiring urgent attention,
all of which the police, fire, or other emergency department are expected to respond.
AUDIBLE ALARM: A device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry or presence on certain premises which generates an audible sound or signal
on such premises when it is activated.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: An alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a
prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of an emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
BANK ALARM: Any alarm at any bank or financial institution which automatically sends a signal indicating the existence of an emergency situation that the
alarm is designed to detect.
EMERGENCY SITUATION: Any condition for which the alarm was designed and installed, and which results in a response from police, fire, or other
emergency personnel.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal, message, transmittal, or communication which is activated from an alarm system and which is responded to by
personnel of the police, fire, or other emergency department for which no emergency situation existed or existed as determined by the responding
personnel.
PANIC ALARM: Any device designed for the use of elderly, disabled or handicapped persons to assist in the detection or occurrence of an attempted
robbery, unauthorized intrusion, and/or a fire or medical problem requiring urgent attention, all of which the police, fire, or other emergency department are
expected to respond.
SILENT ALARM: A device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry or presence on certain premises which, when it is activated, generates no
audible sound or signal on the premises, but transmits a signal directly to the police station. (Ord. 2944)
6-10-3: SILENCING ALARM SYSTEMS:
A. Upon notification by the alarm officer that an alarm system is activated, the alarm subscriber, or representative or the alarm agent of the alarm
subscriber, shall immediately proceed to silence the alarm.
B. The silencing of the alarm shall be completed by the alarm subscriber, alarm agent, alarm company operator, or their designees, within fifteen (15)
minutes after notification of activation when the alarm system is protecting a residential structure, or within thirty (30) minutes when the alarm system is
protecting a commercial or industrial structure. (Ord. 2944)
6-10-4: ALARM SYSTEMS MAINTENANCE:
A. Each alarm subscriber shall maintain each alarm system in good working order and provide the necessary service to prevent malfunctions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 151/410
B. It shall be unlawful for an alarm subscriber to allow, permit, or use an alarm system which is not in good working order, or has fallen into disrepair, or
has malfunctioned. (Ord. 2944)
6-10-5: PROHIBITION OF FALSE ALARM; PENALTIES; NUISANCE:
A. Use Of Alarm: No person, whether or not an alarm subscriber, shall maintain, operate, use or attempt to use an alarm system which generates more
than two (2) false alarms in a calendar year.
B. Public Nuisance: Any alarm system maintained, operated, used or attempted to be used in violation of this chapter may be deemed a public nuisance.
The city may institute an action to abate the nuisance and receive reimbursement for all costs attendant to responding to false alarms.
1. The city of Nampa shall reserve all rights and remedies provided for in Idaho Code sections 50-334, 52-202, and 52-205.
2. The city of Nampa shall further reserve all rights and remedies of collection pursuant of Idaho Code section 50-1008.
C. Penalty Fee Imposed: The city may impose a penalty fee for each and every false alarm violation after the first two (2) false alarms within the calendar
year pursuant to a schedule adopted by resolution of the city council.
D. Written Notice: Where the alarm system is deemed a violation or a public nuisance as provided in this section, the alarm officer shall provide the
offender or alarm subscriber written notice of violation informing the offender or alarm subscriber of the penalty imposed and/or the need to abate the
nuisance.
E. Right Of Review:
1. The alarm subscriber may request the alarm officer to review and reconsider the determination of public nuisance by submitting a written request to
the alarm officer within ten (10) days upon receipt of the notice of violation. Failure to submit a written request in compliance with this chapter is
deemed a waiver of any and all rights to appeal.
2. The alarm officer shall review the determination, and send the alarm subscriber his findings as to whether the alarm system is a violation or a public
nuisance in writing by certified mailing within fifteen (15) days.
F. Appeal: The alarm subscriber may request a hearing before the city council after filing a notice for hearing in writing to the city clerk no later than ten
(10) days after the date of the alarm officer's findings of violation or public nuisance. Any finding by the city council is appealable in accordance with
Idaho law. (Ord. 2944)
6-10-6: COMPLIANCE:
A. Any person or alarm subscriber who has notice of his/her alarm system being deemed a violation and/or a public nuisance shall be assessed a penalty
in accordance with subsection 6-10-5C of this chapter or shall abate the nuisance, whichever is prescribed in the notice.
B. An alarm subscriber who has notice of the penalty, or for any amount due in reimbursement, shall remit within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice
the amounts due to the city. (Ord. 2944)
6-10-7: PROHIBITED ALARM SYSTEMS:
No person shall use or operate an automatic dialing device or any device programmed to initiate and deliver a message or signal, except for a panic alarm,
to any telephone number belonging to the city. (Ord. 2944)
6-10-8: VIOLATIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful to operate or maintain any "alarm system" as defined in this chapter for any purpose other than reporting any emergency situation
such as, but not limited to, trespass, burglary, robbery, or other crimes involving potential serious bodily injury or death.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a public safety alarm for any purpose other than that for which it is installed, or for any purpose
other than detecting and reporting an emergency situation such as, but not limited to, trespass, burglary, robbery, or other permitted purpose.
C. It shall be unlawful for any alarm agent, alarm subscriber or other person to install, operate or use any "alarm system" as defined in this chapter which
malfunctions due to improper installation or operation and that results in the generation of false alarms. (Ord. 2944)
6-10-9: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter may be charged with an infraction. (Ord. 4165, 3-2-2015)
6-10-10: ENFORCEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 152/410
The conviction or punishment of any person for violation of the provisions of this chapter shall not release such person from paying any penalties, business
taxes, charges, fees, license fees or reimbursement for false alarms due and unpaid at the time of such conviction; nor shall payment of any fee or
reimbursement for false alarms prevent the criminal prosecution for violations for any of the provisions of this chapter. All remedies shall be cumulative and
the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by law. (Ord. 2944)
6-10-11: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. If any section is found to be invalid, such findings shall not affect the validity of the remaining
sections, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this chapter, but they shall remain in effect, as it is the intent of the city council that this chapter shall remain
in effect notwithstanding the invalidity of any part. (Ord. 2944)
Chapter 11
SALE OF METHAMPHETAMINE PRECURSOR DRUGS
6-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
METHAMPHETAMINE PRECURSOR DRUGS: A. A drug or product containing as its sole active ingredient ephedrine, pseudoephedrine,
phenylpropanolamine, or any of their salts, optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers; or
B. A combination drug or product containing as one of its active ingredients ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or any of their salts,
optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
C. This term does not include any compounds, mixtures, or preparations that are in liquid, liquid capsule, or gel capsule form.
OVER THE COUNTER SALES: A retail sale of a drug or product but does not include the sale of a drug or product pursuant to the terms of a valid
prescription.
RETAILER: Any person, corporation, partnership or other business entity conducting business within the incorporated limits of the city of Nampa who sells
or furnishes any over the counter drug product containing methamphetamine precursor drugs to any person who is the ultimate user or consumer of the
product. (Ord. 3501, 10-17-2005)
6-11-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. It shall be unlawful within the incorporated limits of the city of Nampa for any retailer or employee thereof to knowingly sell, transfer, or otherwise furnish
in a single transaction:
1. More than three (3) packages of any product that he or she knows to contain methamphetamine precursor drugs.
2. A methamphetamine precursor drug to a person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
B. The limits established in this section shall not apply to any quantity of methamphetamine precursor drugs dispensed pursuant to a valid prescription.
(Ord. 3501, 10-17-2005)
6-11-3: ACCESSIBILITY OF METHAMPHETAMINE PRECURSOR DRUGS:
A. A business establishment that offers for sale methamphetamine precursor drugs shall ensure that all packages of the drugs are displayed and offered
for sale only:
1. Behind a checkout counter where the public is not permitted; or
2. Inside a locked display case; and
3. All sales shall be conducted with an employee of the retailer and cannot be conducted by a self-service system. (Ord. 3501, 10-17-2005)
6-11-4: PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 3501, 10-17-2005)
6-11-5: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision or section of this chapter shall be held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such provision or section shall be considered
separately and apart from the remaining provisions or sections of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 3501, 10-17-2005)
Title 7
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 153/410
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
7-1-1: VISION CLEARANCE:
It is the responsibility of the property owner to maintain vegetation, fences and restrict obstructions on the public right-of-way between the roadway and the
property line, within the front yard areas or within the "vision clearance" areas as defined by section 10-1-2, "Definitions", of this Code in such a manner
that they do not create a traffic hazard, interfere with pedestrian traffic, obscure traffic control signs or create a vision sight problem. Any vegetation, fence
or obstruction which creates one of the above mentioned problems may be deemed a nuisance and may be subject to the enforcement provisions of
section 3-4-2, "Abatement Of Nuisances", of this Code.
Trees in the vision clearance area shall be trimmed at least nine feet (9') above the curb and/or sidewalk and at least fourteen feet (14') above the street to
provide clear visibility up to that height. Shrubs and site obscuring fences or walls in vision clearance areas shall not exceed two and one-half feet (21/2')
(i.e., 30 inches) in height above the curb line. (Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
7-1-2: TRAFFIC REGULATION MAPS; VIOLATION:
Traffic designations and regulations, including, but not limited to, speed zones and truck routes, are maintained on maps on file in the City Engineer's
Office. These maps may be amended by resolution of the Council upon recommendation of the Chief of Police and City Engineer. (Ord. 2129)
7-1-3: AUTHORITY AND PLACEMENT OF SIGNS:
The City Engineer is authorized to designate and maintain traffic control signs, signals, devices and marks when and as required under the traffic laws of
this Code and the State and may place and maintain additional traffic control devices as may be necessary to regulate, guide or warn traffic, provided
however, that no stop sign or signal light shall be placed at any location except upon the approval of the Council. (Ord. 2129)
7-1-4: SIGN SPECIFICATIONS:
All official traffic control signs, signals and devices erected throughout the City shall, so far as practicable, conform to the specifications approved by the
"Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways" published by the U.S. Department of Transportation. (Ord. 2129)
7-1-5: SHORT CUT USING PRIVATE DRIVEWAY:
It is unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to drive upon or use any private driveway, private property, or parking lot as a shortcut or public
thoroughfare. Any violation of this provision shall be an infraction. (Ord. 4165, 3-2-2015)
7-1-6: BARRICADES:
The Chief of Police has the authority, when he deems it necessary, to order certain streets and alleys in the City to be barricaded and closed to traffic; and
the Chief may cause temporary barricades to be constructed closing off certain streets. (Ord. 2129)
7-1-7: TRUCK ROUTES; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a truck or any commercial vehicle with or without a load within the City limits except upon those streets or parts of
streets designated as truck routes on a map on file in the City Engineer's Office and posted by signs. Any violation of this provision shall be an infraction.
(Ord. 4165, 3-2-2015)
7-1-8: U-TURNS PROHIBITED AT TRAFFIC LIGHTS:
It is unlawful for the driver or operator of any motor vehicle traveling in any direction upon the streets of the city to reverse or change the direction of said
vehicle by making what is commonly known as a "U-turn" at and/or on any intersection where there is a traffic light unless specifically authorized by the
Nampa city council and appropriate signage is installed. Any violation of this provision shall be an infraction. (Ord. 4165, 3-2-2015)
7-1-9: CARELESS DRIVING:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in a careless or inattentive manner or in disregard of the safety of persons or property.
Careless driving shall be considered a lesser offense than reckless driving and shall be applicable in those circumstances where the conduct of the
operator has been inattentive, careless or imprudent, in light of the circumstances then existing, rather than heedless or wanton, or in those cases where
the danger to persons or property by the motor vehicle operator's conduct is slight. Any violation of this provision shall be an infraction. (Ord. 4165, 3-2-
2015)
7-1-10: AIR COMPRESSION BRAKES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 154/410
A. Prohibited: The use of air compression brakes (also known as "jake brakes") by motor vehicles within the city limits of the city of Nampa is hereby
prohibited and shall be unlawful except under emergency circumstances where the use of air compression brakes is necessary to prevent an accident
or injury to persons or property.
B. Exemption: Motor vehicles owned and operated by a fire department are specifically exempted from the prohibitions of this section.
C. Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and upon judgment thereof shall be subject to the
fixed penalty for moving traffic infractions set by the Idaho infractions rules 9(b)(5). (Ord. 3836, 12-1-2008)
7-1-11: SPEED LIMIT RESTRICTIONS:
No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway or street at a speed greater than that which is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and with regard
to actual potential hazards then existing. The limits specified in this section, or established as posted, shall be maximum lawful speeds, and no person
shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of such limits. A violation of this section shall be an infraction.
A. Parks And Alleys: In any public park, or in any alley, fifteen (15) miles per hour. The term "alley" shall mean a minor public way providing secondary
access at the back or side of a property for vehicle or pedestrian traffic.
B. City Streets: On all other streets in Nampa, twenty (20) miles per hour, unless otherwise posted.
C. School Zones: Twenty (20) miles per hour when any of the following exist:
1. A school speed limit sign with flashing lights attached and the words "when flashing" posted and the lights are activated; or
2. A school zone speed limit sign with designated time frames included thereon.
3. Any person that violates this subsection shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be assessed a fixed penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
excluding court costs and fees. (Ord. 4247, 4-18-2016)
Chapter 2
PARKING REGULATIONS
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Except for the following words or terms used in this title, which shall have the meaning herein ascribed to them, all words and phrases used in this title,
shall be as defined in title 49, chapter 1, Idaho Code:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE: For the purposes of this chapter, the phrase "abandoned motor vehicle" shall mean any vehicle which is left, or which is
parked upon any street, alley, public or private property for a period of twenty four (24) hours or longer within a residential restricted parking zone/district,
as defined by section 7-2-4 of this chapter or for a period of forty eight (48) hours or longer within any other district or part of the city, and the owner of
such vehicle cannot be found, located or determined, or the owner of which refuses to remove such vehicle from such street, alley or public property upon
notice, oral or written.
ACCESS AISLE: An accessible pedestrian space between elements, such as parking spaces, seating, and desks, that provides clearance appropriate for
use of the elements.
ACCESSIBLE ROUTE: A continuous unobstructed path connecting all accessible elements and spaces of a building or facility. Interior accessible routes
may include corridors, floors, ramps, elevators, lifts, and clear floor space at fixtures. Exterior accessible routes may include parking access aisles, curb
ramps, crosswalks at vehicularways, walks, ramps, and lifts.
CAMPER: A separate vehicle designed for human habitation and which can be attached or detached from a motor vehicle.
COMMERCIAL TRUCK/VEHICLE: Any of the following:
A. Any solid waste collection vehicle, tractor truck/semitrailer or tractor truck/trailer combination (or part thereof), dump truck, concrete mixer truck,
towing and recovery vehicle, box type truck, flatbed truck, commercial vehicle step vans, cube vans, buses, stake trucks, wreckers, tank trucks,
commercial or construction equipment, whether located on private property or on a truck, trailer, or semitrailer; or
B. Any trailer, semitrailer, or other vehicle in which food or beverages are stored or sold; or
C. Any trailer or semitrailer used for transporting landscaping or lawn care equipment whether or not such trailer or semitrailer is attached to another
vehicle; or
D. Any taxicab or limousine(s); or
E. Any truck or vehicle registered as a commercial vehicle; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 155/410
F. Any other trailer or semitrailer used for commercial purposes; or
G. Vehicles exceeding a maximum gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of fifteen thousand (15,000) pounds (excluding pickup, dually style trucks, and
SUV type vehicles used for residential purposes).
DOUBLE PARKED: Stopped or parked on the roadway side of a vehicle which is stopped or parked in an officially designated parking space; or adjacent
to the curb line of a street. The term "double parking" also describes parking over the lines of any designated parking space, whether such space is
separating two (2) designated parking spaces or not.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Any police officer or city employee assigned the responsibility of enforcing parking regulations.
EXTENUATING CIRCUMSTANCES: An unusual condition, long term condition, or problem, which is unexpected, significantly disruptive, unforeseeable,
unpreventable, and, beyond the person(s) control. Such circumstances are expected to have a serious impact on an individual(s).
LOADING ZONE: A space or section of a street which has been set aside for the exclusive purpose of loading and unloading of persons, supplies and/or
merchandise. Such zone shall be marked by the appropriate signage, curb markings, or diagonal street striping.
MOTOR HOME: A self-contained vehicle, designed for human habitation, with its own motor power, and with a passageway from the body of the home to
the driver's and front passenger's seat.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
PARKING SERVICES OFFICE: The phrase "parking services office" or "parking services" refers to the code enforcement division, of the city of Nampa
economic development department, or such other administrative arrangements as the city may establish, and all designated representatives thereof.
PARKING SPACES (ACCESSIBLE): Accessible parking spaces shall include the width required for the parking stall and the required parking access
aisles. Parking access aisles shall be part of an accessible route to the building or facility entrance. Parked vehicles shall not reduce the clear width of an
accessible route.
RESIDENTIAL RESTRICTED PARKING ZONE/DISTRICT: The area of the city so designated for the purpose of providing residential parking permits to
vehicle owners or operators who reside within a designated residential restricted parking zone.
RESIDENTIAL SCHOOL RESTRICTED PARKING ZONE/DISTRICT: The area of the city so designated for the purpose of providing residential parking
permits to vehicle owners or operators who reside within a designated residential restricted parking zone, and are located within one-fourth (1/4) of a mile
from a school.
RESTRICTED PARKING ZONE/DISTRICT: The area of the city so designated for the purpose of providing special regulations for the control of parking
and traffic.
TRAILER: A vehicle without motor power designed for carrying persons or property on its own structure and to be drawn by a vehicle with motor power.
The term trailer shall include trailer coach, boat trailer, semitrailer, travel trailer or utility trailer.
VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled but not operated upon rails, except vehicles moved solely by human power. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-2: MOTORCYCLES:
A. Applicable Rules And Regulations Pertaining To Motorcycles: The driver of any motorcycle shall be subject to all the rules and regulations within this
chapter pertaining to vehicles as defined.
B. Off Street Use Prohibited: No person shall operate or ride a motorcycle within the city limits except upon a street, alley or private road having access to
a street or alley. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-3: PARKING ZONES; VIOLATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 156/410
A. Timed parking, diagonal parking, no parking, loading zones and any other parking related zones shall be established by resolution of the council upon
the recommendation of the chief of police and the city engineer. Upon passage of such resolution the public works department is authorized and
directed to indicate the zone with appropriate markings.
B. It is unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in any area in violation of markings provided in accordance with the provisions of this section.
C. The Nampa city parking services supervisor may permit allowances, exceptions, or exemptions within timed parking zones based on the approval of an
"extenuating circumstance".
1. Approval of an extenuating circumstance may constitute the allowance for a "temporary" parking exemption, such as, but not limited to, the following:
a. A minor personal illness which is not a permanent medical condition, but does have a temporary serious impact on an individual.
b. A personal injury which is not a permanent medical condition and therefore does not have a long term serious impact.
2. Approval of an extenuating circumstance may constitute the allowance for an "indefinite" parking exemption. Such circumstances may be, but are
not limited to:
a. A serious illness (permanent medical condition) that creates a serious impact on an individual.
b. A personal injury which has created a long term permanent medical condition, and has and will continue to have a serious impact on an
individual(s).
Application to apply for extenuation as a result of extenuating circumstances must be made to the city of Nampa code enforcement division.
Approval for an extenuation must be authorized by the code enforcement administrator (supervisor), or his/her designee, and coordinated with the
Downtown Nampa Association. Each request will be looked at on a case by case basis. The code enforcement administrator (supervisor) has the
authority to request additional information or documentary evidence to be submitted as needed to determine validity of such request.
The city reserves the right to revoke any temporary and/or indefinite parking allowance, exception, and exemption at any time deemed necessary.
(Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-4: RESIDENTIAL RESTRICTED PARKING ZONES/DISTRICTS:
A. Nampa city parking services and their nominated committee may determine which, if any, residential areas of the city, can be designated as a
residential restricted parking zone/district. Upon concluding that an area meets the criteria established by city policy, the city shall follow the process in
subsections B and C of this section.
B. Nampa city parking services shall distribute to all properties in the area affected which appear to be used or occupied a written statement specifying the
area proposed for designation, the reasons for the designation; and publish in a newspaper of general circulation throughout the city a copy of the
same.
C. Nampa city parking services shall submit to the city council a written recommendation specifying the area proposed for designation and the reasons for
designation. Upon ratification of the recommendations, the council shall direct parking services to erect signs in designated areas indicating the time
limitations for parking. Such time limitations will be designated as Monday through Friday between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five
o'clock (5:00) P.M., excluding holidays. In residential school restricted parking zone/districts, such time limitations will be designated as Monday
through Friday between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M., excluding holidays, and days in which schools are not in
session. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-5: PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING ZONES:
A. Any vehicle upon which a current residential parking permit is properly displayed may be parked in the zone to which the permit applies without regard
to posted time limitations, except that the vehicle may only be parked pursuant to the permit within two (2) blocks of the residence on the registration of
the vehicle. Permit code on the vehicle must correspond with the decal code displayed on the signs.
B. The permit shall be affixed to the bottom corner of the front window and shall be clearly visible at all times. Failure to properly display the permit is a
violation of this section.
C. A residential parking permit shall not authorize the holder thereof to park beyond the posted time limits in any residential parking zone other than that to
which his permit applies, nor authorize the violation of any other law regulating the stopping or parking of vehicles in the city of Nampa, nor exempt the
holder from the observance of any traffic regulation. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-6: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS:
A. Residential Parking Permits:
1. The code enforcement parking services office is hereby authorized and directed to issue residential parking permits to vehicle owners or operators
who reside within a designated residential restricted parking zone. In order to maintain the integrity of a residential zone, Nampa city parking services
has the authority to limit the number of parking permits issued to any one household. A permit shall be issued upon application without charge.
2. The application for a permit shall contain such information as the parking services office shall specify.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 157/410
3. The parking services office is authorized and directed to make provision for:
a. The issuance of temporary parking permits to bona fide visitors of residents of designated residential parking zones, Nampa city parking services
will have the authority to limit the number of visitor parking permits issued per household, permits will contain that information deemed necessary
by staff; and
b. The issuance of exemption parking permits to handicapped persons.
B. Temporary Use Permits And Fees; Declaration Of Findings And Policy: The city of Nampa recognizes the importance of outdoor dining and special
events to the vitality of our downtown historic district (DH zone). In order to reimburse the city of Nampa for loss of utilization of on street parking
spaces within the downtown historic zone, limit the public impact for the use of such spaces and provide for the use of parking by construction
companies, for "special events", for sidewalk cafes or outdoor restaurant seating, or other entities which, out of necessity, must, in some manner,
obstruct or prohibit the public use of on street parking, the city of Nampa enacts this chapter regulating such use of on street parking spaces.
1. Construction Work/Company Requirements Within The Downtown Historic (DH) Zone:
a. Application Requirements: Upon an application being made to code enforcement parking services, and in compliance with the other requirements
of this chapter, parking services may issue a temporary use permit providing for use of on street parking spaces and the placement thereon of
dumpsters, vehicles, apparatus, or other related articles. The application shall describe the company, address, phone number, contact person,
complete job location, type of job, and the time frame anticipated for the start and completion of such job. The application shall list the equipment
and/or related articles to be used.
b. Issuance Of Temporary Use Permit: Temporary use permits for construction or construction related activity are intended for persons who by virtue
of their employment are required to have their vehicles, dumpsters, or equipment in close proximity to the job site where the actual work is being
performed. The vehicle must be a necessary part of the operation in that it carries tools, equipment, or supplies. A vehicle solely used as a mode
of transportation does not qualify for a permit. Temporary use permits will be issued for areas where the length of stay is restricted by time
according to meters, posted signs or ordinance.
c. Dumpsters Or Equipment: Upon an application being made to parking services, a permit for the placement of a dumpster or equipment on the
street will be required. If a dumpster or equipment is to be placed on or within the public right of way, the city of Nampa traffic division must be
contacted for a ROW permit.
d. Items Prohibited; Fencing Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to place equipment, materials, dumpsters, apparatus, or other articles in an
on street parking area where posted time restrictions, or city code restricts time without first obtaining a permit from parking services. Failure to
comply with any requirement of this chapter or condition of the temporary parking use permit shall be grounds for immediate permit revocation.
When an area of on street parking is being used as a staging or delivery area, the area approved by city of Nampa parking services for use as a
temporary use zone, must be so designated by the contractor with use of temporary fencing or barricades that will identify said areas as a part of
the zone and restrict access by nonrelated parkers.
2. Sidewalk Cafes, Outdoor Seating, And/Or Special Events Within The Downtown Historic (DH) Zone:
a. Sidewalk cafes, outdoor seating areas, and/or special event temporary use parking permits are designed to allow uses on public property in
locations where they are determined to be appropriate by the city of Nampa economic development department, and to promote and protect the
public health, safety, and general welfare of the community. These general goals include, among others, the following specific purposes:
(1) To attract residents and nonresidents to downtown Nampa;
(2) To provide an additional way for restaurants or food establishments to expand their operations;
(3) To promote sidewalk cafes, outdoor seating and/or special events as useful and properly planned visual amenities;
(4) To provide adequate space for pedestrians on the sidewalk adjacent to sidewalk cafes, outdoor seating, and/or special event area, and to
ensure access to adjacent commercial and retail uses;
(5) To provide for penalties for violations of this chapter.
b. Upon an application being made to code enforcement parking services, and in compliance with the other requirements of this chapter, parking
services may issue a temporary use permit providing for use of on street parking spaces and the placement thereon of tables, chairs, umbrellas,
fencing, outdoor receptacles, or other related articles. Permit applications shall be reviewed by city staff and approved by the city economic
development department to be in accordance with all city ordinances, city of Nampa downtown design guidelines, city of Nampa outdoor dining
design guidelines, building and fire codes, and all other applicable law and ordinances.
c. All permits shall be issued for a maximum time frame of six (6) months. All permits shall be reapplied for prior to their expiration date. A permit
application available from the code enforcement division, parking services, shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(1) Name of applicant and business;
(2) Address of the business;
(3) Address of the applicant;
(4) Telephone number of the applicant and business;
(5) Name of the property owner if other than applicant;
(6) Address of the property owner if other than applicant;
(7) Telephone number of the property owner if other than applicant;
(8) Proposed start and end date;
(9) Proposed hours of operation;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 158/410
(10) Proposed number of tables, chairs, railings, posts, table umbrellas or other items;
(11) Proposed color, design, materials, and workmanship of tables, chairs, railings, post, table umbrellas or other items;
(12) Proposed area of occupancy including square feet and dimensions;
(13) Whether alcohol will be served;
(14) Copy of certificate of insurance;
(15) Whether permit application is a new application or renewal; if renewal, applicant shall describe any changes from the previous application;
(16) Written authorization from the owner of the property shall be required where the applicant is not the owner of the affected property.
C. Standards: Cafes, outdoor seating, and/or special events shall only be permitted where it is determined that the use will not create a hazard, a sight
distance obstruction for motor vehicle operators, nor unduly impede pedestrian traffic. Conditions, specific to the operation of a business may be
incorporated into the permit as required by city staff. All sidewalk cafes, outdoor seating, and/or special events are subject to the requirements as listed
within the city of Nampa outdoor dining design guidelines, and the city of Nampa sidewalk cafe, outdoor dining and special event resolution.
D. Permit Fee Schedule: Temporary parking use permits will be subject to the fees as established by resolution of the council.
Temporary parking use permits may be obtained from code enforcement parking services provided that such vehicle, equipment, dumpster, apparatus,
or other article is actually being used as provided by this section. No proration of permit fees shall be made except as provided.
1. An applicant may not use the permitted space for any purpose other than the authorized purpose stated on the application. City of Nampa parking
services has the authority to limit the amount of space available, to limit the impact on the general public, nonrelated businesses and others who may
require access into these areas.
2. If within the area where construction is being performed, there are signs that need to be temporarily removed during the project, the contractor is
required to contact parking services twenty four (24) hours in advance. If sidewalk renovations or new sidewalks are being done, the contractor will
be required to reinstall any and all signposts that were removed. Contractor will also be responsible to repaint any space markings on the street
damaged as a result of the contractor's project. The replacement of both the posts and the space markings must meet the requirements provided by
city of Nampa parking services, city of Nampa traffic division, and city of Nampa street division. If the contractor does not perform as required, city of
Nampa will have the work done and charge the contractor for the cost of the work incurred by city of Nampa.
3. All fees are payable in advance of permits being issued. It is the applicant's responsibility to obtain and pay for all additional fees required to add an
extension to the permits until work is completed. Applicants are required to estimate the completion date of the project or event prior to receiving a
permit.
4. The fee for a construction project shall be based on the estimated duration of the project. Applicants for projects exceeding the date for which the
permit was granted shall obtain an extension on such permit within seven (7) days of expiration of the original permit. Applicants who do not obtain
an extension on such permit within the seven (7) day grace period above will be considered in violation and subject to the penalties listed herein.
E. Revocation: Code enforcement parking services has the authority to revoke the permit for unauthorized use or a violation of any of the provisions of this
section. Upon revocation, the applicant will not be entitled to any refund for fees assessed under this chapter. An applicant must then make an
application for a new permit under the same requirements for the original permit. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-7: PARKING PERMIT VIOLATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to represent that he is entitled to a residential, temporary use, leased, and/or extenuating circumstances parking permit
when he is not so entitled, to fail to surrender a permit to which he is no longer entitled, or to park a vehicle displaying such a permit at any time when the
holder of such permit is not entitled to hold it. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-8: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The code enforcement parking services office is authorized to revoke the residential, temporary use, leased, and/or extenuating circumstances parking
permit of any permittee found to be in violation of this code, and, upon written notification thereof, the permittee shall surrender such permit to the code
enforcement parking services office. Failure when so requested, to surrender a residential, temporary use, leased, and/or extenuating circumstances
parking permit so revoked, shall constitute a violation of this section. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-9: MANNER OF PARKING:
All vehicles shall be parked on the right hand side of the street facing in the direction in which traffic is permitted to move; except that on one-way streets in
the city, vehicles may park on either side of the one-way street in the direction in which traffic is permitted to move.
Any vehicle parked within a parking or loading zone shall be parked entirely within the markings designating one parking space; shall be parked parallel or
diagonal to the curb in accordance with the marking of the parking space; and in case of diagonal parking, shall be parked so that the front of the vehicle is
nearest the curb.
Except as otherwise provided in this section every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or
parked with the right hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within eighteen inches (18") of the right hand curb.
Any vehicle parked within a city owned lot shall be parked entirely within the markings designating one parking space; shall be parked facing the direction
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 159/410
of such markings and/or signs within the lot; and in the case of diagonal parking, shall be parked so that the rear of the vehicle is nearest the drive aisles
or entry to such parking stall. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-10: HOURS OF PARKING REGULATION DEFINED; PARKING ZONES:
Parking within parking zones and loading zones, except as otherwise specified in subsection 7-2-4C of this chapter, is regulated during the time between
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. of every day, unless otherwise stated on such signs; provided, however, the regulation of parking shall
not include any Sunday or state holiday.
A. The parking services office will determine the designation and location of such parking zones. Parking services shall submit to the city council a written
recommendation specifying the area(s) proposed for designation and the reasons for designation. Upon ratification of the recommendations, the
council shall direct the parking services office to erect signs in the designated area(s) indicating the parking zone(s) and the time limits for parking.
B. Parking services will determine the days of the week that the zone will be in effect, and the hours of enforcement for such zones.
C. The parking services office will determine the design of the signs for proper posting of the zone.
D. Parking services will identify any areas in which loading zones, no parking areas, and other such items should be required or maintained for public
safety or to maintain previous commitments. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-11: OPERATING HOURS; PARKING LOTS:
There shall be no parking in city owned parking lots between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., except by those persons who
have a properly leased space. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-12: LOADING ZONES:
A loading zone or space that is not a part of an accessible parking stall may be occupied by a vehicle while actually engaged in loading and unloading
persons, materials, supplies and merchandise, or other property at stores or places of business adjacent to said loading zones for such periods of time
only as is set forth on the loading zone sign. Parking in a loading zone or space during the time period set forth on the loading zone for any purpose other
than loading is unlawful, and punishable as a parking ticket pursuant to section 7-2-19 of this chapter. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-13: PARKING SIGNS:
It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, or, having parked the same, to suffer it to remain parked in violation of the regulations of any duly installed
parking sign. When the parking sign states the duration of time allowed for parking, for example, "Two-Hour Parking", then the regulation shall be enforced
only during operating time; when the sign forbids parking at all times, or at designated times, the regulation is in force at all times or as stated. Persons
parked in a leased stall or in a restricted parking zone/district must have displayed the appropriate parking permit decal. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-14: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING:
A. No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled portion of any street or
highway within the city when it is practicable to stop, park or leave the vehicle off the street or highway, but in every event an unobstructed width of the
street opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a clear view of such stopped vehicles shall be available from a
distance of two hundred feet (200') in each direction upon such street or highway. Any violation of this provision shall be an infraction. (Ord. 4165, 3-2-
2015)
B. This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or main traveled portion of a street or highway in such
manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-15: OFFICERS AUTHORIZED TO REMOVE ILLEGALLY STOPPED VEHICLES:
A. Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or highway in violation of any of the provisions of section 7-2-9 of this chapter such
officer is authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or
main traveled part of such street or highway.
B. Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge or causeway or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
7-2-16: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 160/410
A. Exceptions: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1. On or across sidewalks, or in such a manner as to obstruct the route of passage between such sidewalks.
2. In front of a public or private driveway.
3. Within an intersection.
4. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
5. On a crosswalk.
6. a. Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection, except at those intersections controlled by a pedestrian control signal.
b. Within twenty five feet (25') of the corner of the intersection at an intersection where no crosswalk is indicated. The said corner of the intersection
shall be the intersection of the projected edge of paving.
7. Within twenty feet (20') upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
8. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless
the traffic authority indicates a different length by signs or markings.
9. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
10. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entranceway to any fire station within
seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when properly posted.
11. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
12. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
13. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or highway or within a street or highway tunnel.
14. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking.
15. On a bike lane or bike path.
16. On commercial vehicle lots at locations where vehicles are displayed for sale in that area located between the roadway and back of sidewalk or
back of projected sidewalk.
17. Adjacent to any yellow painted curb or fire lane.
B. Moving Vehicle: No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is
unlawful.
C. Alley: No person shall stop, stand or park a motor vehicle in or upon any alley for a period of time longer than reasonably necessary for the purpose of
loading or unloading the vehicle. Such vehicles must utilize their hazard lights during such time they are stopped, standing, or parked in the alley. In no
case shall the stop exceed thirty (30) minutes.
D. Disabled Persons Parking Violations:
1. Disabled or handicapped parking spaces shall be identified by: A sign posted in front of the designated parking space and located so that it cannot
be obscured by a vehicle parked in the space, and a painted international symbol of accessibility on each parking space surface. The sign and the
space surface symbol for designated handicapped parking spaces shall be the international symbol of accessibility as depicted in Idaho Code
section 49-410 or 28 CFR part 36, appendix A, section 4.30.7. In addition, designated handicapped parking spaces that are van accessible shall
include adjacent access aisles or areas necessary for loading, unloading and transit, and the sign for the designated handicapped parking space
shall have an additional sign, "Van Accessible" mounted below the international symbol of accessibility.
2. The parking or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, in a space reserved for persons with disabilities, including adjacent access aisles or
areas necessary for loading, unloading and transit designated with a sign and space surface symbol as provided for in subsection D1 of this section
is prohibited, unless the vehicle is momentarily in the space for the purpose of allowing a person with a disability to enter or leave the vehicle, or
unless special license plates or card or temporary card for the disabled is displayed on the vehicle. The operator or other person in charge of the
motor vehicle or, if an operator or person in charge is not present, the registered owner of a vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of this
subsection is guilty of an infraction.
3. Any unauthorized use of a disabled person's license plate or card shall constitute an infraction. Law enforcement officials or enforcement officers
shall enforce the provisions of this section and are empowered, using reasonable discretion, to check personal identification to determine if the user
of the disabled person's license plate or card is the disabled person so authorized to use such disabled person's parking privileges. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-
2012)
7-2-17: PARKING ON STREETS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY:
Where any portion of this chapter is in conflict with any other sections of the code, the more restrictive of the two (2) shall take precedence.
A. Parking On Streets And Public Property Restrictions: No person shall park or place, or cause to be parked or placed, upon any street or public property,
regardless of whether attended or unattended:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 161/410
1. For Longer Than Seventy Two Hours: For longer than seventy two (72) hours:
a. Any motor home, camper or recreational vehicle. Neither this nor any provision of this chapter shall be construed to authorize any person to sleep
in or allow another to sleep in any motor, camper or recreational vehicle.
b. Any utility trailer that is attached to a vehicle.
c. Any snowmobile, boat, boat trailer, snowmobile trailer, or other type of trailer that is attached to a vehicle.
d. Any vehicle.
2. For Longer Than Forty Eight Hours: For longer than forty eight (48) hours:
a. Any snowmobile, boat, boat trailer, snowmobile trailer, or other type of trailer that is not attached to a vehicle.
b. Any utility trailer that is not attached to a vehicle.
3. Overnight Parking:
a. No overnight parking without prior permission is allowed on city property.
4. For Any Length Of Time: For any length of time, except as otherwise allowed in this section:
a. Any pole trailer or semitrailer within a residential zone.
b. Any vehicle designed or used primarily as farm or construction equipment within a residential zone.
B. Time Limit: At the expiration of the applicable time limit set forth in this section, a new time limit may begin only upon removal of the motor home,
camper, recreational vehicle, trailer, or vehicle from the block in which it was previously parked, for a minimum of forty eight (48) hours.
C. Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply when a vehicle or trailer is parked:
1. For the purpose of loading or unloading materials or merchandise, when such materials or merchandise are actually being loaded or unloaded, and
where such vehicle or trailer is parked within one hundred feet (100') of the loading or unloading point.
2. For any purpose incident to any ongoing, lawful construction project, where such construction project is conducted under a valid city of Nampa
permit and such trailer or vehicle is parked within one hundred feet (100') of such construction project.
3. For any purpose incident to a lawful commercial or industrial operation, so long as the vehicle is parked within one hundred feet (100') of such
commercial or industrial operation.
4. For the purpose of maintenance or response to emergency by a public utility, public agency, or the duly authorized agent thereof, where such vehicle
is visibly marked and identified as such.
5. As specifically allowed by a valid permit or authorization issued by the city of Nampa. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-18: COMMERCIAL TRUCKS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES; PARKING PROHIBITED:
The provisions of this section apply to commercial trucks and commercial vehicles, except as specifically noted in subsection 7-2-17A4 of this chapter.
A. It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing a commercial truck or commercial vehicle on any street, alley or other public right of way within
any residential zone within the city or upon any through street within the city for a period of more than one hour.
Provided, however, that a commercial truck or commercial vehicle may remain parked or standing in excess of the aforementioned one hour time, for
the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise provided such commercial truck or commercial vehicle does not create a traffic or
other hazard.
B. The provisions of this chapter imposing time limits on commercial truck or commercial vehicle parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to
observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified
times. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-19: PARKING TICKETS AND PROCEDURE; FAILURE TO PAY TICKET AN INFRACTION; FINES:
A. Any enforcement officer observing a violation of the provisions of this chapter may leave upon the violating vehicle a parking ticket which shall provide
the ticket number, the date and hour, license number, make of vehicle, fine amount, and the enforcement officer's or designated person's name or
identification number. The parking ticket shall notify the owner or operator of the fine for the violation, and the method of payment. If a vehicle upon
which a parking ticket has been attached remains in the same location for a period of two (2) hours after the parking ticket has been attached,
additional parking tickets may be attached to the vehicle for each two (2) hour period of violation. When the identity of the operator cannot be
determined, the owner or person or the corporation in whose name the said vehicle is registered or the named lessees in a rental or lease agreement
of said vehicle shall be presumed prima facie responsible for said violation. If a vehicle upon which a violation has been observed leaves the location
prior to the enforcement officer being able to leave the parking ticket upon the vehicle, such ticket shall be mailed to the registered owner or the named
lessees in a rental or lease agreement of said vehicle.
B. In order to eliminate burdening courts with misdemeanor violations of ordinances and to eliminate insofar as possible public inconvenience, each
person receiving a parking ticket under this chapter shall pay at the address listed on such ticket the appropriate fine for the parking violations for which
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 162/410
a parking ticket may be issued, as listed in this subsection:
1. Overtime parking.
2. Second overtime parking violation within thirty (30) days of the first violation.
3. Third overtime parking violation within thirty (30) days of the first violation.
4. Fourth and subsequent overtime parking violation within thirty (30) days of the first violation.
5. Parking in a no parking zone.
6. Parking within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
7. Blocking driveway with a parked vehicle.
8. Parking in alley.
9. Parking within twenty five feet (25') of corner.
10. Double parking.
11. Parking with the vehicle headed in wrong direction.
12. Parking on or within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk.
13. Parking on or across sidewalks, or in such a manner as to obstruct the route of passage between such sidewalks.
14. Parking with wheels over eighteen inches (18") from curb.
15. Parking in rented and/or leased stall.
16. Parking within twenty feet (20') of or closer to a stop sign, flashing beacon, or traffic control signal.
17. Parking in fire lane or along any yellow painted curb.
18. Parking commercial trucks/commercial vehicles in prohibited zone.
19. Backed into any angled parking stall on the street or within a city owned lot.
20. Parking in city parks after sunset.
21. Parking or driving on grass.
22. Parking in handicap stall or adjacent access aisle.
23. On a bike lane or bike path.
24. Camper, motor home, or trailer parked on the street for more than seventy two (72) hours.
25. Parking where official signs prohibit parking.
26. Failure to display proper parking permit, to include residential permit parking, leased parking, "extenuating circumstances" parking, and temporary
use permit parking.
27. Residential parking permit zone violation.
28. Parking facing the opposite direction of such markings and/or signs within a city owned lot.
29. Parking on commercial vehicle lots.
30. Temporary parking permit violation.
31. Removal of chalk marks.
32. Parking on streets and public property.
33. Parking within front yard setbacks in residential zones for more than forty eight (48) hours in accordance with section 10-22-1 of this code.
C. Fines for parking violations listed in this chapter shall be established by resolution of the council upon recommendation of the chief of police.
D. Enhanced fines for second, third, fourth and subsequent overtime parking violations occurring within thirty (30) days of the first parking violation may be
established by resolution of the council upon recommendation of the chief of police.
E. Upon the failure of the owner or operator to pay the required fine within seven (7) calendar days, a late fee in the amount established by resolution of
the council will be added to such ticket. The chief of police or enforcement officer may, after giving one written notice requesting payment, authorize a
collection agency to use all possible legal means to satisfy this outstanding parking ticket(s). If an outstanding parking ticket(s) is referred to collection,
the vehicle owner will be subject to additional collection fees established by the collection agency. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-20: PARKING LOTS; LEASE RENTAL REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 163/410
It is unlawful for any person to be or remain parked upon the parking lots owned and/or operated by the city without first having leased the same; provided,
however, special free parking areas may be designated by the council. A lease agreement must be entered into between the desired lessee and the city of
Nampa. Lease agreements will be available on a monthly, biannual, or annual basis. Lease rates for parking stalls are established by council resolution,
unless otherwise stated herein. Leased rates for full time, twenty four (24) hour, seven (7) day a week (unless otherwise stated within the lease
agreement), residential use leased parking stalls shall be at a rate of double the normal leased rate.
There shall be no refund on any lease paid in advance where the holder of the parking permit relinquishes or gives up control of said parking space. In
addition, failure to complete the terms within the lease agreement will result in a cancellation/termination fee of one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00).
Such fee is due at the time of cancellation. In addition, all permit stickers/decals will be required to be returned at the time of cancellation. Failure to return
permit stickers/decals is unlawful and will result in a fee in the amount established by resolution of the council. (Ord. 4028, 7-16-2012)
Upon the failure to pay the required cancellation fees and/or any overdue lease payments within seven (7) calendar days, a late fee in the amount
established by resolution of the council will be added to the balance, and the enforcement officer may, after giving one written notice requesting payment,
authorize a collection agency to use all possible legal means to satisfy this outstanding cancellation/termination fee and/or any overdue lease payments. If
an outstanding cancellation/termination fee and/or lease payment is referred for collection, the lessee(s) will be subject to additional collection fees
established by the collection agency. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-21: REMOVAL OF UNLAWFULLY PARKED VEHICLES:
The police department or code enforcement division is hereby authorized and directed to remove all vehicles from said parking lots, where such vehicles
shall appear to have been abandoned, or where such vehicles shall be unlawfully parked in any stall which is rented/leased, such vehicle belonging to any
person other than the person to whom such stall is rented/leased or parked thereon without the permission of the recordholder of such parking stall. The
police department may likewise remove all motor vehicles unlawfully parked upon all spaces between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. when the hours of parking have been posted in a conspicuous place. Such vehicles so removed shall be taken to either a public garage or
storage place for safekeeping, and all costs and expenses incidental to such removal shall be paid by the owner of such vehicle. The police department or
code enforcement division, upon such removal, shall immediately notify the registered owner of the removal of such vehicle, and the place to which the
same has been removed, together with the charges for removal. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-22: CHALK MARKS; REMOVAL OF:
It is unlawful for any person to remove, or cause to be removed, chalk marks placed by the city on tires of parked vehicles in a parking space regulated by
the city.
Any person in violation of this section shall be issued a parking ticket for the amount established by resolution of the council, in addition to the fee of such
parking violation in which they have been found guilty of committing. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-23: VALIDATION:
The city has the authority to create a department/division internal policy for process and procedures of validation of parking tickets. Such process and
procedure policy will be developed and approved through a joint committee as established by city staff. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
7-2-24: VOLUNTEER PARKING ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM:
A. The Nampa city council and the city of Nampa police department are hereby authorized to establish or appoint a disabled persons' advocacy group
authorized to enforce the provisions of subsection 7-2-16D of this chapter, and to be called the volunteer parking enforcement program. Under this
section, these volunteers or parking enforcement specialists are authorized to issue complaints and summonses for violations of subsection 7-2-16D of
this chapter.
B. A volunteer appointed under this section must:
1. Be at least twenty one (21) years of age;
2. Complete a course of instruction concerning the enforcement of this chapter that is conducted by the appointing law enforcement agency;
3. After successfully completing the course of instruction, obtain a certificate from the executive authority of the appointing law enforcement agency;
and
4. Satisfy any other qualifications established by the law enforcement agency.
C. The Nampa police department shall file a copy of each certificate issued under subsection B3 of this section with the prosecuting attorney having
jurisdiction over the area served by the law enforcement agency.
D. A complaint and summons issued by a volunteer appointed under this section has the same force and effect as a complaint and summons issued by a
law enforcement officer for the same violation.
E. A volunteer appointed under this section does not have powers of a law enforcement officer except those powers granted under this section.
F. A volunteer appointed under this section does not have authority to carry a weapon.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 164/410
G. The Nampa police department may, at any time, revoke the certificate issued to the volunteer under subsection B3 of this section. If a certificate is
revoked under this subsection:
1. The Nampa police department shall notify the prosecuting attorney where the certificate was filed under subsection C of this section of the
revocation;
2. The volunteer's powers under this section terminate immediately upon the revocation;
3. All volunteers serve at the pleasure and discretion of the Nampa police department. (Ord. 4009, 3-5-2012)
Chapter 3
UNCOVERED LOADS
7-3-1: PROHIBITION AGAINST UNCOVERED LOADS:
A. No person shall drive or move any vehicle with any load on any public roadway in the city of Nampa unless such load is covered, constructed, or loaded
so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping from the vehicle.
B. No person shall operate any vehicle with any load on any public roadway in the city of Nampa unless the load and its covering are securely fastened to
prevent the covering or load from becoming loose, detached, or in any manner a hazard to other users of the public roadway.
C. Any person operating a vehicle on any public roadway in the city of Nampa from which any materials have fallen or escaped which would constitute an
obstruction or injure a vehicle or otherwise endanger travel upon such public roadway shall immediately cause the public roadway to be cleaned of all
such materials and shall pay any costs therefor.
D. This section shall not apply to vehicles on a public roadway, or a portion thereof, that is closed to travel by the general public; however, prior to the
opening or reopening of the public roadway, all materials that would constitute an obstruction or injure a vehicle or otherwise endanger travel upon
such public roadway must be cleaned from the public roadway by the entity, company, or business for which the public roadway was closed. (Ord.
3809, 8-4-2008, eff. 10-1-2008)
7-3-2: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Nothing in this chapter may be construed to prohibit a government employee or contractor from dropping sand on a roadway to enhance traction or
sprinkling water or other substances to clean or maintain a roadway.
B. This chapter shall not apply to agricultural vehicles while being used for agricultural purposes. (Ord. 3809, 8-4-2008, eff. 10-1-2008)
7-3-3: PENALTIES:
A person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). For each subsequent
violation of this chapter, the fine shall be increased by twenty five dollars ($25.00) but shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 3809, 8-4-
2008, eff. 10-1-2008)
Title 8
WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
WATER REGULATIONS
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
CITY WATER SERVICE LINE: The portion of an individual water service line that runs from its connection with the public water main to and including the
corporation stop, valve box, and meter yoke installed in the service line. It is owned and maintained by the city.
DOMESTIC WATER: Potable water used for any purpose.
IRRIGATION WATER: Nonpotable water used for irrigation purposes.
MASTER WATER PLAN: Any document which the city has accepted by official action of the council which describes or otherwise indicates an overall view
of proposed future water needs, minimum water main sizing, and/or minimum water main spacing.
MUNICIPAL WATER MAIN: Any pipe owned by the city for the purpose of distribution of water to serve more than one water service line or user.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 165/410
OVERSIZED: Circumstance where the city requires the developer or builder to install a sanitary sewer, water, or irrigation line of a size or capacity greater
than eight inches (8") nominal diameter.
PRIVATE FIRE SERVICE CONNECTION: A separate and independent connection from the domestic water main that connects directly to a fire hydrant,
sprinkler system or fire control device that has been, or is to be, installed on private property or in any building for the purpose of fire control within the
specific building and said connection is to be for no other purpose.
PRIVATE WATER SERVICE LINE: The portion of the water service line that runs from the point being served to the point of connection with the city water
service line.
REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENT: An agreement between a developer and the city of Nampa that defines conditions and provisions for the developer to
be reimbursed for a portion of the infrastructure costs that benefit others who did not participate in the cost of providing that infrastructure.
WATER: When the term water is used in this chapter without the prefix irrigation or domestic it shall refer to both irrigation and domestic water. (Ord. 2088;
amd. Ord. 4299, 1-17-2017)
8-1-2: AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE; POWERS AND AUTHORITY:
The City through its authorized representative bearing proper identification shall be permitted at proper and reasonable hours of the day to enter all
properties, premises or buildings to which water is furnished from the water system for any purpose necessary for the proper administration of the water
system. Also, the City through its authorized representative shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated
easement for any purpose necessary for the maintenance of any portion of the water system lying within said easements.
It is the duty of the Water Superintendent, or his/her authorized designee, to enforce all provisions of this title and, generally, as determined requisite, issue
infractions, citations or refer all violations to the City Attorney, entering actions in the courts when necessary, and his failure to do so shall not legalize any
violation of such provisions, nor shall the failure of the City Attorney to enter actions legalize any violation of such provisions. (Ord. 3371, 8-2-2004)
8-1-3: BOARD OF APPRAISERS; DUTIES:
There is a Board of Appraisers, as the same is referenced in section 3-1-1 of this Code and section 8-2-4 of this title, consisting of the following: Finance
Director, Public Works Director, City Engineer, and three (3) citizens at large, appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. Citizens will serve
on a rotational basis with staggered four (4) year terms. The board shall recommend all rates, charges or fees made and established under authority of
this chapter. The board shall also conduct hearings and hear appeals from services, regulations, and fees charged under this chapter. The Board of
Appraisers' decisions must be presented to Council for approval. (Ord. 4408, 11-19-2018)
8-1-4: RIGHT OF CITY TO TURN WATER OFF:
The City reserves the right at any time without notice to shut off the water supply for repairs, extensions, or for any other maintenance and operation
procedures. The City shall not be responsible for any damage such as bursting of boilers, the breaking of any pipe, water heater, or fixtures, or any other
damage resulting from shutting the water off. (Ord. 2088)
8-1-5: WATER SYSTEM FUNDS:
All fees and charges received and collected under the authority of this chapter shall be deposited and credited to funds designated as the Domestic Water
System Fund and the Irrigation Water System Fund. The account of said funds shall show:
A. Receipts and expenditures for the maintenance and operation of the water system, and
B. Any payments into a Sinking Fund established for the purpose of paying principal of, and interest on, the City's water bond indebtedness, as may be
outstanding.
When budgeted and appropriated, funds and credits to the account of the Domestic Water System Fund shall also be available for the payment of the
requirements of the necessary maintenance, operation, repairs and upkeep of the City's domestic water system. To the extent legally possible, funds shall
also be available for payment into a Sinking Fund established for the payment of the principal of and interest on any of the City's water bond indebtedness,
as may be outstanding. (Ord. 2088; amd. Ord. 3071)
8-1-6: DOMESTIC WATER USER CHARGE:
The domestic water user charge is established to cover operation and maintenance costs of the system, and to provide a fund to pay for capital
improvement costs, additions, participation in oversized extensions to the system, or redemption of bonds that have been used to finance system
improvements, all as a part of the City's responsibility to provide adequate domestic water service and facilities. For new connections, the water user
charge is to begin when the meter has been installed. All owners who derive benefit from the City's domestic water system shall, in return for said benefit,
pay user charges. (Ord. 2088)
8-1-7: IRRIGATION WATER ASSESSMENT:
The irrigation water assessment shall be established by the council pursuant to state code. (Ord. 2088)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 166/410
8-1-8: SPECIAL DOMESTIC WATER USER CHARGE FOR OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
The city may provide service from the domestic water system to individual properties that are partially or entirely outside the corporate limits of the city. In
so doing, the following procedure shall be followed:
A. Each request for such service shall be made in writing, addressed to the director of public works; and
B. Applicant shall sign an agreement to be annexed if their property is not contiguous to city limits. If the applicant's property is contiguous to city limits,
the property must be annexed before connection may be made. An applicant shall apply for annexation through the planning and community
development division of the department of public works.
Such special domestic water users shall comply with all regulations of this chapter. The domestic water user will be considered a special user as long as
the property being served remains outside the city limits. The special domestic water user shall be charged fees and user charges at a rate greater than
that of a similar user who is entirely within the city limits. (Ord. 2088; amd. Ord. 3071)
8-1-9: INSPECTION FEES:
The city has the authority to assess the owner an inspection fee to cover the city's cost of providing inspection of facilities installed by the owner or his
agent. (Ord. 2088)
8-1-10: CONNECTION FEES:
The city has the authority to assess the developer and/or landowner hookup fees which are related to the cost of providing city water service lines, meters
and city water mains. A copy of current hookup fees is on file at the city. Provided, however, that hookup fees may be deferred at the discretion of the city
for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days or a request for issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. A request for deferral under
this section shall be made by written application of the developer and/or landowner. (Ord. 4041, 1-7-2013)
8-1-11: IMPACT FEES:
The city has the authority to assess the developer and/or landowner impact fees which are for the purpose of providing a more equitable distribution of
water system costs relating to such items as water supply development, storage, transmission lines and other off site improvements. (Ord. 2088)
8-1-12: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
The materials and methods used for construction of city and private water lines and appurtenances shall conform to the requirements of all codes and
specifications as may be adopted by the city. The city may reject any materials or workmanship for cause and upon such order the rejected materials shall
be removed and replaced with approved materials. (Ord. 2088; amd. Ord. 3071)
8-1-13: WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS:
All proposed extensions of the city water system to serve undeveloped areas within the existing city limits, newly annexed areas or areas outside the city
limits shall comply with existing policies, specifications, master plans, or requirements established by the city engineer. The plans for all extensions to the
city water system shall be prepared under the direction of and signed by a registered Idaho professional engineer and three (3) copies of the plans shall be
filed with the city. In approving a plan for extension to the city water system, the city reserves the right to stipulate other requirements such as a special
permit fee, rights of way easement limits, sequence of construction, time limits for having existing service disrupted, the filing of a performance bond and
other similar measures as may be required to protect the public. No work shall commence on any such extension of the city water system until the
extension project has been approved by the city and a written permit has been issued. A permit shall not be issued until all applicable fees have been paid.
All water main extensions and appurtenances made for the purpose of serving the development shall be constructed at the expense of the developer by a
qualified contractor in accordance with city specifications and subject to conditions and fees which may be established by the city. (Ord. 2088)
All oversized water mains shall be furnished and installed by the developer. The developer shall be eligible to request reimbursement for oversized mains
in accordance with policy established by the city. The reimbursement amount shall be computed and given in accordance with said policy. (Ord. 4299, 1-
17-2017)
8-1-14: EXTENDING DOMESTIC WATER SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS; REQUIREMENTS:
All extensions of domestic water service outside the city limits shall be recommended by the board of appraisers and approved by the council on a case by
case basis. Said extensions of service shall be granted only when in the best interest of the city. The extension of services is a privilege and not a right and
is intended for those areas likely to be annexed to the city in the near future. In determining whether to allow an extension of domestic water service, the
following criteria shall be considered: (Ord. 4299, 1-17-2017)
A. The city may, at its option, require prepayment of water connection fees.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 167/410
B. Whether the extension of water service would create an adverse impact upon existing facilities or create economic burdens for future operation and
maintenance. (Ord. 2088; amd. Ord. 3071)
C. Water line extensions shall be made at no cost to the city. Lines shall be adequately sized for future growth. A developer may apply for reimbursement
for additional costs associated with oversized lines required by the city either within the proposed development or in the extension of city lines.
Reimbursement requests shall be in accordance with policy established by the city. (Ord. 4299, 1-17-2017)
D. Whether the city water system has adequate capacity to serve existing development, the proposed development for which the extension is requested
and all probable development within the city and between the city and proposed development.
E. The proposed developer must consent in a form acceptable to the city and binding on the development to annexation by the city at the city's option and
convenience. (Ord. 2088; amd. Ord. 3071)
8-1-15: CONSTRUCTION CERTIFICATION:
The city has the authority to require the developer responsible for major line extensions to supply the city with a statement from a licensed engineer
certifying that the materials and construction were installed and tested in conformance with city specifications. (Ord. 2088)
8-1-16: GUARANTEE; ONE YEAR:
Following final inspection and acceptance by the city of an extension of the city water system it shall become the property of the city. The
developer/contractor shall guarantee all materials and workmanship for a one year period and shall make any repairs, adjustments or replacements due to
faulty materials or workmanship without any cost to the city. (Ord. 2088)
8-1-17: NEW WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection to a city water main or service line or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining
authorization from the city. The granting of said authorization shall be contingent upon compliance with specifications, plans and conditions established by
the city.
All new water meters shall be installed by the city or its duly authorized representative. The city shall maintain a schedule of estimated costs for installation
of publicly owned water service lines, meters and appurtenances. Said schedule shall be adjusted periodically as is necessary to offset varying materials
and labor costs. Construction of city water service lines within new subdivisions and developments shall be the responsibility of the developer. (Ord. 2088)
8-1-18: PRIVATE WATER SERVICE LINE:
All workmanship and materials used in the installation of private water service lines shall conform to city specifications and codes. The furnishings of all
labor and materials shall be the sole responsibility of the owner. (Ord. 2088)
8-1-19: PRIVATE FIRE SERVICE CONNECTION:
All materials and workmanship used in the installation of private fire service connection lines shall conform to city specifications and adopted code. The
furnishing of all labor and materials shall be the sole responsibility of the owner. A Nampa city engineering or water division inspector must witness any fire
line tap. Only a contractor approved by the city of Nampa engineering division may perform a fire line tap on a city water main, with one exception: The
Nampa city water division may perform the fire line tap for a contractor upon receipt of a fire line tap fee. A copy of the current fire line tap fee is and shall
be kept on file with the city. (Ord. 2088; amd. Ord. 3071)
8-1-20: UNAUTHORIZED USE:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except one duly authorized by the city, to operate, interfere with, or connect anything to or modify or change any portion
of the city water system, i.e., hydrants, valves, pipes, shutoff valves, ditches. Further it shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the access to any fire
hydrant or water system appurtenances.
Violation of this section is declared to be unlawful or an offense, the same shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punished by applicable fines and jail time
in accordance with currently adopted state law. (Ord. 3844, 1-5-2009)
8-1-21: WASTE OF DOMESTIC WATER:
It shall be unlawful for any water user to waste water or allow it to be wasted by imperfect water stops, valves or leaky pipes that are not under the
jurisdiction of the city, or to permit the malicious or wilful consumption of water, having no beneficial use. The city, based on meter readings, will make a
determination of where water has been wasted and shall notify the user of that determination. It shall be the user's responsibility to make the necessary
repairs, or to institute actions that will correct the situation within sixty (60) days of the city's notification to the user. All costs incurred, including the cost of
pumping wasted water and any repairs shall be the responsibility of the user. (Ord. 2088)
8-1-22: WASTE OF IRRIGATION WATER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 168/410
It is and shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit the waste of irrigation water by allowing said water to flow on or upon any street, alley or other
public right of way in the city, or by allowing said water to flow on or upon adjacent or adjoining property so as to cause unnecessary inconvenience or
expense to the owner of such adjacent or adjoining property or by using more of said water than good husbandry requires for the maintenance and
cultivation of the premises being irrigated.
When it has come to the attention of the city that a wasting of water has occurred, the city shall notify the user of that determination. It shall then be the
user's responsibility to make the necessary repairs, or to institute actions that will correct the situation within forty eight (48) hours of the city's notification
to the user. If the situation has not been corrected or is repeated, then the city may fine and/or prosecute the user. Violation of the provisions of this section
shall constitute an infraction per violation.
This section may be enforced by the issuance of an irrigation citation by a duly authorized representative or enforcement officer to the property owner or
responsible party who caused the wasting of irrigation waters. Said citation is intended to discourage repeat offenders and constant abusers from waste
and is not intended to penalize the regular and otherwise productive use of municipal irrigation waters. (Ord. 3439, 4-18-2005)
8-1-23: USE OF DOMESTIC WATER FOR IRRIGATION:
It shall be unlawful to use or supply domestic water or cross connect domestic water lines with pressure irrigation lines in order to furnish irrigation service
to any property within the city of Nampa, except under the following circumstances:
A. No pressure irrigation system, whether private or city owned and operated, is immediately available, as determined by the city engineer, to any
certain property in question; and
B. A dedicated meter and a backflow device are integrated into the irrigation water delivery system to any particular property; and
C. Appropriate permits are issued and obtained by the installer of the backflow device from the city approving its emplacement. Only appropriately
licensed individuals shall be/are authorized to emplace said devices.
Said devices shall be certified by a licensed individual on a yearly basis, in accordance with the clean water act, by a state of Idaho certified and licensed
backflow specialist; and such certification shall then be forwarded to the city of Nampa. Failure to comply may be cause for the city to, at its option,
terminate service, repair, or replace the device and assess all costs to the corresponding property owner from whom the reparation was made. (Ord. 2088)
8-1-24: USE OF CITY WATER REQUIRED:
A. Connection To City System; Exception: The owner or occupant of any house, building or property used for residential, commercial, industrial,
governmental or recreational use, or any other purpose, situated within the city which is abutting on or having a permanent right of access to any street,
alley or right of way in which there is located a city water line is hereby required to cease using any other water system and at his expense to connect
such building directly with the city water in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within fifteen (15) calendar days after the date of official
notice from the city to do so; provided, however, that said city water is within three hundred feet (300') of any property line where said building to be
served is located. Provided, further, however, properties which are served by private systems on the effective date hereof, and properties annexed into
the city at the request of the city and not the owner thereof which have their own water system, are excepted from this requirement until such systems
fail. A property owner may request to be connected to the city water system at any time at their own expense.
B. Disconnection Of Private System Required: At such time as the city water system becomes available to the property served by the private water
system, and the owner or tenant connects his property to city services as required, it is mandatory that the private water supply is not connected or
cross connected in any way to the water lines served by the city water system. The disconnection of the private water supply line shall be inspected
and approved by the waterworks superintendent or his designated representative.
C. Disconnection From City Water System Prohibited: Once connected to the city water system, it shall be unlawful to disconnect from the city water
system. (Ord. 3293, 1-5-2004)
8-1-25: IRRIGATION CITATIONS AND PROCEDURE; FAILURE TO PAY CITATION AN INFRACTION; FINES:
A. Any duly authorized water department representative or enforcement officer observing a violation of the provisions of this chapter may leave upon the
violating premises or serve upon a responsible party an irrigation citation which shall provide the citation number, the date and hour, property address
and location, nature of violation, fine amount, and the enforcement party's or designated person's name or identification number. The irrigation citation
shall notify the property owner or responsible party of the fine for the violation and the method of payment. In the event that an irrigation violation has
not been remedied within twenty four (24) hours after the first violation, additional irrigation citations may be served for each day's continuing violations.
When the identity of the responsible party cannot be determined, the owner or person or the corporation in whose name the real property upon which
the violation occurs is registered or the named lessees in a rental or lease agreement of said premises shall be presumed prima facie responsible for
said violation.
B. In order to eliminate burdening courts with misdemeanor violations of irrigation ordinances and to eliminate insofar as possible public inconvenience,
each person receiving an irrigation citation under this chapter shall pay at city hall the appropriate fine for the irrigation violations for which an irrigation
citation may be issued, as listed in this section.
1. Overuse/excessive use of irrigation waters.
2. Allowing irrigation water to be wasted by running into depressions or dry channels so that the same cannot be used for irrigation purposes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 169/410
3. Allowing irrigation water to run onto public streets and roadways.
4. Second irrigation violation within thirty (30) days of the first violation.
C. Fines for irrigation violations listed in this chapter shall be established by resolution of the council upon recommendation of the chief of police and the
city water department.
D. Any person committing third, fourth or subsequent violations of the irrigation ordinance within thirty (30) days of the first violation shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor.
E. Upon the failure of the owner or responsible party to pay the required fine within seven (7) calendar days, the chief of police, enforcement officer or
designated representative may, after giving written notice of intent to cite the irrigation violation as an infraction, file an infraction citation or complaint
with the magistrate division of the district court against the owner of the land or responsible party cited for the violation of this chapter. Written notice to
the owner or responsible party is deemed sufficient if mailed to the last known address of such person. The complaint may be signed after seven (7)
days from the date of notice. (Ord. 3439, 4-18-2005)
8-1-26: UTILITY REIMBURSEMENT FEES:
The city of Nampa has adopted, and may update, from time to time, a utility reimbursement policy, which provides a mechanism for a developer of a
property who has paid for and constructed potable water, sanitary sewer, or irrigation utilities of a size or depth greater than needed to serve only said
developer's property, or off site from the developer's property, and to be reimbursed a pro rata share of such costs from other properties which benefit from
those improvements, as the benefiting properties develop. The city may establish an application and administration fee to process and administer the
reimbursement agreement in an amount to be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 4299, 1-17-2017)
8-1-27: CLEARANCE OF FIRE HYDRANTS:
Fire hydrants must remain visible without obstruction from any city right of way at all times. Objects or types of obstruction include, but are not limited to,
posts, fences, vehicles, natural plant, tree and shrub growth, rubbish, landscaping, solid waste, storage and other materials. Fire hydrants shall be painted
only safety yellow and the fire department may paint the outlet caps to indicate the volume of water available from the hydrant.
The minimum clearance shall be three feet (3') around the circumference of fire hydrants at all times.
Violation of this section is declared to be unlawful or an offense, the same shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punished by applicable fines and jail time
in accordance with currently adopted state law. (Ord. 3844, 1-5-2009)
Chapter 2
SEWER REGULATIONS
8-2-1: BASIS FOR CHARGES:
There is hereby established a system of periodic service charges and fees for the use of, and for service rendered by the sewer system and sewage
disposal facilities, which said service charges and fees are based on the volume and concentration of biochemical oxygen demand and suspended solids
in the liquid effluent discharged into the sewer system. The rates, charges and fees provided by this chapter are levied and assessed against each
premises having any sewer connection with the sanitary sewer system of the City, or intercepting sewers, or otherwise discharging sanitary sewage,
industrial wastewater, or other liquids directly into the sanitary sewage disposal system or facilities of said City. (Ord. 2088)
8-2-2: SEWER FUND:
All fees and charges received and collected under authority of this chapter shall be deposited and credited to a special fund to be designated as the Sewer
Fund. The accounts of said fund shall show all receipts and expenditures of the construction, maintenance, upkeep and repair of the sewer collection and
treatment system and all payments on sewer bonds of the City which shall from time to time be outstanding. As provided by law, when budgeted and
appropriated, the funds and credits to the account of the Sewer Fund shall be available for the payment of the requirements for the maintenance,
operation, repairs and upkeep of the sewer system and sewage disposal facilities of the City and to the extent legally available for payment into a Sinking
Fund established for the payment of the principal of and interest on the general obligation sewer bonds of the City which shall from time to time be
outstanding. (Ord. 2088)
8-2-3: IMPROPER USE OF SYSTEM AND PERMITS:
Any property owner, or sewer user violating the provisions of this section shall upon notice immediately install such preliminary treatment through
separators, traps, and/or chemical, physical, or biochemical processes as will make and assure that the sewage contributed from such premises will meet
the requirements of this chapter.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, surface drainage, or cooling water into any
sanitary sewer. (Ord. 2088)
8-2-4: BOARD OF APPRAISERS; DUTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 170/410
There is a Board of Appraisers, as the same is referenced in section 3-1-1 of this Code and section 8-1-3 of this title, consisting of the following: Finance
Director, Public Works Director, City Engineer, and three (3) citizens at large, appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. Citizens will serve
on a rotational basis with staggered four (4) year terms. The board shall recommend all rates, charges or fees made and established under authority of
this chapter. The board shall also conduct hearings and hear appeals from services, regulations, and fees charged under this chapter. The Board of
Appraisers' decisions must be presented to Council for approval. (Ord. 4408, 11-19-2018)
8-2-5: FINAL SCHEDULE:
The Board of Appraisers shall submit a final schedule of rates and charges to the Council. The Council has the power to approve, confirm, modify or
amend the same, and the decision of the Council shall be final. (Ord. 2088)
8-2-6: AUTHORITY TO CONNECT:
No connection shall be made to a city sewer line except in compliance with city regulations and under an authorization issued by competent authority of
the city. (Ord. 2088)
8-2-7: INSPECTION:
No connection to a city owned sewer line shall be made and sewage permitted to flow through such connection except pursuant to inspection and
approval issued by the public works department. (Ord. 2088)
8-2-8: REJECTIONS OR DISAPPROVALS:
The public works department may reject any material or workmanship for cause and upon his order rejected material shall be removed and replaced with
approved material. Disapproved workmanship shall cause the removal and replacement of all materials involved, including appurtenant excavation,
backfilling and other work items. (Ord. 2088)
8-2-9: SEWER SERVICE CONSTRUCTION:
A. No sewer service connection shall be constructed except pursuant to permit or authorization issued by the public works department.
B. All construction shall conform to standards established by the city, copies of which are on file in the office of the city engineer.
C. No sewer service connection shall be placed in service until after a permit or authorization has been issued by the city and thereafter no sewer service
connection shall be used after the city has formally notified the user that such connection is in need of repair, replacement, or alteration. Such
prohibition shall continue until the specified requirements shall have been met in full and a permit or authorization has been issued by the city to use
the house service connection in question. (Ord. 2088)
8-2-10: PERMIT:
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the public works department. (Ord. 2088)
8-2-11: NUMBER OF CONNECTIONS LIMITED:
Not more than two (2) houses or buildings shall be connected to the same service line, without the written permission of the public works director. (Ord.
2088; amd. Ord. 3147)
8-2-12: SEWER CONNECTION FEES:
The city shall have the authority to assess the owner a sewer connection fee for treatment plant capacity, trunk line capacity and main line construction.
The fee is established by resolution of the council. Provided, however, that the sewer connection fee may be deferred at the discretion of the city for not
more than one hundred eighty (180) days or a request for issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. A request for deferral under this
section shall be made by written application of the owner. No person shall be permitted to connect to any sewer line without having first paid the
connection fee or received a deferral. (Ord. 4042, 1-7-2013)
8-2-13: SEWER SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS; REQUIREMENTS AND FEES:
Regulations for sewer service connection fees and extensions outside the city shall follow the same requirements as those for water service outside the
city. A copy of the listing of current connection fees is, and shall be maintained, on file with the city. (Ord. 2088)
8-2-14: SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS; CONSTRUCTION METHODS, MATERIALS, CERTIFICATION AND GUARANTEE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 171/410
Regulations relative to sewer main construction shall follow the same requirements as those for water mains and prescribed in chapter 1 of this title. (Ord.
2088; amd. Ord. 3071)
Chapter 3
SEPTIC TANK CLEANERS
8-3-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person may engage in the business of the removal of biological waste or other refuse from cesspools, septic tanks, chemical toilets or other similar
receptacles within the city without first obtaining a license. (Ord. 2104)
8-3-2: PREREQUISITE:
Licenses shall only be issued to those persons who have a current district health department permit. (Ord. 2104)
8-3-3: LICENSE FEES, TERM AND REVOCATION:
License fees are established by council resolution. Licenses are issued on a calendar year and expire at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight December 31.
Licenses may be revoked by the city for cause. (Ord. 2104)
8-3-4: USER CHARGES:
All licensees using the wastewater facility are subject to a user fee established and updated by the board of appraisers. (Ord. 2104)
8-3-5: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE AND UNIT NUMBER:
Each license shall include vehicle license plate number, maximum tank gallon capacity and unit number. Unit numbers are issued by the wastewater
treatment plant and must be displayed on vehicle(s) as directed. (Ord. 2104)
8-3-6: DUMPING OF REFUSE:
Any licensee by paying the applicable user charges has the privilege of dumping biological waste or other refuse from cesspools, septic tanks, chemical
toilets or other similar receptacles directly into the sewer lines of the city at a place and in the manner designated by the wastewater superintendent. Each
vehicle is subject to inspection and sampling of a load at any time. (Ord. 2104)
8-3-7: LIMITING TYPE OF REFUSE:
No licensee shall dump into any facilities of the wastewater division biological waste or other refuse from cesspools, septic tanks, chemical toilets or other
similar receptacles as will harm or damage the facilities of the wastewater system or its personnel. Hazardous waste, alone or in any mixture with domestic
sewage is prohibited. (Ord. 2104)
8-3-8: RECORDS:
Each licensee so dumping authorized and acceptable waste into the wastewater system shall keep a written log on a prescribed form at the treatment
plant. A written log is also required to be in each truck, available for inspection at any time by the wastewater staff. The log shall contain the time and
source of the load, and the quantity and type of waste being hauled. (Ord. 2104)
8-3-9: RESTRAINTS FROM DUMPING:
Each licensee is bound by the rules and regulations of the wastewater division with respect to dumping of any septic tank or chemical toilets or similar
wastes into the wastewater facility. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be approved by the board of appraisers and be on file at the wastewater
office. Failure to comply to these rules and regulations may result in termination of dumping privileges. (Ord. 2104)
Chapter 4
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM
8-4-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city of Nampa through the regulation of nonstorm
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 172/410
water discharges and storm water discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This chapter
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with
requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this chapter are:
A. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by storm water discharges by any user.
B. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
C. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, cost assessments, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this chapter. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-2005)
8-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: Employees or designees of the director of the public works department designated to enforce this chapter.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention
and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly
to storm water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to
control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one
acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstorm water discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in section 8-4-7 of this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: Either of the following: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter
the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstorm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater,
and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said
drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency, or any drain or conveyance connected
from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by
an authorized enforcement agency.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: A permit issued by EPA (or by a state
under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC section 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the
permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area wide basis.
NONSTORM WATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the
owner's agent.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordnances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances
and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a
building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Publicly owned facilities by which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and humanmade
or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
STORM WATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN: A document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a
person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water,
storm water conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-2005)
8-4-3: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 173/410
8-4-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
The public works department shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the
authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the director of the authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-2005)
8-4-5: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
chapter. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-2005)
8-4-6: ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-2005)
8-4-7: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including, but not limited to,
pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards. The commencement, conduct or
continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
A. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this chapter: water line flushing or other potable water sources,
landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active ground water dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation,
springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated_typically less than 1 ppm
chlorine), and firefighting activities.
B. Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
C. Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test.
D. The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstorm water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the federal environmental protection agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-2005)
8-4-8: CONNECTION PROHIBITIONS:
No person shall connect, or cause any connection to be made, into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses. The construction, use, maintenance
or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections
made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. A person
is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. (Ord.
3431, 3-7-2005)
8-4-9: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
A. Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The public works department may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access
to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize
damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illicit Discharge: Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access
terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing.
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the
authorized enforcement agency. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-2005)
8-4-10: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 174/410
compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the public works department prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. (Ord.
3431, 3-7-2005)
8-4-11: MONITORING OF DISCHARGES:
A. Applicability: This section applies to all facilities that have storm water discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity.
B. Access To Facilities:
1. The public works department shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be necessary
to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before
entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement
agency.
2. Facility operators shall allow the public works department ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of
any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
3. The public works department shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized
enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's storm water discharge.
4. The public works department has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used
to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
5. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the public works department and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by
the operator.
6. Unreasonable delays in allowing the public works department access to a permitted facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this
chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity or construction
activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of
conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter.
7. If the public works department has been refused access to any part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court
of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-2005)
8-4-12: REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS BY THE USE OF BEST
MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment, or construction site, shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of structural and
nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to
implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-2005)
8-4-13: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S., that person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment,
and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of
the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the public works department
in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-2005)
8-4-14: ENFORCEMENT:
Whenever the public works department finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the authorized
enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
A. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
B. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
C. That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
D. The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 175/410
E. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
F. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or
restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the
work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-2005)
8-4-15: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination to the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received
within ten (10) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority, or his/her designee, shall take place
within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final. (Ord. 3431,
3-7-2005)
8-4-16: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice of
violation (or in the event of an appeal, within 15 days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement
agency) then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all
measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any
premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-
2005)
8-4-17: COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION:
Within ten (10) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified in writing of the cost of the abatement, including
administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within ten (10) days of the date of the written
notification. Hearing on the protest before the appropriate authority, or his/her designee, shall take place within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of
the written protest. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final.
If the amount due is not paid by the expiration of the time in which to file the written protest if no written protest is filed, or within a timely manner as
determined by the decision of the municipal authority, the cost of the abatement shall become a special assessment against the property and shall
constitute a lien on the property. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-2005)
8-4-18: LIABILITY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more
than twelve (12) equal payments. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-2005)
8-4-19: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the
person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-
2005)
8-4-20: VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's
expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-2005)
8-4-21: PENALTIES:
A. Any discharger who violates an order of the city, or who fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, or any regulations, rules, or permits of the city,
issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be liable to the city for an administrative penalty. The amount of such administrative penalty shall be not less than
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation per day nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day.
B. Any discharger who violates an order of the city, or who fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, or any regulations, rules, or permits of the city,
issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be liable to the city for a civil penalty. The amount of such civil penalty shall not exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per violation. Each day upon which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate violation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 176/410
C. Any person that has violated or continues to violate this chapter shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law and shall be subject
to a criminal penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed six (6) months.
The public works department may recover all attorney fees, court costs, and all other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including
sampling and monitoring expenses. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-2005)
8-4-22: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within the
discretion of the public works department to seek cumulative remedies. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-2005)
8-4-23: EFFECTIVE DATE OF CHAPTER:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect upon its passage and publication. All prior ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter are
hereby repealed. (Ord. 3431, 3-7-2005)
Chapter 5
CROSS CONNECTION PROGRAM
8-5-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted for the benefit of consumers receiving their water supply from the city of Nampa by protecting the city water supply system from
actual or potential pollution or contamination through cross connections. The implementation of a proactive cross connection program will do this in
accordance with the state of Idaho department of environmental quality. (Reference IDAPA 58.01.08, chapter 550, section 07, subsection a, Idaho rules for
public drinking water systems) (Ord. 3548, 2-21-2006)
8-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on, or available to, a premises in addition to the purveyor's approved public potable water supply.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, gases or solids from any source back into the customer's plumbing system or the water purveyor's water
distribution system.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: An approved assembly, which counteracts backpressure and/or prevents back siphonage. A reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention assembly, a double check valve assembly, a pressure or atmospheric vacuum breaker shall be considered approved if it has
successfully passed the performance tests of the University of Southern California Engineering Center or other testing laboratories acceptable to the city
and the state of Idaho department of environmental quality.
CITY: The city of Nampa or any authorized agent thereof.
COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Any development on private land that is not heavy industrial or residential. The category includes, but is not limited to,
hospitals, laboratories and other medical facilities, educational institutions, recreational facilities, plant nurseries, multi-apartment buildings, car wash
facilities, minimalls and other business complexes, shopping malls, hotels, office buildings, public warehouses and other light industrial complexes.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the potable water which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the
spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids or waste. Also defined as severe or high hazard.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any actual or potential arrangement whereby the water supply system is connected either directly or indirectly with any
unapproved water supply, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device which contains or may contain any substance
capable of pollution or contamination.
CUSTOMER: Any persons and/or premises receiving water from the city water supply system. (Ord. 3548, 2-21-2006)
8-5-3: PROTECTION AGAINST CROSS CONNECTIONS:
No water service or fire sprinkler system connection shall remain or be installed to any customer unless the water supply system is adequately protected
against cross connection by backflow prevention devices commensurate with the degree of hazard that either does or potentially may exist. The
installation or maintenance of a cross connection, which may endanger the water supply system quality, shall be unlawful and is prohibited. Any such
cross connections now existing or hereafter installed shall be abated. The control or elimination of cross connections shall be in accordance with this
chapter, the most current Pacific Northwest section - American Water Works Association cross connection control manual for accepted procedures and
practices, and the Idaho rules for public drinking water systems, reference chapter 550, section 07, subsection i-iv, or subsequent revisions, together with
any other publications pertaining to cross connection control approved by the director of the state department of environmental quality. (Ord. 3548, 2-21-
2006)
8-5-4: USE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES:
A. Installation Requirements; Certain Circumstances: Backflow prevention assembly shall be installed, if possible, within the confines of the affected
building in a readily accessible location with adequate clearances for maintenance and testing. If the preceding installation is not possible, the
assembly shall be installed in an accessible, aboveground, locked, heated enclosure adjacent to the structure. The structure shall be situated above
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 177/410
seasonal high ground water, shall contain an adequate floor drain, shall provide adequate room for testing and maintenance and shall protect the
device against freezing. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed under any circumstances included in, but not limited to, the following
(reference Pacific Northwest section - American Water Works Association, chapter 7):
1. The domestic service lines to all industrial and commercial development structures within the city of Nampa, regardless of business type, will be
required to install a reduced pressure backflow assembly.
2. Premises housing an auxiliary water supply that has not been approved by the city for its quality and protection.
3. Premises having intricate plumbing arrangements that make it difficult to ascertain whether or not cross connections exist.
4. Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross connections could not be made during reasonable hours, at sufficiently short notice
to assure that cross connections do not exist.
5. Premises where any substance handled under pressure could enter into the water supply system. This shall include the handling of process and
cooling waters.
6. Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being created or re-created.
B. Types Of Assemblies For Use: The type of backflow prevention assembly required for a particular situation shall be commensurate with the degree of
hazard presented. The following guides shall be used:
1. Where the water supply system could be contaminated as a result of cross connection, an air gap separation or a reduced pressure backflow
prevention assembly shall be installed.
2. Where cross connection could result in pollution of the water supply system, either of the above method/assembly or a double check valve assembly
shall be used. This determination will be made by the city of Nampa.
3. Back siphonage or back pressure from irrigation sprinkler systems, shall be prevented by the use of a reduced pressure backflow prevention
assembly, at the service connection, a pressure vacuum breaker assembly, or a spill resistant pressure vacuum breaker assembly, as directed by the
city and the state department of environmental quality.
C. Stagnant Water; Double Check Valve Assembly: Facilities having plumbing arrangements connected to the water supply system, where the water
remains stagnant for prolonged periods of time, shall be required to install a double check valve assembly (reference Pacific Northwest section cross
connection control manual, IDAPA 58.01.08, Idaho rules for public drinking water systems).
1. Fire Sprinkler Systems: Fire sprinkler systems that are of the wet or dry type shall be required to install a double check valve assembly. Systems that
are a chemical type or are equipped with an antifreeze loop shall be required to install a reduced pressure backflow assembly. (Ord. 3709, 5-21-
2007)
8-5-5: SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION:
A. Supervision; Expense: Backflow prevention assemblies required by this chapter shall be installed under the supervision of and with the approval of the
city. Such installations shall be completely at the customer's expense.
B. Inspection And Testing:
1. Inspecting Firm: Backflow prevention assemblies installed prior to the effective date hereof shall be inspected and tested by a testing firm of the
customer's choice that is qualified and approved by the city to inspect and test said devices. A list of approved testers will be provided by the water
department. This work shall be at the customer's expense and the results forwarded to the city of Nampa water department.
2. Replacement Of Faulty Parts: Annual inspection and testing of all installed backflow prevention assemblies shall be carried out by a qualified and
approved testing firm of the customer's choice. Any parts found faulty shall be replaced. All inspection, testing and parts replacement data shall be
forwarded to the city. All of this work shall be carried out at the customer's expense.
3. Proof Required: All backflow testers will be required to show proof of the following:
a. Carry a minimum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) liability insurance.
b. Be licensed or recertified within the past twenty four (24) months.
c. Test equipment must be recalibrated within the past twelve (12) months.
d. Current copy of proof of insurance and recalibration certificate must be on file with the city of Nampa water department.
4. Frequency Of Testing: When the city considers it necessary, because of the degree of hazard involved should any cross connection occur, inspection
and testing may be more frequent than annually.
5. Right Of Entry Allowed: During reasonable hours, all customers shall permit entry of the city to inspect for cross connections.
6. Newly Constructed Premises; Compliance Required: No water service shall be supplied to any newly constructed premises until the said premises
has successfully passed the city inspection for cross connections and complies with this chapter.
C. Existing Industrial And Commercial Structures: Inspection shall be made by the city of Nampa waterworks department to verify that the requirement of a
cross connection control assembly has been met. Inspection shall be made by the city waterworks department after the assembly has been installed
and prior to its certification. Request for inspection shall be the responsibility of the customer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 178/410
D. Final Determination: The Nampa water department shall make the final determination regarding cross connections. (Ord. 3548, 2-21-2006)
8-5-6: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. Grounds For Termination Of Water Service:
1. The following shall be grounds for termination of water service to a customer:
a. Failure to install, maintain, inspect and test any backflow prevention assembly required by this chapter.
b. Refusal of access, during reasonable hours, to any property for the purpose of determining whether or not cross connections exist.
c. Any owner who refuses to comply with current procedures and practices required by this chapter.
2. Only upon the customer's complete compliance with this chapter shall the service be resumed.
B. Penalty Imposed: Any customer who violates or refuses to comply with this chapter, or commits any act or omission that is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall, for each offense, be subject to a
fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Every day of any violation or offense or commission of any prohibited act or omission shall constitute a separate violation.
C. False Test Results: Any tester found to have turned in false test results on a backflow prevention assembly shall be banned from testing in the city of
Nampa for a period of six (6) months, upon first violation. If a second violation occurs, the tester will be banned from testing in the city of Nampa
permanently. (Ord. 3548, 2-21-2006)
Chapter 6
STORMWATER AND DRAINAGE SYSTEM UTILITY
(Rep. by Ord. 4006, 2-6-2012)
Chapter 7
RESERVED
Chapter 8
RESERVED
Chapter 9
WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT
8-9-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS; SHORT TITLE:
A. Purpose And Policy: This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for dischargers into the city wastewater collection and treatment system (POTW) and
enables the city to protect public health in conformity with all applicable local, state and federal laws including the clean water act (33 USC 1251 et
seq.) and the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR part 403).
The objectives of this chapter are:
1. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater system which will interfere with the normal operation of the system or the use and
disposal of the resulting sludge in compliance with applicable statutes and regulations;
2. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city wastewater system which do not receive adequate treatment in the POTW, and which will pass
through the system into receiving waters or the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
3. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system;
4. To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public;
5. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the POTW.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 179/410
B. Provisions And Applications: This chapter provides for the regulation of discharges into the city wastewater system through the enforcement of
administrative regulations; this chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW. This chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits;
authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for
the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. This chapter does not provide for recovery of
operations, maintenance or replacement costs of the POTW, or the costs associated with the construction of collection and treatment systems used by
industrial dischargers, in proportion to their use of the POTW, which are the subject of separate enactments.
C. Public Works Director: Except as otherwise provided herein, the public works director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the public works director may be delegated by the public works director to other city personnel.
D. Short Title: This chapter shall be known as the WASTEWATER DISCHARGER COMPLIANCE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 3765, 12-17-2007)
8-9-2: ACRONYMS:
The following acronyms as used in this chapter shall have the reference to and therefore the meaning of the word as herein set forth:
ASPP Accidental spill prevention plan
BMPs Best management practices
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of federal regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA U.S. environmental protection agency
gpd Gallons per day
l Liter
LEL Lower explosive limit
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National pollutant discharge elimination system
O&M Operation and maintenance
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource conservation and recovery act
SIC Standard industrial classification
SU Sewer user
SWDA Solid waste disposal act (42 USC 6901 et seq.)
TDS Total dissolved solids
TSS Total suspended solids
USC United States Code
(Ord. 3765, 12-17-2007)
8-9-3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall mean and refer as herein set forth:
ACT: The clean water act of 1972 (33 USC 1251 et seq.) as amended.
APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: For any specified pollutant, general discharge prohibitions, city's specific limitations on discharge, state
standards, the categorical pretreatment standards (when effective), whichever standard is most stringent.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY: The regional administrator of EPA region 10.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER: A. If the user is a corporation:
1. The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or
2. The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long term environmental compliance with environmental laws
and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control
mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures. This authorization must be made in writing by the principal executive officer or ranking elected official and submitted to the city prior to
or together with the report being submitted by the user and contain the certification in subsection 8-9-6D1 of this chapter.
B. If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively.
C. If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her designee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 180/410
D. The individuals described in subsections A through C of this definition may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city and contain the
certification in subsection 8-9-6D1 of this chapter. If an authorization in this definition is no longer accurate because a different individual or position
has responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of this definition must be submitted to
the city prior to or together with any reports to be signed by the authorized representative.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): BMPs means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR section 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), usually expressed as a concentration (milligrams per liter, mg/l).
BOARD OF SEWER APPRAISERS: A board consisting of the mayor, the director of administrative services, the public works director, the treasurer, the
wastewater superintendent and waterworks superintendent. The board shall establish all rates, charges or fees charged under this chapter. The board
shall also conduct hearings and hear appeals from services, regulations, and fees charged under this chapter. The board's decisions shall be presented to
the council for approval.
BRINE: Wastewater containing total dissolved solids (TDS) in excess of twenty five thousand milligrams per liter (25,000 mg/l) or 0.2 pounds per gallon.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the
US EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR
chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405_471.
CATEGORICAL USER: A user covered by one of EPA's categorical pretreatment standards.
CITY: City of Nampa, or the city council of Nampa, or its authorized representatives.
COLOR: The optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum adsorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent (100%) transmittance is
equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of
either flow or time.
CONTROL AUTHORITY: The city of Nampa whose pretreatment program has been approved in accordance with the requirements of 40 CFR 403.11.
COOLING WATER OR NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material,
intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. Cooling water can be discharged from any use, such as air conditioning, heat exchangers,
cooling or refrigeration to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DISCHARGER; INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGER: Any nonresidential user who discharges an effluent into a POTW by means of pipes, conduits, pumping
stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water intercepting ditches, and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant thereto.
DOMESTIC USER (RESIDENTIAL USER): Any person who contributes, causes or allows the contribution of wastewater into the Nampa POTW that is of
a similar volume and/or chemical makeup as that of a residential dwelling unit. Dischargers from a residential dwelling unit typically include up to one
hundred (100) gallons per capita per day, 0.2 pounds of BOD per capita, and 0.17 pounds of TSS per capita.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA): The U.S. environmental protection agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management
division director, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE: Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to publication by EPA of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the act.
EXISTING USER: For noncategorical users, an "existing user" is defined as any user that is discharging wastewater prior to the effective date hereof.
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream or without consideration
of time.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the act.
INDUSTRIAL USER: See definition of User Or Industrial User.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting from any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the development,
recovery or processing of natural resources.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, either: a) inhibits or disrupts the POTW,
its treatment processes or operations; b) inhibits or disrupts its sludge processes, use or disposal; or c) is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
city's NPDES permit or to the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits
issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): section 405 of the clean water act, the solid waste disposal act (SWDA) (including title II
more commonly referred to as the resource conservation and recovery act (RCRA)), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA, the clean air act and the toxic substances control act.
LOCAL LIMITS: Pretreatment standards developed by the city to enforce the specific and general prohibitions, and to prevent POTW and environmental
problems due to nondomestic discharges.
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT: The maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined
from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
MAY: Is permissive.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 181/410
MEDICAL WASTES: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
NPDES: National pollutant discharge elimination system permit program as administered by EPA or state.
NEW SOURCE: A. Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge, the construction of which commenced after
publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the clean water act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
1. The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
2. The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an
existing source; or
3. The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing
source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source,
should be considered.
B. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a
new building, structure facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection A2 or A3 of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
C. Construction of a new source as defined herein has commenced if the owner or operator has:
1. Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site construction program:
a. Placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or
b. Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for
the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
2. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection C2.
NEW USER: A "new user" is not a "new source" and is defined as a user that applies to the city for a new building permit or any person who occupies an
existing building and plans to begin discharge of wastewater to the city's collection system after the effective date hereof. Any person that buys an existing
facility that is discharging nondomestic wastewater will be considered an "existing user" if no significant changes are made in the manufacturing operation.
OTHER WASTES: Decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, refuse, ashes, garbage, offal, oil, tar, chemicals and all other substances except sewage
and industrial wastes.
PASS THROUGH: The discharge of pollutants through the POTW into navigable waters in quantities or concentrations which are a cause, in whole or in
part, of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERMITTEE: A person or user issued a wastewater discharge permit.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or
any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, or local governmental entities.
pH: A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units.
POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes, and the
characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, chemical oxygen demand (COD), toxicity, or odor).
PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to (or in lieu of) introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
processes; by process changes; or by other means (except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment
standard).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment
standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR STANDARDS: Prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits and/or BMPs
established by the city.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITED DISCHARGES: Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these
prohibitions appear in section 8-9-4 of this chapter.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A "treatment works" as defined by section 212 of the act (33 USC 1292) which is owned by the city
of Nampa. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial
wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also means the city of Nampa.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE: Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
SEWAGE: Water carried human wastes or combination of water carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments, together with such ground, surface, storm or other waters as may be present.
SEWER: Any pipe, conduit, ditch or other device used to collect and transport sewage or storm water from the generating source.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 182/410
SHALL: Is mandatory.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: An industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who:
A. Is subject to or potentially subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
B. Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling,
and boiler blowdown wastewater); or
C. Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW treatment plant; or
D. Is determined by the city to have a significant impact or potential for significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing
industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system.
Upon finding a user meeting the criteria in subsections A through D of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from a user (and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.80(6)) determine such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
SLUG LOAD: Any substance released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or concentration which could cause a violation of the discharge standards in
section 8-9-4 of this chapter or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch
discharge.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE: A classification pursuant to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" issued by the
United States office of management and budget.
STORM WATER: Any flow of water which is storm water runoff and/or snow melt runoff and/or surface runoff and/or drainage.
SUPERINTENDENT: The person assigned to be in charge of the operation of the wastewater treatment plant at the time of this reading, and who is
charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter, or his authorized representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS): A well mixed sample that is filtered through a weighed standard glass fiber filter and the residue retained on the filter and
dried at one hundred three (103) to one hundred five degrees Celsius (105°C). The increase in weight of the filter represents the suspended solids.
TOTAL DISSOLVED SOLIDS (TDS): The portion of solids that passes through a filter of 2.0 .m (or smaller) nominal pore size and subsequently dried at
one hundred three (103) to one hundred five degrees Celsius (105°C). The dried residual represents total dissolved solids. TDS consists of organic and
inorganic constituents.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS): The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and
which is determined by procedure as defined in Suspended Solids (SS).
TOXIC POLLUTANTS: Those substances listed in the federal priority pollutant list and any other pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in
regulations promulgated by the administrator of the environmental protection agency under section 307 of the clean water act (33 USC 1317).
TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT: The discharge from the POTW into waters of the United States.
UPSET: An exceptional incident in which a discharger unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
standards adopted by the city, due to the factors beyond the reasonable control of the discharger, and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation thereof.
USER OR INDUSTRIAL USER: A source of indirect discharge. The source shall not include "domestic user" as defined herein.
WASTEWATER: Industrial waste, or sewage or any other waste including that which may be combined with any ground water, surface water or storm
water that may be discharged to the POTW.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: An authorization or equivalent control document issued by the city to users discharging wastewater to the POTW.
The permit may contain appropriate pretreatment standards and requirements as set forth in this chapter. It may also be called an "industrial wastewater
acceptance permit".
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT: That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. (Ord.
3765, 12-17-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4427 - PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS. Go to new ordinance.
8-9-4: REGULATIONS:
A. General Discharge Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass
through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment
standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. The following are specifically prohibited:
1. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction, to cause fire or
explosion or be injurious in any other way to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter
at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent (5%) nor any single reading over ten percent (10%)
of the lower explosive limit of the meter. No waste stream having a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F)
(60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21 is allowed to be discharged to the POTW.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 183/410
2. Solid or viscous substances which will or may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater
system.
a. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l), for
nonbiodegradable (mineral) fats, oils and greases or in excess of two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l) for biodegradable (nonmineral)
fats, oils and greases, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees (32°) and one
hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (or 0° and 65°C).
b. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
(3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater, shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent.
c. Any pretreatment sludges and spent chemicals generated shall be disposed of in accordance with section 405 of the clean water act and subtitles
C and D of the resource conservation and recovery act.
3. Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, or personnel of the system, such as, but not limited to, battery or plating acids and wastes, copper sulfate, chromium salts and
compounds, or salt brine.
4. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to exceed the limitation set forth in the categorical pretreatment standards, as promulgated,
which is hereby adopted by reference.
5. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which, either singly or by interaction, are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life
or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair.
6. Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or treatment residues, sludges, or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to
interfere with the reclamation process. (In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge
use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use
on disposal developed pursuant to the solid waste disposal act, the clean air act, the toxic substances control act, or state standards applicable to
the sludge management method being used.)
7. Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or other disposal system permits.
8. Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions. Color (in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for
photosynthetic activity by more than ten percent (10%) from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life.
9. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference; but in no case, any
liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (66°C), or having temperatures sufficient to cause the
influent to the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F) (40°C) unless the approval authority, upon the request of the
city, approves the alternate limits.
10. Any pollutant released in such strength or volume as to cause interference in the treatment plant.
11. Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to, noncontact cooling water, unless approved by the board of sewer appraisers.
12. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as to exceed limits established by the city in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
13. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
14. Any waters or wastes containing heavy metals and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such a degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the point of discharge exceeds the limits as follows. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless
indicated otherwise. The superintendent may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration based limitations below. Where
a user is subject to a categorical pretreatment standard and a local limit for a given pollutant, the more stringent limit shall apply.
DAILY MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMITS
Arsenic 0.09 mg/l
Cadmium 0.26 mg/l
Chromium 2.26 mg/l
Copper 1.04 mg/l
Cyanide 0.23 mg/l
Lead 0.43 mg/l
Mercury 0.003 mg/l
Nickel 1.20 mg/l
Silver 0.24 mg/l
Zinc 0.99 mg/l
15. Truck or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the city and in accordance with this section.
16. Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the superintendent.
17. Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit.
18. Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 184/410
19. Detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
20. Grease, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime,
stone or marble dusts, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar asphalt
residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
21. Any wastewater, which in the opinion of the superintendent can cause harm either to the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance, unless allowed under special
agreement by the superintendent (except that no special waiver shall be given from categorical pretreatment standards).
22. The contents of any tank or other vessel owned or used by any person in the business of collecting or pumping sewage, effluent, septage or other
wastewater unless said person has first obtained testing and approval as may be generally required by the city of Nampa and paid all fees assessed
for the privilege of said discharge.
23. Persistent pesticides and/or pesticides regulated by the federal insecticide fungicide rodenticide act (FIFRA).
24. Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to
the POTW.
25. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within in the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems.
26. Any hazardous waste as defined in rules published by the state of Idaho or in 40 CFR part 261.
27. Sewage sludge, except in accordance with the city's NPDES permit, providing that it specifically allows the discharge to surface waters of sewage
sludge pollutants.
B. Other Limitations:
1. Categorical Pretreatment Standards: Categorical pretreatment standards as promulgated by the environmental protection agency pursuant to the act
shall be met by all dischargers of the regulated industrial categories. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter
N, parts 405-471, are hereby incorporated. An application for modification of the categorical pretreatment standards may be considered for submittal
to the approval authority by the city, when the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of the pollutants as defined by 40
CFR section 403.7.
2. State Requirements And Limitations: State requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW shall be met by all users which are subject to
such standards in any instance in which they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations, or those in this chapter or other applicable
ordinances.
3. Right Of Revision: The city reserves the right to amend this chapter or an industrial wastewater permit to provide for more stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to the POTW where deemed necessary to comply with the objectives set forth in subsection 8-9-1A of this chapter.
4. Dilution: No discharger shall, without written approval of the superintendent, increase the use of potable or process water in any way, nor mix
separate waste streams for the purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with
the standards set forth in this chapter.
5. Mass Limitations: The city may impose mass limitations on dischargers which are using dilution to meet the pretreatment standards or requirements
of this chapter or, in other cases, where the imposition of mass limitations is deemed appropriate by the city.
6. Special Agreements: The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with users setting out special terms under which they may
discharge to the POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard or federal pretreatment
requirement. However, the user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. They may also
request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from the approval authority. Such a request will be approved only if the user can prove
that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when establishing that categorical pretreatment
standard. A user requesting a fundamentally different factor variance must comply with the procedural substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13.
7. Provide Necessary Treatment: Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve
compliance with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements set out in this chapter within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the
state or the city, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided,
operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to
the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no
way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the city under the provisions
of this chapter.
8. Compliance By Existing Users: Compliance by existing users (categorical users) covered by categorical pretreatment standards shall be within three
(3) years of the date the standard is effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate standard. The city shall establish a final
compliance deadline date for any existing significant industrial user (SIU) not covered by categorical pretreatment standards or for any categorical
user when the local limits for said user are more restrictive than EPA's categorical pretreatment standards.
9. New Users: New source dischargers and "new users" (that fit the definition of SIU) are required to comply with applicable pretreatment standards
within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed 90 days from the beginning of discharge). New sources and "new users" shall install and have in
operating condition and shall "start up" all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to
discharge.
10. Compliance Date: Any wastewater discharge permit issued to a categorical user shall not contain a compliance date beyond any deadline date
established in EPA's categorical pretreatment standards. Any other existing SIU, which is in noncompliance with any local limits shall be provided a
compliance schedule placed in an order or other similar enforcement document as outlined elsewhere in this chapter.
11. Interceptors Provided: Fats, oils, greases, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary
for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of fats, oils, greases, or sand, except that such interceptors shall not be required
for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be so located to be easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at his expense.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 185/410
Interceptor maintenance and cleaning records shall be maintained by the user and made available to pretreatment inspectors for review upon
request. The introduction of chemical, bacterial and/or enzyme or any other additive into a grease or grit interceptor is prohibited unless approved by
the superintendent.
12. Detection Meter: Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved, combustible gas
detection meter.
C. Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans: The city may require any user to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. Where
deemed necessary by the city, facilities to prevent accidental discharge or slug discharges of pollutants shall be provided and maintained at the user's
cost and expense. An accidental spill prevention plan/slug control plan showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be
submitted to the city for review and approval before implementation. The city shall determine which user is required to develop a plan and require said
plan to be submitted within ninety (90) days after notification by the city. Each user shall implement its ASPP as submitted or as modified after such
plan has been reviewed and approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by the city shall not relieve the user
from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this section.
Users shall notify the city wastewater treatment plant immediately after the occurrence of a slug or accidental discharge of substances regulated by this
code. The notification shall include location of discharge date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. Any
affected user shall be liable for any expense, loss, or damage to the POTW, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the city on account
thereof under state or federal law.
Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the city a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge
and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this code or other applicable law.
Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on the user's premises advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug or accidental
discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who may cause or discover such a discharge with respect to emergency notification procedures.
Any user required to develop and implement an accidental discharge/control slug plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the
following:
1. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
2. Description of stored chemicals;
3. Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which
would violate any of the standards in this section; and
4. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training,
building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and
equipment for emergency response.
D. Best Management Practices: The city may develop best management practices (BMPs) to implement this section. Such BMPs shall be considered
discharge limits and pretreatment standards for the purpose of this section and section 307(d) of the act. (Ord. 3765, 12-17-2007)
8-9-5: FEES:
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to provide for the payment of fees from dischargers to the city's wastewater disposal system, to compensate
the city for the cost of administration of the pretreatment programs established herein.
B. Charges And Fees: The city shall adopt charges and fees which may include:
1. Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
2. Fees for filing appeals;
3. Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction.
C. Separable: These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the
city. (Ord. 2696)
8-9-6: ADMINISTRATION; WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
No industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the city; the permit must be
enforceable and contain all the elements in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii)(B). It shall be unlawful to discharge sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes to any
sewer within the jurisdiction of the city, and/or to the POTW without having first complied with the terms of this chapter. All industrial dischargers proposing
to discharge waste to the POTW shall comply with all terms of this chapter prior to discharging waste to the POTW. The city may require other users,
including liquid waste haulers, to obtain wastewater discharge permits to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Domestic users are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter.
A. Disclosure Forms: Prior to the city granting a wastewater discharge permit, the industrial discharger shall complete and file with the city a disclosure
declaration in the form prescribed by the city. Existing industrial dischargers shall file disclosure forms within thirty (30) days of being notified by the city
and proposed new users and new sources shall file their disclosure forms at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting to the POTW. Categorical users
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 186/410
submitting the following information shall have complied with 40 CFR 403.12(b). The city will evaluate the complete disclosure form and data furnished
by the discharger and may require additional information. Within thirty (30) days after full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city shall
notify the discharger of the city's acceptance thereof. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued setting forth limitations of various waste strengths
as addressed under section 8-9-4 of this chapter. The city reserves the right not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The disclosure to be made by
the discharger shall be on written forms provided by the city and shall cover:
1. Disclosure of name of facility, address and location of the facility, owner's and operator's name (if different).
2. Disclosure of wastewater sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass where required by the city) of regulated pollutants
contained in section 8-9-4 of this chapter. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. A minimum of
one representative sample is necessary to comply with this subsection A2. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA and contained in 40 CFR, part 136, as amended.
3. Disclosure of time and duration of discharges. Categorical users shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily
flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated, manufacturing process streams or other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined
waste stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e).
4. Disclosure of average daily and instantaneous peak wastewater flow rates, in gallons per day, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if
any. All flows shall be measured unless other verifiable techniques are approved by the city due to cost or nonfeasibility.
5. Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes,
sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation.
6. Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or may be discharged to the sewers or works
of the city.
7. Disclosure of the nature and concentration of any pollutants or materials prohibited by this chapter and all applicable pretreatment standards in the
discharge, together with a statement regarding whether or not compliance is being achieved with this chapter on a consistent basis and, if not,
whether additional pretreatment is required for the discharger to comply with this chapter. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been
calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) for a categorical user covered by a categorical pretreatment standard, this adjusted limit along with
supporting data shall be submitted as part of the application.
8. Disclosure of each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production as it relates to wastewater flow generation,
number of employees, a schematic process diagram indicating points of discharge from regulated or manufacturing processes.
9. Disclosure of the type and amount of raw materials, including chemicals utilized (average and maximum per day) and normal operating hours.
10. All disclosure forms shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user using the certification text stated in subsection D1 of this section.
11. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
12. The user shall submit any other information as may be deemed necessary by the city to evaluate the wastewater discharge application.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision.
B. Industrial Waste Discharge Permit: The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within forty five (45)
days of receipt of a completed wastewater discharge application, the city will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. Upon
determination to issue, the permit shall be issued within thirty (30) days of full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished. The city may deny any
application for a wastewater discharge permit.
Industrial wastewater permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the superintendent to prevent pass through or
interference, protect the quality of Indian Creek, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect the POTW
against damage.
1. Wastewater Permit Contents: Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following conditions:
a. A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years. Each significant industrial user
discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire;
b. A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to (and approval from) the superintendent, and
provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
c. Effluent limits, including best management practices, applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, including any special state
requirements;
d. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, submittal of technical reports, compliance schedules, and record keeping requirements. These
requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on
federal, state, and local law;
e. Requirement to notify the city immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the POTW including any slug loadings as defined in
section 8-9-3 of this chapter;
f. Requirement for immediate notification to the POTW where self-monitoring results indicate noncompliance;
g. Requirement to report a bypass or upset of a pretreatment facility;
h. Requirement for the SIU who reports noncompliance to repeat the sampling and analysis and submit results to the POTW within thirty (30) days
after becoming aware of the violation;
i. A statement of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule;
j. Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined to be necessary by the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 187/410
2. Wastewater Discharge Permit Conditions:
a. Permits Reassigned Or Transferred: Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only if the
permittee gives at least thirty (30) days' advance notice to the superintendent and the superintendent approves the wastewater discharge permit
transfer. The notice to the superintendent must include a written certification by the new owner and/or operator which:
(1) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes;
(2) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
(3) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit.
Provided that the above occurs and that there were no significant changes to the manufacturing operation or wastewater discharge, the new owner
will be considered an existing user and be covered by the existing limits and requirements in the previous owner's permit.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit voidable as of the date of facility transfer.
b. Duty To Reapply: The city shall notify the discharger ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the discharger's wastewater discharge permit.
Within thirty (30) days of the notification, the discharger shall reapply for reissuance of the wastewater discharge permit on a form provided by the
city. A user, whose existing wastewater discharge permit has expired and has submitted its reapplication in the time period specified herein, shall
be deemed to have an effective wastewater permit until the city issues or denies the new wastewater permit. A user, whose existing wastewater
discharge permit has expired and who failed to submit its reapplication in the time period specified herein, will be deemed to be discharging
without a wastewater discharge permit.
c. Severability: The provisions of a wastewater discharge permit are severable, and if any provision of this wastewater discharge permit, or the
application of any provision of this permit to any circumstance is held invalid, the application of such provision to other circumstances, and the
remainder of this permit shall not be affected thereby.
d. Property Rights: The issuance of a wastewater discharge permit does not convey any property rights in either real or personal property, or any
exclusive privileges, nor does it authorize any invasion of personal rights, nor any infringement of federal, state or local regulations.
e. Permit Holders Outside City Limits: All permit holders outside the city limits shall be subject to all the same sewer use regulations as permit
holders inside the city limits.
f. Inspection And Sampling Points: The city may require inspection and sampling manholes, flow recording devices, or sampling equipment at each
sewer discharge to the city if deemed necessary by the superintendent to assure compliance with this chapter. The superintendent may require the
construction and maintenance of sampling facilities at other locations (for example, at the end of a manufacturing line, or wastewater treatment
system). All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
3. Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals: Any person, including the user, may petition the city to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge
permit within ninety (90) days of its issuance.
a. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.
b. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.
c. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.
d. If the city fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater
discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final
administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
e. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the
district court for Canyon County within the state of Idaho.
4. Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification: The superintendent may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not
limited to, the following:
a. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
b. To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater
discharge permit issuance.
c. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
d. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel or the receiving waters.
e. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit.
f. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting.
g. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
h. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit.
i. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator.
5. Revocation Of Wastewater Discharge Permit: The wastewater discharge permit issued to the industrial user by the city may be revoked for, but not
limited to, the following reasons:
a. Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
b. Failure to provide notification to the city of changed conditions;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 188/410
c. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;
d. Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
e. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
f. Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and records;
g. Failure to meet discharge limitations;
h. Failure to pay fines;
i. Failure to pay sewer charges;
j. Failure to meet compliance schedules;
k. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;
l. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility;
m. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter; or
n. If the city has to invoke its emergency provision as stated in section 8-9-7 of this chapter.
C. Compliance Schedules For Meeting Applicable Pretreatment Standards: Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance activities will
be required to comply with this chapter, the discharger shall provide a declaration of the shortest schedule by which the discharger will provide such
additional pretreatment and/or implementation of additional operational and maintenance activities.
1. The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment equipment required for the discharger to comply with the requirements of this chapter including, but not limited to, dates
relating to hiring an engineer, hiring other appropriate personnel, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major
components, commencing construction, completing construction, and all other acts necessary to achieve compliance with this chapter.
2. Only upon recommendation of the board of sewer appraisers and approval of the city council shall the city permit the total compliance schedule
period to exceed nine (9) months. Categorical industrial users shall not be allowed to exceed nine (9) months for compliance schedule completion.
3. Not later than fourteen (14) days following each milestone date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the discharger shall submit a
progress report to the city, including no less than a statement as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress represented by that
milestone date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by
the discharger to return the construction to the approved schedule.
D. Reporting Requirements For Discharger:
1. Compliance Date Report: Within ninety (90) days following the commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW by a new
discharger, any discharger subject to this chapter shall upon request of the superintendent submit to the city a report indicating the nature and
concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in its discharge, and the average and maximum daily flow in gallons. In the case of
categorical dischargers, the flows and pollutant concentrations (or mass) of the waste streams from processes regulated under categorical standards
must be reported separately. This report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent
basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the discharger into compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the discharger with the following certification:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons
who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.
2. Periodic Compliance Reports:
a. Discharger Report: Any discharger subject to any applicable pretreatment standard set forth in this chapter, after the compliance date of such
pretreatment standard, or in the case of a new user after commencement of discharge to the city, shall comply with all applicable requirements
under 40 CFR 403.12 and submit to the city during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently by the city, a report
indicating the nature and concentration of prohibited or regulated substances in the effluent which are limited by the pretreatment standards
hereof. In addition, this report shall include a record of all measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows during the reporting period
reported in subsection D1 of this section. Flows shall be reported based on actual measurement, provided, however, where cost or feasibility
considerations justify, the city may accept reports of average and maximum flows estimated by verifiable techniques. The city, for good cause
shown considering such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, or other extenuating factors, may authorize the submission
of said reports on months other than those specified above. A certification statement signed by an authorized representative of the discharger is
required as a part of the periodic compliance reports for categorical users. (See subsection D1 of this section.)
b. City May Require Reporting: The city may require reporting by users that are not required to have an industrial wastewater discharge permit if
information or data is needed to establish a sewer charge, determine the treatability of the effluent or determine any other factor which is related to
the operation and maintenance of the sewer system.
c. Self-Monitoring: The city may require self-monitoring by the user or, if requested by the user, may agree to perform the periodic compliance
monitoring needed to prepare the periodic compliance report required under this section. If the city agrees to perform such periodic compliance
monitoring, it may charge the user for such monitoring, based upon the costs incurred by the city for sampling and analyses. Any such charges
shall be added to the normal sewer charge and shall be payable as part of the sewer bills. The city is under no obligation to perform periodic
compliance monitoring for a user.
d. Report Contents: Reports of dischargers shall contain all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and
concentration of regulated pollutants, or production and mass where required by the city. The frequency of monitoring by the discharger shall be as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 189/410
prescribed by the city but not less than twice a year unless the city agrees to sample instead. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the city pursuant to section 304(g) of the act and contained in 40 CFR, part 136, in subsection I of this section, and
amendments thereto, or with any other test procedures approved by the city. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
approved by the city and shall be representative of wastewater discharges during the reporting period. Where 40 CFR, part 136, does not include
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, or where the city determines that the part 136 sampling and analytical techniques
are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical methods, or any other sampling
and analytical procedures including procedures suggested by the city or other parties approved by the city. A certification statement signed by an
authorized representative of the discharger is required as a part of the periodic compliance reports for categorical users. (See subsection D1 of
this section.)
e. Notification Of Significant Production Changes: Any user operating under a wastewater discharge permit incorporating equivalent mass or
concentration limits shall notify the city within two (2) business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will
significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not providing a notice of such anticipated change will be required to comply with the
existing limits contained in its wastewater discharge permit.
f. Notice Of Potential Problems Including Accidental Spills And/Or Slug Loadings: Any user shall notify the city immediately of all discharges that
could cause problems to the POTW including any slug loadings as defined in section 8-9-3 of this chapter. The notification shall include the
concentration and volume and corrective action. Steps being taken to reduce any adverse impact should also be noted during the notification. Any
user who discharges a "slug" (or slugs) of prohibited materials shall be liable for any expense, loss or damage to the POTW in addition to the
amount of any fines imposed on the city under state or federal law.
g. Noncompliance Reporting: If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the city within twenty four (24) hours of
becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling within five (5) days and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the
city within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation, except the user is not required to resample if:
(1) The city performs sampling at the user's facility at a frequency of at least once per month, or
(2) The city performs sampling at the user's facility between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user
receives the results of this sampling.
h. Notification Of Changed Discharge: All users shall promptly notify the city in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of
pollutants in their discharge, including significant manufacturing process changes, pretreatment modifications, and the listed or characteristic
hazardous wastes for which the user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p).
E. Record Keeping: Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain and make available for inspection and copying all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements including documentation associated with best management practices.
The city may develop best management practices (BMPs) for recording and documentation of information obtained by users pursuant to monitoring
activities. Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates
analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the
user or POTW, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the superintendent.
F. Monitoring Stations: Each discharger shall provide and operate, at the discharger's own expense, a monitoring station to allow inspection, sampling, and
flow measurement of each wastewater discharge to the sewer. Each monitoring station shall be situated on the discharger's premises, except where
such location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the discharger; the city may concur with the station being constructed in the public
street or sidewalk area providing that the station is located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. The city, whenever
applicable, may require the construction and maintenance of sampling stations at other locations (for example, at the end of a manufacturing line,
wastewater treatment system). All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated annually to ensure their accuracy.
1. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling station to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The station,
sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the discharger. All
devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at a frequency determined by the city to ensure their accuracy.
2. All monitoring stations shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable local construction standards and specifications.
Construction shall be completed within one hundred twenty (120) days of receipt of the permit by the discharger.
G. Inspection And Sampling: The city shall have the right to enter the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter, and any
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, is being met and whether the user is complying with all requirements thereof. Users shall allow
the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying and the performance of
any additional duties.
1. Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make
necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city will be permitted to enter, without delay,
for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
2. The city shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or
metering of the user's operations.
3. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
user at the written or verbal request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
4. Unreasonable delays in allowing the city's pretreatment staff access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
H. Sampling Requirements For Users:
1. A minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, fats, oils and greases, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for
facilities for which historical sampling data does not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data is available, the city may authorize a lower
minimum. The city will determine on a case by case basis whether the user may be able to composite the individual grab samples. For all other
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 190/410
pollutants, twenty four (24) hour composite samples must be obtained through flow proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. The
city may waive flow proportional composite sampling for any user that demonstrates that flow proportional sampling is infeasible. In such cases,
samples may be obtained through time proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of eight (8) grab samples where the user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
2. Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist, or immediately downstream from the regulated or
manufacturing process if no pretreatment exists, or as determined by the city and contained in the user's wastewater discharge permit. For
categorical users, if other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastes formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the applicable
pretreatment standards. For other SIUs, for which the city has adjusted its local limits to factor out dilution flows, the user should measure the flows
and concentrations necessary to evaluate compliance with the adjusted pretreatment standard(s).
3. All sample results shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of analysis and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is
representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges from the user. If a user sampled and analyzed more frequently than what
was required in its wastewater discharge permit, it must submit all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge as part of its self-monitoring
report.
4. The city may authorize the industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical
pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor
expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to
activities of the industrial user. This authorization is subject to the following conditions:
a. The city may authorize a waiver where a pollutant is determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility
provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical pretreatment standard and otherwise includes no process
wastewater.
b. The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective period of the permit or equivalent individual control mechanism, but in no case
longer than five (5) years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent control
mechanism.
c. In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility's process
wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes.
The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(1) and include the certification statement in 40 CFR
403.6(a)(2)(ii). Nondetectable sample results may only be used as a demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from
40 CFR part 136 with the lowest detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis.
d. Any granting of the monitoring waiver must be included as a condition in the user's control mechanism. The reasons supporting the waiver and
any information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver must be maintained by the city for three (3) years after the expiration of the
waiver.
e. Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of user's control mechanism by the city, the industrial user must certify on each report with the
statement below, that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastewater due to activities of the industrial user:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR [specify
applicable National Pretreatment Standard part(s)], I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief there has been no increase in the level of
[specify pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since the filing of the last periodic report under 40 CFR 403.12(e)(1).
f. In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be present based on changes that occur in the industrial user's
operations, the user must immediately: Comply with the monitoring requirements of subsection H1 of this section or more frequent monitoring
requirements imposed by the city; and notify the city.
g. This provision does not supersede certification processes and requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as
otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard.
I. Analytical Requirements: All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40
CFR part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR part 136 does not contain sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
1. The city will follow the same procedures as outlined in subsection H of this section and this subsection I for sampling and analyzing industrial user's
wastewater.
J. Search Warrants: If the city pretreatment staff has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection
program of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the
overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the superintendent shall seek issuance of a search and/or seizure warrant from the
district court of the city of Nampa. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the superintendent in the company of a uniformed police officer
of the city of Nampa.
K. Confidential Information: Information and data furnished to the city with respect to the nature and frequency of discharge shall be available to the public
without restriction unless the discharger specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets or proprietary information of the
discharger.
Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to the general public by the city until, and unless, a ten (10) day notification is
given to the discharger, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for use related to the NPDES program or
pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 191/410
L. Pretreatment Facilities: Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities shall be submitted to the city for review, and must be acceptable to the city
before construction of the facility. The review of such plans shall in no way relieve the discharger from the responsibility of modifying its facility as
necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter. Within a reasonable time after the completion of the
wastewater pretreatment facility, the discharger shall furnish its operation and maintenance procedures for the city to review. Any subsequent,
significant changes in the pretreatment facility or its method of operation shall be reported to and accepted by the city prior to the discharger's initiation
of the changes.
M. Hazardous Waste Notification: Any user that is discharging fifteen kilograms (15 kg) of hazardous wastes as defined in 40 CFR 261 (listed or
characteristic wastes) in a calendar month or any facility discharging any amount of acutely hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and
261.33(e) is required to provide a onetime notification in writing to the city, EPA region 10, office of air, waste, and toxic chemicals, and to the Idaho
state hazardous materials bureau. Any existing user exempt from this notification shall comply with the requirements contained herein within thirty (30)
days of becoming aware of a discharge of fifteen kilograms (15 kg) of hazardous wastes in a calendar month or the discharge of acutely hazardous
wastes to the POTW.
Such notification shall include:
1. The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261;
2. The EPA hazardous waste number; and
3. The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).
4. If an industrial user discharges more than one hundred kilograms (100 kg) of such wastes per calendar month to the sewer system, the notification
shall also contain the following information to the extent it is known or readily available to the industrial user:
a. An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes;
b. An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste streams discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation
of the mass of constituents in the waste streams expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months;
c. An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste streams expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months.
These notification requirements do not apply to pollutants already reported under self-monitoring requirements. Whenever the EPA publishes final rules
identifying hazardous wastes or new characteristics of hazardous waste, a user shall notify the city of the discharge of such a substance within ninety
(90) days of the effective date of such regulations. In the case of any notification made under this subsection, an industrial user shall certify that it
has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically
practical.
N. Reports For Nonpermitted Users: All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the city as the
superintendent may require. (Ord. 3765, 12-17-2007)
8-9-7: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Emergency Suspension Of Service And Wastewater Discharge Permit: The city may, without advance notice, order the suspension of the wastewater
treatment service to a discharger when it appears to the city that an actual or threatened discharge:
1. Presents or threatens an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons, or substantial danger to the environment. Any
discharger notified by the city's suspension order shall immediately cease all discharges. In the event of failure of the dischargers to comply with the
suspension order, the city is authorized to physically prevent the discharge from entering the public owned sewerage collection system, and assess
all costs associated therewith to the discharger.
2. Threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or to violate any pretreatment limits imposed by this chapter. Any discharger notified of the
city's suspension order shall immediately cease all discharges. In the event of failure of the discharger to comply with the suspension order, the city
may commence judicial proceedings immediately thereafter to compel the discharger's specific compliance with such order and/or to recover civil
penalties. The city shall reinstate the wastewater treatment service upon proof by the discharger of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge or
conditions creating the threat as set forth above.
B. Termination Of Treatment Services: The city may terminate wastewater treatment services to any discharger who violates any of the following
prohibitions. A discharger shall not:
1. Fail to factually report accurately the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
2. Fail to report significant changes in wastewater constituents or characteristics;
3. Refuse responsible access to the discharger's premises by representatives of the city for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
4. Violate the provisions of this chapter, or any order of the city with respect thereto.
C. Compliance Orders: When the superintendent finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for
the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a time specified in the order. If the user does not come into compliance within the
time specified in the order, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are
installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional selfmonitoring,
and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 192/410
violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user.
D. Compliance Schedule For Meeting Applicable Pretreatment Standards:
1. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards.
2. Only upon recommendation of the board of sewer appraisers and approval of the city council shall the city permit the total compliance schedule
period to exceed nine (9) months. Categorical industrial users shall not be allowed to exceed nine (9) months for compliance schedule completion.
3. Not later than fourteen (14) days following each milestone date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the discharger shall submit a
progress report to the city, including no less than a statement as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress represented by that
milestone date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by
the discharger to return the construction to the approved schedule.
E. Notices Of Violation: When the city finds that a user has violated (or continues to violate) any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may serve that user a written notice of violation (NOV). If required,
within five (5) working days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof,
to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the city. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
F. Consent Orders: The city may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement
with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a
time period specified by the document. Use of a consent order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
G. Cease And Desist Orders: When the superintendent finds that a user has violated (or continues to violate) any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the
superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
1. Immediately comply with all requirements; and
2. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
H. Show Cause Hearing: Where the violation of section 8-9-4 of this chapter is not corrected in adherence to compliance orders or any other enforcement
action in a timely manner, the city may order any discharger which suffers or permits a violation of section 8-9-4 of this chapter to show cause before
the city or its duly authorized representative why the proposed service termination action should not be taken. A written notice shall be served on the
discharger by personal service, or certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the city
or its designee regarding the violation; the reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken; the proposed enforcement action; and directing the
discharger to show cause before the city or its designee why the enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served no
less than ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent, officer, or authorized representative of a discharger. The proceedings
at the hearing shall be considered by the city, which shall then enter appropriate orders with respect to the alleged violations of the discharger. Appeal
of such orders may be taken by the discharger in accordance with applicable local or state law.
A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
I. Judicial Proceedings: Following the entry of any order by the city with respect to the violation by a discharger of subsection B of this section, the city may
commence in an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the appropriate local court.
J. Annual Publication: An annual publication of all SIUs in significant noncompliance (SNC) shall be made in the largest daily newspaper published in the
city. This publication will summarize the enforcement actions taken against dischargers which have had a pattern of noncompliance during the previous
twelve (12) months. For the purpose of this provision, a user is in SNC if its violation(s) meets one or more of the following criteria:
1. "Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits", defined here as those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of wastewater measurements
taken during a six (6) month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1)
for the same pollutant parameter by any amount;
2. "Technical review criteria (TRC) violations", defined here as those in which thirty three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for
each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit, including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);
3. Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) (daily maximum, longer term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the city believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass
through (including endangering the health of city personnel or the general public);
4. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such as discharge;
5. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 193/410
6. Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
7. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
8. Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best management practices which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.
K. Right Of Appeal: Any discharger or any interested party shall have the right to request, in writing, an interpretation or ruling by the city on any matter
covered by this chapter and shall be entitled to a prompt, written reply. In the event that such inquiry is by a discharger and deals with matters of
performance or compliance with this chapter for which enforcement activity relating to an alleged violation is the subject, receipt of a discharger's
request shall not stay enforcement proceedings pending. Appeal of any final judicial order entered pursuant to this chapter may be taken in accordance
with the local and state law.
L. Operating Upsets: For the purpose of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance
with applicable pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the
extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or
careless or improper operation.
1. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards if the requirements of
subsection L2 of this section are met.
2. A user who wishes to establish an affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or
other relevant evidence that:
a. An upset occurred and that the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
b. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
c. The user has submitted the following information to the city within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is
submitted orally, a written submission must be provided within 5 days):
(1) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
(2) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
(3) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent occurrence of the noncompliance.
3. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
4. Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment standards.
5. Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with applicable pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the treatment facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies to the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
M. Falsifying Information: Any person who knowingly makes a false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or
other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter; or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall (in addition to civil and/or criminal penalties provided by state law) be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be prosecuted and punished by fines and/or imprisonment.
N. Injunctive Relief: When the superintendent finds a user has violated (or continues to violate) any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may petition the third district court through
the city's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The city may also seek such other action as
is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
O. Vandalism: No person shall wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with, or prevent access to any structure,
appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any person found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in this
chapter. (Ord. 3765, 12-17-2007)
8-9-8: PENALTIES:
A. Administrative Penalties: Any discharger who violates an order of the city, or who fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, or any regulations,
rules, or permits of the city, issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be liable to the city for an administrative penalty.
1. The amount of such administrative penalty shall be not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per violation. Each day upon which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate violation. In the case of a monthly or other
long term average discharge limit, the penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. The superintendent is authorized to levy
fines and penalties.
In determining the amount of the administrative penalty the superintendent shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 194/410
limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation,
corrective actions by the user, compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
B. Civil Penalties: Any discharger who violates an order of the city, or who fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, or any regulations, rules, or
permits of the city, issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be liable to the city for a civil penalty.
1. The amount of such civil penalty shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Each day upon which a violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate violation. In the case of a monthly or other long term average discharge limit, the penalties shall accrue for each
day during the period of the violation.
In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm
caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user,
compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
2. The city may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.
C. Appeals: Users desiring to dispute such penalty must file a written request for the city to reconsider the penalty along with full payment of the penalty
within fifteen (15) days of being notified of the penalty. Where a request has merit, the city shall convene a hearing with the board of sewer appraisers
on the matter within fifteen (15) days of receiving the request from the user. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any
interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The city may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and
orders, to the penalty.
D. Issuance Of Penalty: Issuance of an administrative or civil penalty shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user.
E. Recovery Of Costs Incurred By The City: Any discharger violating any of the provisions of this chapter who discharges or causes a discharge producing
a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the city's wastewater disposal system shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss, or
damage caused by such violation or discharge. The city shall, by order, bill the discharger for the cost incurred by the city for any cleaning, repair, or
replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation enforceable under the provisions
of section 8-9-7 of this chapter.
F. General Criminal Penalties: Any user who knowingly violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable
by a fine of no more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per offense or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months per offense or by both such
fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 3765, 12-17-2007)
8-9-9: RECORDS RETENTION:
All dischargers subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve, for no less than three (3) years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports,
correspondence and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or in behalf of a discharger in
connection with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative adjustment or any other enforcement of litigation
activities brought by the city pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the discharger until all enforcement activities have concluded and all
periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. (Ord. 2696)
8-9-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision, paragraph, word or section of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs,
words and sections shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 2696)
8-9-11: NONLIABILITY:
A. It is expressly the purpose of this chapter to provide for and promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public. It is not the intent of this
chapter to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by
the terms of this chapter.
B. It is the specific intent of this chapter to place the obligation of complying with these regulations upon the applicant or discharger and no provision nor
any term used in this chapter is intended to impose any duty whatsoever upon the city or any of its officers, employees or agents except as provided
under the act or other related statutes of the United States or the state of Idaho.
C. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to be nor shall be construed to create or form the basis for any tort liability on the part of the city or its
officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from failure of an applicant or discharger to comply with the provisions of this chapter,
or by reason or in consequence of any inspection, notice, order, certificate, permission or approval authorized or issued or done in connection with the
implementation or enforcement of this chapter or inaction on the part of the city related in any manner to the implementation or the enforcement of this
chapter by its officers, employees or agents. (Ord. 2696)
8-9-12: CONFLICTS:
All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this chapter, are hereby repealed to the extent of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 195/410
inconsistency or conflict. (Ord. 2696)
8-9-13: BYPASS OF TREATMENT FACILITIES:
A. Definitions:
BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a permittee's treatment facility.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe
property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
B. Bypass Not Violating Applicable Pretreatment Standards Or Requirements: The permittee may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is also for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections C and D of this section.
C. Notice:
1. If the permittee knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the city, if possible, at least ten (10) days before the date of
the bypass.
2. The permittee shall submit oral notice of unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the city within twenty four (24)
hours from the time the permittee becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the
permittee becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned
to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the bypass. The city may waive the written report on case by case basis if the oral report has been
received within twenty four (24) hours.
D. Prohibition Of Bypass:
1. Bypass is prohibited, and the city may take enforcement action against the permittee for a bypass, unless;
a. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage,
b. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance
during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal equipment downtime or preventative
maintenance, and
c. The permittee submitted notices as required under subsection C of this section.
2. The city may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effect, if the city determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed
in subsection D1 of this section. (Ord. 3765, 12-17-2007)
Title 9
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
9-1-1: STREET NAMES:
Any street names which are changed shall be by ordinance. Names for new or additional streets shall be approved by the council. (Ord. 2107; amd. Ord.
2914)
9-1-2: PREMISES IDENTIFICATION:
All residential structures, commercial and industrial structures shall be identified with a premises identification number (address). All numbers shall
contrast with their background. Single-family residential addresses shall be a minimum of six inches (6") in height. Multi-unit residential structures
containing three (3) or more units, commercial and industrial structures address numbers shall be a minimum of ten inches (10") in height. Multi-unit
residential structures containing three (3) or more units, commercial or industrial structures on corner lots shall have the building number appear on both
elevations of the building(s) that adjoin streets or avenues. The city engineer or his/her designee shall be solely authorized to assign address numbers for
properties in the Nampa addressing impact area. (Ord. 2107; amd. Ord. 2914)
9-1-3: DIRECTIONAL DESIGNATION REQUIRED:
All streets, avenues, courts or places in the Nampa addressing impact area shall have designated directional prefix as running east and west, and all
streets running at right angles, as north and south. (Ord. 2107; amd. Ord. 2914)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 196/410
9-1-4: RIGHT OF WAY PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall perform construction on a public right of way without first obtaining from the city engineer's office a right of way permit. All construction
shall be performed in conformance to the conditions of said permit. (Ord. 2107; amd. Ord. 2914)
9-1-5: VACATING STREETS; FILING FEES:
Prior to the consideration of any petition or request for the vacation of any street an application requesting the same must first be filed with the office of the
planning director, which said application shall be on the form provided by the planning director and shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount
established by the council. Filing fees are nonrefundable1. (Ord. 2107)
9-1-6: NEIGHBORHOOD MASTER STREET PLAN; PROCEDURE FOR ADOPTION:
A. Public Hearing Required: Prior to the adoption of a neighborhood master street plan for any platted or unplatted area of the city a public hearing shall
first be held before the planning commission. Notice of such hearing shall be given by mailing written notice to the owners of the property upon which
the proposed streets are to be located and to the owners of the property adjacent to said proposed streets. The written notice shall be mailed at least
ten (10) days prior to the hearing date.
B. Council Approval: Any neighborhood master street plan adopted by the planning commission shall be recommended to the council for approval. The
council may either accept or reject the plan in whole or in part.
C. Violation: The development of property in violation of any duly adopted and approved neighborhood master street plan is prohibited.
D. Dedication Of Right-Of-Way Of Street: Prior to issuance of development permits for property situated adjacent to any duly adopted and approved
Master Street Plan, property owners shall be required to dedicate the right-of-way so designated on the property by the neighborhood Master Street
Plan. (Ord. 2107)
9-1-7: BENCH MARKS:
Certain bench marks, being United States coast and geodetic survey monuments or brass caps permanently set by survey are accepted as official bench
marks for the City. A record of these bench marks is on file in the City Engineer's Office. Removal or destruction of bench marks shall be deemed a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2107; amd. Ord. 2914)
9-1-8: CURBS, GUTTERS AND SIDEWALKS:
A. Maintenance Responsibilities:
1. It is the duty of every property owner to maintain, repair, and, if necessary, replace the curb, gutter and sidewalk located in public right-of-way
adjacent to the owner's property. If a property owner fails, after receiving notice from the City to construct, repair or replace damaged curb, gutter or
sidewalk located in public right-of-way adjacent to the owner's property, the City may cause the work to be done and assess the costs thereof against
the property owner and such costs shall constitute a lien against said property. Said assessment shall be collected as provided in Idaho Code section
50-1008.
2. The accumulation of snow, ice, dirt or any solid waste upon sidewalks of the City or placement of items (e.g., dumpsters, portable backstops,
landscaping features, etc.) upon such so as to obstruct the same is declared to be a nuisance. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
property adjacent to the sidewalk whereon the obstruction(s) is/are located to move or remove said obstruction(s) in a timely manner. Provided,
however, the City may, with or without notice, clear all sidewalks of snow, ice, dirt or any solid waste, and assess the cost against the property
abutting the sidewalk so cleaned. Said assessment shall be collected as provided in Idaho Code section 50-1008.
3. It shall be unlawful to push snow or ice off a private property or driveway onto a City sidewalk, or into the public right-of-way (i.e., a street).
4. The City is not responsible to clear private driveways or drive approaches on private property. It is the responsibility of each property owner to
remove any snow or ice pushed by City snow plows or snow plowing contractors onto their driveways, sidewalks or in front of mailboxes. (Ord. 4340,
9-18-2017)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
9-1-9: RESIDING ON A PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY:
It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to reside or stay more than fourteen (14) days in an "unauthorized dwelling unit" on public rights-of-way.
"Unauthorized dwelling units" are and shall include: vehicles (i.e., cars, trucks, trailers [office, camp, horse, vehicle transport and utility types, etc.], buses,
RVs, towed pop tents, camper shells, fifth wheels, boats) and other portable and temporary shelters including, but not limited to, tents and boxes. (Ord.
3807, 7-21-2008)
Chapter 2
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC WORKS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 197/410
9-2-1: PREPARATION:
The city engineer, or his designated representative, shall prepare, from time to time, standard specifications, standard drawings, and other regulations for
establishing uniform and minimum standards of construction for public work facilities. These standards may be for, but are not limited to, the construction
of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, approaches, streets, water, sanitary sewer, storm sewers, irrigation, gas, power, telephone, parking, drainage structures,
bridges and other public works type of facilities. (Ord. 2107)
9-2-2: COUNCIL APPROVAL:
When such standard regulations are prepared or modified they shall be presented to the council for approval. At the time of the approval, the council shall:
A. Authorize the mayor to sign the documents.
B. Establish charges for furnishing these documents to the public.
C. State any other regulations that may be pertinent to the implementation of such material.
Any standard regulations that are approved as outlined herein are to be adopted as part of this chapter as though set out at full and in length. (Ord. 2107)
9-2-3: COPIES:
Not less than three (3) copies of any such documents shall be on file in the office of the city engineer. (Ord. 2107)
Chapter 3
IMPROVEMENTS WITHIN RIGHT-OF-WAY
9-3-1: MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
There shall be no development or construction upon land located adjacent to or adjoining unimproved or partially improved public rights-of-way unless the
owner or developer of such land constructs the following minimum improvements upon the public right-of-way located adjacent to or adjoining such land:
A. For Rights-Of-Way Classified As Arterial And Existing Collector Roadways:
1. Sanitary Sewer: Sanitary sewer collection system where it is physically and economically feasible to connect to an existing or proposed public sewer
system in accordance with the City's adopted Sewer Master Plan.
2. Irrigation System: Irrigation distribution system where it is physically and economically feasible to connect to an existing or proposed public irrigation
system in accordance with the City's adopted Irrigation Master Plan.
3. Domestic Water System: Domestic water distribution system where it is physically and economically feasible to connect to an existing or proposed
public domestic water system in accordance with the City's adopted Domestic Water Master Plan.
4. Storm Drainage: Storm drainage facilities designed to handle the required drainage per the City's adopted Engineering Process and Policy Manual.
5. Street Improvements:
a. Sidewalk.
b. Pavement improvements for widening or turn lanes as identified by a Traffic Impact Study as required by the City's Transportation Impact Study
Policy.
B. For New Collector Roadways: Located on 1/4 section lines:
1. Sanitary Sewer: Sanitary sewer collection system where it is physically and economically feasible to connect to an existing or proposed public sewer
system in accordance with the City's adopted Sewer Master Plan.
2. Irrigation System: Irrigation distribution system where it is physically and economically feasible to connect to an existing or proposed public irrigation
system in accordance with the City's adopted Irrigation Master Plan.
3. Domestic Water System: Domestic water distribution system where it is physically and economically feasible to connect to an existing or proposed
public domestic water system in accordance with the City's adopted Domestic Water Master Plan.
4. Storm Drainage: Storm drainage facilities designed to handle the required drainage per the City's adopted Engineering Process and Policy Manual.
5. Street Improvements:
a. Sidewalk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 198/410
b. Pavement improvements for a two (2) lane asphalt roadway and turn lanes as identified by a Traffic Impact Study as required by the City's
Transportation Impact Study Policy.
C. For Local Roadways:
1. Sanitary Sewer: Sanitary sewer collection system where it is physically and economically feasible to connect to an existing or proposed public sewer
system in accordance with the City's adopted Sewer Master Plan.
2. Irrigation System: Irrigation distribution system where it is physically and economically feasible to connect to an existing or proposed public irrigation
system in accordance with the City's adopted Irrigation Master Plan.
3. Domestic Water System: Domestic water distribution system where it is physically and economically feasible to connect to an existing or proposed
public domestic water system in accordance with the City's adopted Domestic Water Master Plan.
4. Storm Drainage: Storm drainage facilities designed to handle the required drainage per the City's adopted Engineering Process and Policy Manual.
5. Street Improvements:
a. Sidewalk.
b. Curb and gutter.
c. Pavement improvements at the required width per the City's adopted Engineering Process and Policy Manual.
D. Sidewalks: The City may defer the requirements for sidewalk construction provided all of the following conditions are met:
1. The property is not located on an arterial street;
2. There is no sidewalk located within three hundred feet (300') of the property, or on the block where development occurs;
3. The development is a detached, single-family residence;
4. A Deferral Agreement, running with the land and binding upon the owner and successors will be recorded at the developer's expense which will
require the installation of sidewalk at the expense of the owner upon sixty (60) days' notice by the City;
5. No temporary or permanent structure or landscaping will be added which shall impede the pedestrian access along the area of the future sidewalk.
E. Service Connections Placement: All service connections for underground utilities shall be placed to a point in back of any proposed sidewalk line before
placing base gravel for the street. (Ord. 4424, 3-4-2019)
9-3-2: IMPROVEMENT PLANS:
The minimum construction requirements shall be the published standard City specifications. Three (3) sets of all off site improvement plans such as plans
and profiles for street improvements, curb and gutters, sanitary and/or storm sewers shall be filed with the City Engineer. When approved, one set shall be
returned to the developer or owner with the engineer's written approval. (Ord. 2107)
9-3-3: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
All improvements by the owner or developer as required herein shall be required to be completed prior to the final inspection and approval by the City of
the development. The owner or developer may, in lieu of actual construction, file with the City Clerk a surety bond written by a surety company authorized
to do business in the State in such amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the cost of the improvements not previously installed, by the owner
or developer, as estimated by the City Engineer conditioned for the installation of such improvements within a period of two (2) years from the date of the
bond and which bond shall be approved by the attorney as to form. In lieu of posting the bond, the individual may post cash or an irrevocable letter of
credit in such form as the City may approve. (Ord. 2107)
Chapter 4
CEMETERY
9-4-1: CEMETERY DESIGNATED:
The official plat of the cemetery is on file in the county recorder's office. (Ord. 2107)
9-4-2: USE DEFINED:
Cemetery spaces shall be used only for burial of the human dead. (Ord. 2107)
9-4-3: CONVEYANCE OF LOTS:
Cemetery spaces shall be conveyed by the city by furnishing the purchaser a certificate describing the location of the space(s) and signed by the mayor
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 199/410
and clerk. (Ord. 2107)
9-4-4: OWNERSHIP REVERTS TO CITY:
In the event said space(s) are not used for interment purposes within fifty (50) years from the date of purchase, any such space shall revert to the city. The
fifty (50) year period may be extended upon written application by the purchaser, or current owner, and approval of the city prior to the expiration of the fifty
(50) years. (Ord. 2107)
9-4-5: FEES:
All fees relating to the burial of the human dead including cost of spaces shall be set by resolution of the mayor and council. (Ord. 2107)
9-4-6: FENCING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to enclose any cemetery lot with a fence or coping of any kind. (Ord. 2107)
9-4-7: SHRUBS AND TREES PROHIBITED:
No trees, shrubs, or vegetation other than grass or flowers shall be planted or grown on cemetery spaces. Shrubs and trees are defined as any plant that
develops a woody type root, including roses, azaleas, etc. (Ord. 2107)
9-4-8: MONUMENT SPECIFICATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to erect any monument or gravestone that exceeds thirty inches (30") in height from ground level. Foot stone markers are
allowed, but they shall not exceed ground level. (Ord. 2107)
9-4-9: HOURS OF OPERATION:
The cemetery shall be open to the public every day of the year from one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise until one-half (1/2) hour after sunset. Persons and
vehicles shall be excluded from the cemetery during the hours of closure. (Ord. 2107)
9-4-10: EMERGENCY CLOSURE:
The cemetery director has the authority to temporarily close the cemetery, or any portion thereof, at such times as he deems necessary to protect the
cemetery and in the best interest of the city. (Ord. 2107)
9-4-11: BURIAL VAULTS:
No casket shall be buried unless placed in a permanent outer burial container as approved by the cemetery director. (Ord. 2107)
Chapter 5
PUBLIC PARKS
9-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, each of the terms defined has the meaning given in this section unless a different meaning is clearly required by the context. The
word "shall" is mandatory, not directory.
AT LARGE: A dog or other animal off the premises of the owner and not under control by adequate leash.
CAMP: To remain overnight, to attempt to remain overnight, to erect a tent or other shelter, or to use sleeping equipment, a vehicle, or a trailer camper, for
the purpose of, or in such a way as will permit, remaining overnight.
CONCESSIONS: Shall constitute any vendor food sales and nonconsumable sales as well.
DECIBEL: Shall constitute a unit for expressing the relative intensity of sounds on a scale from zero for the average least perceptible sound to about one
hundred thirty (130) for the average pain level.
FIREWORKS: Any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing
a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation. Fireworks include items classified as common or special fireworks by the
United States bureau of explosives or contained in the regulations of the United States department of transportation and designated as UN 0335 1.3G or
UN 0336 1.4G. The term "fireworks" shall not include any automotive safety flares, toy guns, toy cannons, caps or other items designed for use with toy
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 200/410
guns or toy cannons, party poppers, pop its or other devices which contain twenty five hundredths (25/100) of a grain or less of explosive substance.
PARK: All parks, lands, buildings, reserves, sports complexes, swimming pools, squares, drives, trails, playgrounds, playfields, greenbelts, parking lots
and other recreation and open space areas and facilities comprising the parks and recreation system that are owned, operated or maintained by the city of
Nampa, including private pathways crossing the park system.
PARK RULE: Those particular rules or codes of conduct the parks and recreation director has adopted and the city council has designated by resolution as
those for which a violation may lead to exclusion from a city park.
VIOLATION: An act or omission or combination thereof that is contrary to any park rule or any civil or criminal provision of this code or the Idaho state
code. (Ord. 3386, 10-4-2004)
9-5-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
The following activities shall be prohibited in all public parks:
A. Motor Vehicles In Parks: No cars, motorcycles or motor vehicles of any kind shall be driven or parked within the boundaries of any public park in the
city, except upon regularly traveled public rights of way within said parks, without the written approval of the parks and recreation director or designated
representative. This rule shall not prohibit the use of ADA compliant wheelchairs that are motorized and other similar accessibility enhancing devices
by disabled individuals.
It is unlawful to park or display "for sale vehicles" within the boundaries of a public park, public park parking lot, trailway or trailway parking lot. The
parks and recreation department may have violating vehicles towed at owner's expense.
An applicant or representative of a group may receive a turf pass from the parks and recreation director or designated representative. A turf pass shall
only be granted through written permission upon application and payment of the applicable fee which shall be set by resolution.
B. Alcoholic Beverages: No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage or controlled substances as defined by state code or have in his possession any
opened containers or receptacles containing any alcoholic beverage on any public park grounds, or thoroughfares within the city, or at any other place
therein, other than a private residence or upon premises licensed for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages or upon premises whereon
alcoholic beverages are sold by a licensee under an Idaho liquor catering permit, as authorized by law. The city owned golf courses and adjacent
grounds are excluded from this section.
C. Sale Of Food Or Goods: No person shall sell any goods, food or food product of any kind in any park, including adjacent rights of way (sidewalks,
parking lots, etc.), without a license as a concessionaire as provided in title 5, chapter 4 of this code.
The operator of concessions for an extended period of time, such as during athletic tournaments, in any public park, must enter into a written
agreement for such duration and the contract must be approved by the parks and recreation director or designated representative.
D. Camping: Overnight camping is prohibited in city parks and other public property except in areas and times designated by the parks and recreation
department.
E. Recreational Activities: The participation in the playing of any games involving dangerous objects such as stones, arrows, or javelins, except in areas
set apart for such forms of recreation by the director, is prohibited. Golfing or driving balls shall be prohibited except in duly constituted golf courses or
driving ranges. Hunting and the use of firearms and/or fireworks shall be prohibited in public parks.
Bicycle riding shall be prohibited in the interior area of softball and/or baseball complexes within the city of Nampa parks system pursuant to title 6,
chapter 5 of this code.
Skateboarding shall be prohibited in the interior area of softball and/or baseball complexes within the city of Nampa parks system pursuant to title 6,
chapter 4 of this code.
F. Glass Containers Prohibited: It is prohibited for any person to throw, carry or have in their possession any glass beverage container on city park grounds
which includes the interior of athletic complexes.
G. Advertising Or Signage In Parks: It is prohibited for any person to paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any signs, plaques, advertisements or inscriptions
whatsoever in any park, including adjacent rights of way (sidewalks, parking lots, etc.), except plaques, tablets or signs, of a size, design and location
approved by the parks and recreation director or designated representative, recognizing or acknowledging donations or contributions to any city park or
to public facilities therein.
Individual teams may place team sponsor banners on their designated dugout fence only for the duration of the game. Sponsor banners are required to
have the team name and will be allowed to list sponsor's names or logos on the banner.
H. Destruction To Park Property: It is prohibited for any person to wilfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove any building,
bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, playground equipment, paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal, or have in his possession any of the foregoing things or objects, or any part thereof.
No person shall fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of six (6) years
shall use the park restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex.
It is prohibited for any person to construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or
string any public service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on special written permit issued hereunder.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 201/410
It is prohibited for any person to wilfully damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds, of
any tree, fruit or plant. Nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant. No person shall dig in or otherwise disturb
grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area, except by approval by the parks and recreation director
or designated representative.
I. Hot Air Balloons/Parachuting: No person shall land or launch a hot air balloon or land a parachute within any park or reserve of Nampa city, except by
written permission from the parks and recreation director or designated representative and in designated areas. Such permission requires compliance
with all applicable FAA regulations. (Ord. 3386, 10-4-2004)
J. Metal Detecting/Worm Gathering: Metal detecting within a cemetery or upon a golf course is prohibited and any person who is using or attempting to
use a metal detector or similar device within a cemetery or upon a golf course shall be issued an infraction.
Any person who is using or attempting to use a metal detector or similar device in a park shall be issued an infraction unless that person has a current
permit for metal detecting issued by the Nampa department of parks and recreation. There shall be no fee charged for such permit.
Worm gathering is prohibited and is punishable in accordance with section 6-1-2 of this code. (Ord. 4170, 4-20-2015)
9-5-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The director and all employees of the parks and recreation department shall have authority to enforce any provision of this chapter, and shall have the
authority to eject from any park or public facility any person violating any provision of this chapter. The director or designated representative shall further
have the authority to regulate activities in any area where necessary to prevent congestion and to secure maximum use of the parks for the comfort and
convenience of the public.
Police officers, the director of the Nampa city park system, and park attendants, or duly authorized representatives of the park supervisor, shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
A police officer, the director of the Nampa city park system, or his duly authorized representative, shall have the authority to eject from the park any person
acting in violation of this chapter. Any person ejected from the park shall leave promptly and peaceably and shall not return to the park for any reason on
the same calendar day of his ejection.
Whenever any police officer, parks director or representative finds a vehicle unattended in the park and the vehicle is parked in violation of this chapter,
such person may provide for the removal of such vehicle to the nearest available garage or place of safety at the cost of the vehicle's owner. (Ord. 3386,
10-4-2004)
9-5-4: HOURS OF OPERATION:
City parks shall be open to the public every day of the year from one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise to one-half (1/2) hour after sunset. Persons and vehicles
shall be excluded from the parks during the hours of closure. (Ord. 3386, 10-4-2004)
9-5-5: EMERGENCY CLOSURE:
The parks and recreation director or designated representative has the authority to temporarily close a park, or any portion thereof, at such times as he
deems necessary to protect the park and in the best interest of the city. (Ord. 3386, 10-4-2004)
9-5-6: PARK RESERVATIONS:
Use of park facilities is on a first come, first served basis unless reserved pursuant to city policy.
Reservations may be made by any party for any park facility where diamonds, courts, halls, rooms, gyms, gardens, picnic shelters or fireplaces are
provided. All persons requesting advance reservation shall pay a fee as provided by resolution and approved by the parks and recreation director or
designated representative and shall observe all parks and recreation department regulations and requirements. Such areas designated as "reserved" shall
remain reserved for the exclusive use of the reservation holder during their reservation period.
If persons using a facility have not reserved the time and paid the appropriate fee, and are using the facility at a time that has been reserved for another
person, they shall be required to vacate the facility. If they refuse to vacate the facility, they may be excluded from the park pursuant to the authority
granted in this chapter.
A list of reservations for a particular facility shall be maintained by the parks and recreation department to inform the public who has reserved the facility
and the time, or times, for which the facility has been reserved.
It is prohibited for any person to fail or refuse to comply with directions given by park attendants in regulating the activities in any area when necessary to
prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Failure to observe such parks and recreation department rules
and regulations shall result in the immediate termination of the advance reservation.
It is prohibited for any person to remove tables from reserved areas.
It shall be the duty of the reservation holder to leave all halls, rooms, gyms and other building facilities reserved for use in a condition identical to that when
those facilities were permitted to the reservation holder for use. It is prohibited for any person to leave a picnic area before the fire is completely
extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, garbage and other refuse is placed in disposal receptacles where provided. If no
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 202/410
such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere.
Glass beverage containers are prohibited on all park and reserve properties of the city of Nampa. (Ord. 3386, 10-4-2004)
9-5-7: ADMISSION FEES FOR SPECIAL EVENTS:
No group or event shall be allowed to charge fees of any sort to the public for events held within city parks without first obtaining approval of the parks and
recreation director or designated representative. Said approval may be conditioned upon receipt of proof of adequate insurance coverage and/or a release
of liability of the city for the event or gathering. (Ord. 3386, 10-4-2004)
9-5-8: AMPHITHEATER PERMIT:
A permit shall be required to use the amphitheater. The permit shall be secured by application and the payment of fees to the parks and recreation
department. Fees shall be set by resolution.
All music must be maintained no louder than sixty two (62) decibels at a distance of two hundred forty feet (240') (the big fireplace) from the music source.
If the noise level is anticipated to be louder than sixty two (62) decibels at the big fireplace, the same group must also reserve the big fireplace and the
sound level shall not exceed sixty two (62) decibels at five hundred feet (500'). Special permission must be granted for raised noise levels. Following
proper warning, power will be shut off at the amphitheater when a group abuses the sound restrictions, thereby terminating the performance. (Ord. 3386,
10-4-2004)
9-5-9: SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR DOGS IN PUBLIC PARKS:
A. Dogs Running At Large Prohibited: Any person who owns, harbors or has in his control a dog, whether the dog is licensed or not, in any public park in
the city, is liable for such dog being at large in violation of this section except:
1. When such dog is controlled by a leash not exceeding eight feet (8') in length;
2. Such dog is confined in a motor vehicle;
3. When written permission is obtained in advance from the parks department to have a dog or dogs at large.
B. Dogs Prohibited Within Specified Locations And During Certain Community Events: Any person who owns, harbors or has in his control an animal,
whether the animal is licensed or not, and whether the animal is controlled by a leash or not, within the parameter of an athletic complex in any public
park in the city or in a public park when a community event is taking place is responsible for such animal being at large and in violation of this section;
seeing eye dogs and police dogs are exempt from this section; specific locations and specific events include:
1. The interior area of softball and/or baseball complexes within the city of Nampa parks system.
2. Any open area that is being utilized as a playing field for any organized athletic or sporting event (e.g., soccer, archery, football, etc.).
3. Community events generating large crowds including, but not limited to, the Nampa Arts Festival, chamber events, etc.
C. Cleaning After Dog: No person owning, harboring, controlling or keeping any dog shall permit the dog to deposit fecal material on any public property
without the owner or custodian immediately bagging and removing the material and disposing of it in the proper trash receptacles. (Ord. 3386, 10-4-
2004)
9-5-10: PENALTY:
A violation of any provision of this chapter, other than nonpayment of fees and charges shall be an infraction. (Ord. 4011, 4-2-2012)
Chapter 6
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL/GRADING
9-6-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard persons, protect property, prevent damage to the environment, and promote the public welfare by guiding,
regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or
results in the movement of earth on land in the city of Nampa. (Ord. 3432, 3-7-2005)
9-6-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all construction activity and all land disturbing activity, directly or indirectly associated with construction projects, and all persons
engaged in construction activity and land disturbing activity, directly or indirectly associated with construction projects, within the corporate limits of the city
of Nampa. (Ord. 3432, 3-7-2005)
9-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 203/410
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention
and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly
to storm water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to
control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEARING: Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DRAINAGEWAY: Any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the site.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN: A set of plans indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used controlling sediment and
erosion on a development site before, during and after construction.
EROSION CONTROL: Measures that prevent erosion.
GRADING: Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof.
PERIMETER CONTROL: A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site either by filtering sediment laden runoff, or diverting it to a sediment trap or
basin.
PHASING: Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase before the clearing of the next.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Any foreman, superintendent, project manager, or other person with operational control over site activities and day to day
operational control over plan requirements and permit conditions at the site of any construction activity. The responsible person shall possess a current
and valid Boise City certificate of training or equivalent.
SEDIMENT CONTROL: Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site.
SITE: A parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A permit issued by the municipality for the construction or alteration of ground improvements and structures for the control
of erosion, runoff and grading.
STABILIZATION: The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding.
WATERCOURSE: Any body of water, including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, and bodies of water.
WATERWAY: A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse, or to the public storm drain. (Ord. 3432, 3-7-2005)
9-6-4: PERMITS:
A. No person shall be granted a site development permit for land disturbing activity which would require the uncovering of one acre or more without the
approval of an erosion and sediment control plan by the Nampa public works department.
B. No site development permit is required for any emergency activity, which is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property or natural
resources. The Nampa public works department shall be notified within twenty four (24) hours of the initiation of the emergency activity.
C. Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site, and of any contractor retained by the applicant, together
with the name of the applicant's responsible person, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee.
D. The Nampa public works department maintains the right to prescribe and regulate the fees or charges associated with obtaining a permit pursuant to
this chapter.
E. Each application shall include a statement that any land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance
with the erosion and sediment control plan, and that a responsible person shall be on site on all days where construction or grading activity takes place.
F. The applicant will be required to file with the Nampa public works department a cash bond or automatically renewable letter of credit in an amount
deemed sufficient by the Nampa public works department to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, and maintenance of improvements for such
period as specified by the city of Nampa, and engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the
site.
G. The Nampa public works department will review each application for a site development permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this
chapter. Within ten (10) working days after receiving an application, the Nampa public works department shall, in writing:
1. Notify the applicant that the department has reviewed the permit application for compliance;
2. Disapprove the permit application indicating the deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission. (Ord. 3432, 3-
7-2005)
9-6-4-1: PERMITS REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 204/410
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to perform any construction activity, including, but not limited to, all land disturbing activity, directly or
indirectly associated with construction projects within the corporate limits of Nampa without first obtaining a site development and/or erosion and sediment
control permit. (Ord. 3469, 7-5-2005)
9-6-4-2: FEES REQUIRED:
Permits required under this title require fees to be paid at time of issuance of a permit. Permit fees for projects started without the required permits shall be
subject to a special investigation fee, which shall be assessed at a rate of twice that of the original permit fee unless otherwise provided herein. (Ord.
3469, 7-5-2005)
9-6-4-3: FEES:
Except as otherwise specified all fees are established by resolution of the council. (Ord. 3469, 7-5-2005)
9-6-4-4: FEE REFUNDS:
Fees paid for the permits associated with the construction of improvement to any work regulated under this title shall be refundable at a rate of eighty
percent (80%) of the original permit. Refund requests must be made in writing and shall be accompanied by the original permit. Refunds cannot be
granted for plan review fees or for permits which are expired or null and void for any reason. (Ord. 3469, 7-5-2005)
9-6-4-5: FAILURE TO CORRECT VIOLATION; PERMIT REVOCATION:
In case of violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or other regulation of the city of Nampa related to any permitted project, by any person holding a
required permit and after such violator has been given written notice of such violation and said licensee has failed to correct the violation within the time
specified in the notice, the public works director, or his authorized representative, may declare the permit revoked and notify the permittee. Any permittee
who has had their permit so revoked shall not be issued another permit until said violation has been corrected and formal application made as provided in
this section 9-6-4. Any revocation may be appealed in writing to the council within fifteen days from the date the notice of the revocation is given to the
permittee. (Ord. 3469, 7-5-2005)
9-6-4-6: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT BY LIMITATION:
Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after
its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the work is
commenced. The public works director is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than one hundred eighty
(180) days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall also be demonstrated. (Ord. 3469, 7-5-2005)
9-6-4-7: PERMITS DENIED:
The public works director, city engineer or building official may withhold issuance of any permit to any owners, firm or corporation who has outstanding
notices of violation or outstanding permit fees on permits previously issued, and has failed to take the directed corrective action. Issuance of new permits
may not be withheld if an appeal of the public works director's, city engineer's or building official's action has been filed for consideration by the Nampa city
council. Appeal of the public works director's, city engineer's or building official's action may be made to the Nampa city council. Such an appeal must be
made in writing to the city council whereby the appellant will provide the reason(s) why they have not corrected the substandard work or paid the
outstanding fee. Appeal must be made within fifteen (15) days of the issuance of the notice of violation or prior to the nullification of the required permit.
(Ord. 3469, 7-5-2005)
9-6-4-8: ADDITIONAL CAUSES FOR PERMIT REVOCATION:
The public works director, city engineer or building official may revoke any permit issued in error, any permit issued on the basis of incorrect information or
upon learning of work which has been performed in violation of this or any other law of the state of Idaho or federal government. Upon revocation the
permit holder shall cease all work until such time that a new permit has been issued or written notification of reactivation of the nullified permit has been
received. (Ord. 3469, 7-5-2005)
9-6-4-9: INSPECTION OF WORK:
The public works director, city engineer or building official or their authorized representatives have the authority to enter any premises at any reasonable
hour for the examination of work permitted under this section 9-6-4 or any other provision of this code. All work requiring inspection under this section shall
be left exposed and accessible to the inspector until such time that the inspector has approved the installation or construction. (Ord. 3469, 7-5-2005)
9-6-5: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN:
A. The erosion and sediment control plan shall include:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 205/410
1. A sequence of construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing, rough grading, stockpiling, construction of utilities,
infrastructure, and buildings, and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the
estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, and the sequence of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment measures, and
establishment of permanent vegetation.
2. All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the objectives of this chapter throughout all phases of construction and permanently,
after completion of development of the site.
B. The erosion and sediment control plan must be prepared by a qualified person.
C. Modifications to the plan:
1. Major amendments of the erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted to the Nampa public works department and shall be processed and
approved or disapproved, in the same manner as the original plans.
2. Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the Nampa public works department by written authorization to the permittee. (Ord. 3432,
3-7-2005)
9-6-6: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS:
Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and waterway crossings on all construction sites, regardless of size, shall meet the
requirements of this section and the design criteria set forth in the most recent version of the Boise City "Erosion And Sediment Control Field Manual" or
equivalent and meet the requirements of city of Nampa "Development Information Manual" and shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment
from the site to the satisfaction of the Nampa public works department.
A. Clearing And Grading:
1. Clearing and grading shall not be permitted except when in compliance with all other chapters of this code.
2. Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation and retain natural drainage patterns, as described in the "Erosion And Sediment Control Field
Manual" (Boise City, current edition or equivalent) shall be used to the satisfaction of the Nampa public works department.
3. Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than thirty (30) acres, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as
approved by the Nampa public works department.
4. Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have
been stabilized.
5. Cut and fill slopes shall be no greater than three to one (3:1), except as approved by the Nampa public works department to meet other
community or environmental objectives.
B. Control Standards:
1. Soil must be stabilized within ten (10) days of clearing or inactivity in construction.
2. If vegetative erosion control methods, such as seeding, have not become established within two (2) weeks, the Nampa public works department may
require that the site be reseeded, or that a nonvegetative option be employed.
3. Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or sediment from the site.
4. When in-channel work is conducted, the channel shall be stabilized before, during and after work.
5. Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion must be provided at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels.
6. A temporary access road shall be provided at all sites.
7. A vehicle wash down/cleanup area shall be provided at all sites to remove mud and prevent tracking onto roadways.
8. Other measures may be required at the discretion of the Nampa public works department in order to ensure that construction vehicles do not track
sediment onto public streets or sediment is not washed into storm drains. (Ord. 3432, 3-7-2005)
9-6-7: INSPECTIONS:
A. The permittee or his/her agent shall make regular inspections of all control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the
approved erosion and sediment control plan(s). The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the control plan, and
the need for additional control measures.
B. All inspections shall be documented in written form and submitted to the Nampa public works department at the time interval specified in the approved
permit.
C. The Nampa public works department or its designated agent shall enter the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular
inspections. (Ord. 3432, 3-7-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 206/410
9-6-8: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Stop Work Orders; Revocation Of Permit: In the event that any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of
the permit, or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or
working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the
neighborhood, the Nampa public works department may suspend or revoke the site development permit.
B. Violation And Penalties: No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be done,
contrary to or in violation of any terms of this chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a
separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any person, partnership, or corporation
convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration. (Ord. 3432, 3-7-2005)
9-6-9: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed to be separable, and the invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of
the remainder. (Ord. 3432, 3-7-2005)
9-6-10: EFFECTIVE DATE OF CHAPTER:
The effective date of this chapter is June 1, 2005. All prior ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed. (Ord. 3432,
3-7-2005)
Chapter 7
RESERVED
Chapter 8
RESERVED
Chapter 9
RESERVED
Chapter 10
RESERVED
Chapter 11
RESERVED
Chapter 12
RESERVED
Chapter 13
AIRPORT REGULATIONS
9-13-1: AIRPORT REGULATIONS:
All aircraft and individuals using the municipal airport of the city of Nampa, Idaho, shall comply with the airport rules and regulations adopted by the airport
commission and approved by the city council, a copy of which shall be on file at the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 2410)
9-13-2: STANDARDS FOR FIXED BASE OPERATORS, COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES AND SERVICES:
The minimum standards for fixed base operators, commercial activities and services at the Nampa municipal airport, Nampa, Idaho, shall be as follows:
A. Purpose And Intent: The minimum standards for commercial activity, operation or service hereinafter set forth have been developed to promote in a
reasonable manner the best interest of the public concerning the competent and qualified operation of the Nampa airport.
These standards shall be administered on fair and reasonable terms in accordance with the current applicable regulations of the federal aviation
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 207/410
administration.
Any standard which a tenant operator is required to meet must be uniformly applicable to all operators seeking the same franchise privileges and the
basic premises herein contained are applicable to all.
1. Commercial Operations: "Commercial operations" shall mean any person or persons operating from the airport for compensation or hire.
2. Fixed Base Operator: A "fixed base operator" is defined as any person, firm, or corporation performing any of the functions of furnishing any of the
services as hereinafter set out for fixed base operators at the Nampa airport. No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in any commercial activity
as a fixed base operator as herein defined unless the same is done in full compliance with the standards, rules and regulations herein set forth.
3. Airport Tenant: An "airport tenant" is defined as any person, firm, or corporation leasing property at the Nampa airport who is not a fixed base
operator.
4. Liability Insurance: All fixed base operators and airport tenants shall protect the public generally, the customers or clients of such fixed base
operators, and the city of Nampa from any and all lawful damages, claims, or liability and shall carry liability insurance in a company authorized to do
business in Idaho in an amount to be approved by the city.
5. Technically And Financially Able To Perform: A fixed base operator shall satisfy the lessor that it is technically and financially able to perform the
services of a fixed base operator. This shall include upon the request of the airport commission the responsibility for demonstrating continued
financial solvency and business ability by the submitting of a current balance sheet and profits and loss statement. In each instance, Nampa city
council shall be the final judge as to the qualifications and financial ability of the lessee.
6. Written Lease: Any person, firm or corporation capable of meeting the minimum standards set forth herein for any of the stated categories is eligible
to become a fixed base operator at the airport, subject to the execution of a written lease containing such terms and conditions as may be
determined by the Nampa city council. A fixed base operator or airport tenant shall not engage in any business or activity on the airport other than
that authorized under his particular category or categories. Any fixed base operator desiring to extend his operation into more than one category or to
discontinue operations in a category, shall first apply in writing to the airport commission for permission to do so, setting forth in detail the reasons
and conditions for the request. The Nampa city council shall then grant or deny the request on such terms and conditions as the city council deems
to be prudent and proper under the circumstances. Each fixed base operator shall provide his own buildings, personnel and equipment, and other
requirements as herein stated upon land leased from the city of Nampa.
7. Customer Facilities: All fixed base operators at said airport shall provide ample lounges and restrooms for their customers and shall make telephone
service conveniently and readily available for public use.
8. Construction: All construction required of such operators shall be in accordance with design and construction standards required or established by
the city of Nampa for the facility or activity involved. Title to any and all permanent buildings and appurtenances, which may be built on airport
property, shall revert to the city of Nampa, when and if the subject lessee vacates the lease for any reason.
9. Rates Or Charges: The rates or charges for any and all activities and services of such operators shall be determined by the operators, and subject to
the requirement that all such rates or charges shall be reasonable and be equally and fairly applied to all users of the services.
10. Airport Operator Criteria: All operators at the airports shall be financially sound and progressive business enterprises, with adequately manned and
equipped facilities.
11. Payment Of Taxes And Assessments: All fixed base operators shall, at their own expense, pay all taxes and assessments against any buildings or
other structures placed on the premises by them, as well as all taxes and assessments against the personal property used by them in their
operations.
12. Abide By Laws: All operators shall abide by and comply with all state, county and city laws and ordinances, the rules and regulations of the state
and federal aviation administration.
13. City Council Approval: In the event the city constructs the physical plant facilities (hangars, etc.) for the use by any operator under the provisions of
any lease or other contract, such lease or contract with such operator shall be on such terms and conditions as approved by the city council.
14. Payment Of Utilities: All operators shall provide and pay for all lights, gas, electrical current, water, sewer charges and garbage collection charges
used or incurred anywhere in or about the leased premises, and shall pay the charges made therefore by the suppliers thereof promptly when due.
15. All Agreements: All contracts and leases between such operators and the city of Nampa shall be subordinate to the provisions of any existing or
future agreement between the city of Nampa, state of Idaho and the United States, relative to the operation or maintenance of the airport, the
execution of which has been or may be required as a condition precedent to the expenditure of federal funds for the development of the airport
properties.
16. Subleasing Of Premises: No fixed base operators shall sublease or sublet any premises leased by such operator from the city of Nampa, or assign
any such lease, without the prior written approval of the city council, and any such subletting or assignment shall be subject to all of the minimum
standards herein set forth.
17. Assumption Of Obligations: In the event the lessee sublets any portion of his lease, the sublessee must agree to assume the full obligations of the
lease as set out herein and must agree to fully cooperate with the city of Nampa in seeing that these standards are complied with. The sublessee
shall immediately comply with any reasonably request or direction of the city council as it relates to the enforcement of these standards.
18. Default Of Lessee Or Sublessee: In the event that the lessee or sublessee fails to comply fully with these standards or fails to comply with the
reasonable request or direction of the city council as it relates to these standards, said lessee or sublessee shall be in default. If said default
continues for more than thirty (30) days after notice of said default, the city council may terminate the lease. Said lessee is responsible for the
performance of the sublessee.
19. Common Areas Of Airport: Fixed base operators shall have the right in common with others authorized to do so, to use common areas of the
airport, including runways, taxiways, aprons, roadways, floodlights, landing lights, signals and other conveniences for the takeoff, flying and landing
of aircraft of lessee.
20. Negotiation Of Lease: Any and all leases that may be entered into between the city of Nampa and the fixed base operators and airport tenants shall
be negotiated on an individual basis at the time of each application with the fixed based operators and airport tenants. In addition, leases shall, at the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 208/410
discretion of the city council, be subject to review and reevaluation at the end of each five (5) year period thereof, in relation to the consumer price
index.
21. Maintenance Of Premises: Lessees will, at all times during the continuance of the term of the lease and any renewal or extension thereof, conduct,
operate and maintain for the benefit of the public, the fixed base operation provided for and described therein, and all aspects and parts and services
thereof as defined and set forth, and will make all such services available to the public and that it will devote its best efforts for the accomplishment of
such purposes and that it will at all times make charges to patrons and customers for all merchandise or materials and other services furnished or
rendered, but that it will refrain from imposing or levying excessive or otherwise unreasonable charges or fees for any facilities or fees for any
facilities or services. Notwithstanding anything contained in a lease that may be or appear to the contrary it is expressly understood and agreed that
the rights granted thereunder are nonexclusive and the lessor reserves the right to grant similar privileges to another operator or operators on other
parts of the airport when, in its sole discretion the city council and/or the airport commission, finds it in the best interest of the airport.
22. City Protection Of Airport: The city of Nampa reserves the right to take any action it considers necessary to protect the aerial approaches to the
airport against obstructions, together with the right to prevent any fixed base operator from erecting, or permitting to be erected, any building, sign, or
other structure on the airport which, in the opinion of the city council and/or airport commission, would limit the usefulness of the airport or constitute
a hazard to aircraft.
23. Time Of War Or National Emergency: All contracts and leases between such operators and the city of Nampa shall be subordinate to the right of
the city of Nampa, state of Idaho during time of war or national emergency to lease the landing area of any part thereof to the United States
government for military or naval use, and, if any such lease is so made, the provisions of the lease to the operators shall be suspended.
24. Leases In Effect: The provisions of these standards shall in no way negate or cause to be null or void existing leases with fixed base operators or
airport tenants at the Nampa municipal airport. No new leases will be executed with the fixed base operators presently located at the Nampa
municipal airport on the effective date of these fixed base operators minimum standards, nor will amendments to the existing leases be executed
unless the present leases are made subject to the provisions of these standards.
25. Waste Material: The lessee shall remove from the airport or otherwise dispose of in a manner approved by the airport manager all garbage, debris,
and other waste material (whether solid or liquid) arising out of its occupancy of the premises or out of its operations. Said lessee shall keep and
maintain his leased premises in a neat and orderly manner; lessee shall keep the grass cut and the buildings painted. Any garbage, debris and/or
waste which may be temporarily stored in the open shall be kept in suitable garbage or waste receptacles, the same to be made of metal and
equipped with tightfitting covers and to be of a design safely and properly to contain whatever may be placed therein. The lessee shall use extreme
care when effecting removal of all such waste.
26. City Improvements: The city of Nampa reserves the right to further develop or improve all areas of the airport as it seems fit, regardless of the
desires or views of any fixed base operators, and without interference or hinderance from any such fixed base operators.
27. Right To Enter Premises: The city council and/or the airport commission reserves the right to enter upon any premises leased to fixed base
operators at reasonable times for the purpose of making such inspections as it may deem expedient, to the proper enforcement of these minimum
standards and for the proper enforcement of any covenant or condition of any fixed base operator's contract or lease agreement.
28. Perform Services On Aircraft: The city of Nampa recognizes the rights of any person, firm, or corporation operating aircraft on the airport to perform
services on its own aircraft with its own employees (including, but not limited to, maintenance and repair) that it may choose to perform. Aircraft
fueling accomplished under this provision shall be in strict accordance with any safety regulations and/or ordinance as referenced in subsection A12
of this section.
29. Categories Of Aircraft: Final determination as to proper category designation of any aircraft shall rest with the airport commission.
a. Private:
(1) Privately owned aircraft will be operated noncommercially by owner or owners.
(2) Private aircraft may be used by persons other than the owner provided no part above the cost of the operation of aircraft is received in money
or otherwise by the owner for such use.
(3) The aircraft can be used in connection with the owner's business comparable to an owner's use of his private automobile.
(4) Company and corporation owned aircraft that are operated for the free transportation of their and other personnel and/or products are classified
as private aircraft and subject to the restrictions as listed under subsection A29a(2) of this section.
(5) Club aircraft must be owned and operated by a nonprofit partnership or nonprofit corporation, and each club member must be a bona fide
owner of a part of the aircraft or a share in the corporation. The club may not derive greater revenue from the use of its aircraft than the amount
necessary for the operation, maintenance and replacement of its aircraft.
b. Commercial Aircraft Used:
(1) To carry passengers for hire on local flights.
(2) For rental, hire or charter.
(3) Student instruction and its kindred occupations.
(4) Any aircraft used for commercial purposes and not otherwise covered in these regulations.
30. Licenses: Only aircraft and airmen licensed by the federal aviation administration shall operate on or from this airport; provided, however, that this
restriction shall not apply to public aircraft of the federal government or of the U.S. army, navy, air force, or marine corps or to aircraft licensed by
foreign governments having a reciprocal agreement with the United States covering the operation of such licensed aircraft, or to the operation of
ultralites in accordance with the adopted airport rules and regulations.
B. Fixed Base Operations: All activities, operations or services provided on the airport property for compensation shall be considered commercial and shall
meet the standards as set forth in this chapter.
Only fixed base operators shall conduct a commercial activity on the airport. The following have been set forth as possible services:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 209/410
1. Primary Services:
a. The sales, rental and leasing of aircraft, accessories and supplies.
b. Flight training, ground school (instruction) and related operations.
c. Charter and/or air taxi service.
d. Maintenance activities to include repair, overhaul, rebuild and modification of aircraft, engines and accessories.
e. Line services to include aviation fuel and oil sales and other miscellaneous service activities.
f. Provide hangar facilities and nonpublic tie down areas.
2. Specialty Services:
a. Aerial photography.
b. Air ambulance service.
c. Radio and/or instrument repair.
d. Propeller and/or avionics shop.
e. Other specialty services not listed.
3. Application For Fixed Base Operator Rights: An applicant desiring a lease or license to provide a commercial service at the airport shall submit a
written application to the city council with a copy to the airport commission. The council within forty five (45) days shall arrive at some contract
agreement or reject the application.
a. Special Provisions:
(1) The council may grant licenses for specialty services.
(2) An applicant shall specify each and every activity, operation or service to be provided as listed in subsections B1 and B2 of this section and he
shall conduct only those activities, operations or services for which he qualifies and which are specified in his lease and/or license.
(3) The fixed base operator shall secure minimum public liability insurance coverage from an acceptable insurance company as follows:
Bodily injury: In an amount to be set by the airport commission and approved by the city council.
Property damage: In an amount to be set by the airport commission and approved by the city council.
Said insurance coverage shall name the city of Nampa as a coinsured with the fixed base operator. Such policy or policies shall be maintained in
full force and effect during all terms of existing leases, contracts or agreements and renewals or extensions of same. A copy of the policy shall
be delivered to the city clerk. Each policy shall contain a provision that the policy may not be cancelled without at least ten (10) days prior notice
in writing to the city council. At all times during the term of a lease, lessee shall insure, at lessee's own cost or expense, all hangars and
structures on the leased ground against any loss or damage by fire, windstorm, hail, explosion or smoke, with a responsible insurance company.
b. Revocation Of Lease Or License:
(1) The council in its discretion shall have the right to terminate any lease, license or agreement authorizing the fixed base operator to conduct any
service or activity and to revoke a lease on any land or facility upon the airport for any cause or reason provided by those rules or by law and in
addition thereof upon the happening of one or more of the following:
(A) Filing a petition of voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy by the operator.
(B) The making by the fixed base operator of any general assignment for the benefit of creditors.
(C) The abandonment or discontinuance of any permitted operation at the airport by the fixed base operator or the failure to conduct any service,
operation, or activity which the lessee of licensee has agreed to provide under the terms of his contract. If this condition exists for a period of
thirty (30) days without prior approval of the council, it will constitute an abandonment of the land or facilities and the lease and/or license shall
become null and void.
(D) The failure of the fixed base operator to promptly pay to the city when due all rents, charges, fees or other payments which are payable to
the city in accordance with applicable leases or licenses.
(E) The failure of the fixed base operator to remedy any default or breach or violation of these rules and regulations by him or his employees
within thirty (30) days after notice from the city council.
(F) Violates any of these rules and regulations or fails to maintain current FAA licenses required for his operation.
(G) Supplies the city with false or misleading information or misrepresents any material facts on his application or documents, or in statements to
or before the council; or fails to make full disclosure on his financial statement or other required documents.
(H) Operates or allows any employee to operate an aircraft or equipment in a dangerous or hazardous manner which may endanger the general
public in any manner.
c. Certificates:
(1) Fixed base operators and/or employees shall be competent and shall hold all current valid certificates, permits, licenses or other authorities
required by the CAB and FAA, including any required air taxi permits and public utility commission certificates, and shall not utilize any pilot in
any aircraft operations who does not hold valid and current certificates from CAB and FAA, nor shall he allow an aircraft to be flown which does
not have a current and valid license and permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 210/410
d. All Complaints In Writing:
(1) All complaints against any fixed base operator or his employees for violation of these minimum standards shall be in writing and signed by the
complainant, and filed with the city clerk.
e. FAA Review:
(1) All leases shall be subject to review by the FAA but final approval shall be by the city council.
C. Fixed Base Operator Categories:
1. Category A; Flight Instruction And Aircraft Rental: A fixed base operator in this category shall:
a. Have available on a minimum, one instruction pilot with appropriate and current federal aviation administration pilot and medical certificates.
b. Provide and at all times maintain a minimum of one aircraft owned or leased by and under the exclusive control of this fixed base operator which
are properly equipped and federal aviation administration certificated for flight instruction and rental.
c. Demonstrate the continuing ability to meet requirements for certification of flight instructor personnel and aircraft by the federal aviation
administration.
d. Assure that personnel operating rental equipment obtained from the subject fixed base operator have appropriate and current federal aviation
administration pilot and approved medical certificates.
2. Category B; Aircraft Charter And Taxi: A fixed base operator in this category shall:
a. Have available a minimum of one federal aviation administration certified pilot with current commercial and instrument rating and approved
medical certificate.
b. Lease from the city of Nampa or provided under terms agreeable to the city for his use, a building for passenger shelter, restrooms, telephone, etc.
Said building shall be subject to FAA minimum standards.
c. Provide satisfactory arrangements for the checking in of passengers, handling of luggage, ticketing, and ground transportation, etc.
d. Provide and at all times maintain a minimum of one currently certified and continuously airworthy aircraft owned or leased by and under the
exclusive control of this fixed base operator, properly certified for air charter or air taxi service.
3. Category C; Aircraft Sales: Fixed base operators in this category shall:
a. Have available federal aviation administration certified and currently airworthy aircraft for sale.
b. Have a minimum of one fully qualified demonstrator pilot available with current and appropriate federal aviation administration pilot and approved
medical certificates.
4. Category D; Aircraft, Engine, Propeller, And Accessory Maintenance: Fixed base operator in this category shall:
a. Lease from the city of Nampa or provide under terms agreeable to the city council for his use sufficient hangar, shop and storage space.
b. Furnish facilities and equipment for airframe and/or power plant repairs with at least one duly federal aviation administration certified A&P
mechanic and such other personnel as may be necessary.
c. A fixed base operator in the category may engage in the buying and selling of new and used aircraft, aircraft parts and equipment without meeting
the requirements of category C.
5. Category E; Line Services: Fixed base operator in this category shall:
a. Provide and maintain a minimum of two thousand (2,000) gallons tank storage capacity belowground for each grade of aviation fuel offered for
sale.
b. Maintain separate pumping equipment for each grade of fuel meeting all applicable safety requirements with reliable metering devices subject to
independent inspection.
c. Provide and maintain metered, filter equipped dispensers fixed or mobile for dispensing each grade of aviation fuel offered for sale. Mobile
dispensing truck(s) shall have a total of three hundred (300) gallons capacity for each grade of fuel and shall meet fire code.
d. There shall be no fueling direct from a common carrier transport truck except into below ground storage tanks:
e. A fixed base operator in this category may engage in the buying and selling of new and used aircraft, aircraft parts and equipment without meeting
the requirements of category C.
6. Category F; Airport Tenant: An airport tenant in this category shall:
a. Be prohibited from engaging in any of the activities of fixed base operators defined by category A through E, unless specifically approved by the
city council in the lease agreement between the city of Nampa and the tenant.
b. Be responsible that aircraft owned by him or operated from the property leased or occupied by him are operated by personnel who hold
appropriate and current federal aviation administration pilot and approved medical certificates.
7. Category G; Combination Of Services: An applicant requesting to provide a combination of services, shall have requirements reviewed by the airport
commission and the city council. Land shall be improved in accordance with applicable zoning pertaining to the airport.
D. Exceptions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 211/410
1. The council may in its discretion waive any portion of this section of these minimum standards for the benefit of a commercial airline licensed by the
civil aeronautic board, any governmental agency, or a person performing a nonprofit public service, performing air search and rescue operations or
engaging in fire fighting operations.
2. The airport commission may authorize an individual to perform in one of the above functions on an occasional basis and not be connected with a
fixed base operation when, in the commission's discretion the service is necessary for the convenience of the public and provided the following
conditions are met:
a. The authorization will be for a maximum period of two (2) years.
b. The authorization may be granted subject to conditions required by the airport commission. The individual must maintain liability insurance in an
amount to be set by the airport commission and approved by the city council. (Ord. 2410)
9-13-3: AIRCRAFT EMERGENCIES:
A. Emergency Plan: The airport manager shall implement the airport's emergency operations plan to govern all potential or actual aircraft or other
emergencies at the airport.
B. Responsibility Of Aircraft Crash Removal: The owner involved in a crash shall be responsible for organizing and conducting crash removal from such
areas as soon as conditions warrant. All costs incurred for such removal shall be borne by the owner or operator of the aircraft involved. Runways or
taxiways upon which a crash has occurred shall be opened to aircraft traffic only after the removal of debris by the owner or operator of an aircraft
involved and all debris resulting therefrom to the satisfaction of the airport manager or his authorized representative. Should said owner or operator fail,
refuse or be unable to remove such aircraft within a reasonable time as determined by the airport manager from the circumstances and condition of
hazard created by reason of the presence of such aircraft at such place, the airport manager shall, without liability to the owner or operator of such
aircraft, cause the same to be removed and stored off the active airfield and the cost of such removal shall be paid by the owner or operator.
C. Airport Manager Designated To Be Emergency Director: The airport manager is designated the emergency director and will take such actions as
necessary to protect life and property in emergency situations. He will be the representative of the city and may be assisted by the Nampa police and
fire departments.
D. Protection Of Crashed Aircraft: The airport manager will assume responsibility for protecting crashed aircraft until federal and state investigators arrive.
E. Right Of Access To Airport Proper:
1. The airport manager shall have the responsibility of providing and designating access gates in the perimeter fencing of the airport for use by crash,
fire and rescue equipment. The airport manager reserves the right to deny access to the airport to any person or persons not directly connected with
crash, fire and rescue operations, including press, television and radio news reports.
2. Pedestrian traffic beyond any portion of the perimeter fencing of the airport to the scene of an accident within the airport is strictly prohibited.
F. Security At Scene Of Crash: When, by virtue of the kind, type and mission of the aircraft, it becomes necessary to provide security at the scene of the
crash, the owner or operator of the aircraft or his duly authorized agent shall be responsible for obtaining, providing and maintaining his own security, or
the airport manager, if necessary, can secure the scene without authorization of owner and charge all costs to owner. (Ord. 2410)
9-13-4: AIRCRAFT TIE DOWN AND HANGAR REGULATIONS; FEES:
That a fee for the use of aircraft tie downs and hangars is hereby established. Rules, regulations and fee amounts relative to the use of aircraft tie downs
and hangars shall be promulgated by the airport commission and approved by the city council. (Ord. 2410)
9-13-5: AIRPORT MANAGER:
The position of airport manager is hereby created. The airport manager or his designated representative is responsible for overseeing the operation and
maintenance of the airport. The manager or his designated representative shall serve as the secretary to the airport commission and shall provide liaison
between the airport users and the airport commission and between the airport commission and the city council. (Ord. 2410)
9-13-6: AVIATION CLUB:
A. A multiperson ownership, three (3) or more persons owning one or more aircraft, either in partnership or co-ownership, or as a corporation whose
principal base is at the airport and sole purpose of which is for the enjoyment of or for the business of transportation of the owners, shall be deemed an
aviation club.
B. A permit shall be required from the city of Nampa for an aviation club.
C. Each club must be a nonprofit corporation or partnership. Each member must be a bona fide owner of the aircraft or a stockholder in the corporation.
The club may not derive greater revenue from the use of its aircraft than the amount necessary for the actual use or operation, maintenance, and
replacement of its aircraft. The club will file and keep current with the city council and airport commission a complete list of the club's membership and
investment share held by each member. In addition, the club shall maintain a set of books showing all club income and expenses. Said books shall be
available for inspection by airport management to determine compliance with this provision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 212/410
D. All clubs shall submit to the city council and airport commission a list of its officers and members and their addresses each year before January 15.
E. The club's aircraft will not be used by other than bona fide members for rental and by no one for commercial operations. Student checkout and/or
instruction can be given in a club aircraft to club members by either a fixed base operator in the airport who provides flight training or by an instructor
who is a bona fide club member. Instruction can be given in club aircraft to club members, provided such instruction is given by lessee based on the
airport or by a club instructor who shall not receive remuneration in any manner for such.
F. In the event that the club fails to comply with these conditions, the city council and/or airport commission will notify the club in writing of such violations.
The city council and/or airport commission may take any action deemed advisable by the city.
G. Each aircraft owned by the flying club must have aircraft liability insurance coverage for the following amounts:
Aircraft Liability
Bodily injuryIn an amount to be set by the airport commission and approved by the city council.
Property damageIn an amount to be set by the airport commission and approved by the city council.
H. A flying club may not use the facilities of a fixed base operator, for club activities, or instruction except by expressed written permission of said fixed
base operator. (Ord. 2410)
Title 10
PLANNING AND ZONING
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
10-1-1: TITLE, CITATION AND PURPOSE:
This title, with maps, is known as the NAMPA COMPREHENSIVE ZONING ORDINANCE. The purpose is:
A. To promote the interest of health, safety and general welfare.
B. To secure safety from fire and to provide adequate open spaces for light and air.
C. To prevent the overcrowding of land.
D. To avoid undue concentration of population.
E. To conserve and stabilize property values.
F. To promote the achievement of the Comprehensive Plan.
G. To stabilize expectations regarding future development of Nampa thereby providing a basis for decisions with respect to such development. (Ord. 2210;
amd. Ord. 2858)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The word "lot" includes the word "plot". The word "lot" is also used interchangeably in this title and connotates a legal parcel unless specifically denoted as
a "platted lot". Excepting, however, parking lots in which "lot" has a different meaning by common usage. The word "property" connotates lots or parcels as
befitting the situation. The word "used" includes "designated, intended or arranged to be used". Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be
measured horizontally.
ABUTTING: Land having a common property line or district line except when separated by a street, alley, railroad right-of-way, canal or easement.
ACCESS: The place, means or way by which pedestrians or vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a property, use or
parking space.
ACCESSORY DWELLING (RESIDENTIAL), ATTACHED: A separate housekeeping unit physically attached and made an integral part of a single-family
dwelling unit. These uses are often referred to as "mother" or "father-in-law's quarters". They are typified by having their own separate bedroom, possibly a
small separate living/family room, a bathroom, and, perhaps a "kitchenette" (small sink allowed but not an independent 220 watt power source sufficient to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 213/410
allow a full kitchen [stove]) nor independent laundry facilities. They have access directly from and through the main dwelling unit (but may have an outside
access), are not allowed an individual address and are not allowed a separate mailbox. In other words, they are not intended to become completely
independent dwelling units creating thereby a de facto "duplex type" situation.
ACCESSORY DWELLING (RESIDENTIAL), DETACHED: A building incidental and subordinate to the principal residential house on site. Terms,
regulations and provisions for detached accessory dwelling units are found in section 10-3-2 of this title.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A building or other structure incidental and subordinate to the principal building(s) and/or use(s) located on the same
property. In order to be considered "portable/mobile", the structure must be under twelve feet (12') in height, and, be two hundred (200) square feet in area
(total) or smaller, and, be placed on blocks or skids or resting on a hard surface (e.g., a concrete pad) but not be anchored thereto.
ACCESSORY USE: A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use of a property (or on an adjoining property as may be determined by the planning
director or his/her designee) which does not alter the essential characteristic(s) of the principal use.
ACCESSWAY: An unobstructed way of specified width containing a drive or roadway that provides vehicular access within a mobile home park and
connects to a public street.
ADJOINING DISTRICT: Lands within one block (usually 300 to 460 feet) radius of a point of reference. The lands may be in the same or a different zoning
district than where the point of reference is based.
AGRICULTURE: Use of the land for farming, dairying, pasturage, apiaries, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, animal and poultry husbandry, and the
necessary accessory uses for packing, processing, treating or storing the produce; provided the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary
to that of normal agricultural activities; and that the above uses shall not include the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals.
ALLEY OR LANE: A passageway open to public travel, not more than thirty feet (30') wide, which affords generally a secondary means of vehicular access
to abutting lots and is not intended for general traffic circulation.
ANIMAL: Any organism other than human beings needing food to maintain and sustain its life which generally has mobility and a developed central
nervous system.
ANIMAL, FERAL: An animal that belongs to a domestic or agricultural species but behaves like a wild, free ranging species. They may or may not belong
to humans.
ANIMALS, AGRICULTURAL: Animals normally kept for commercial production and sale, utility, and/or family food production, excluding swine, but
including, and not limited to, animals to be considered, at maturity, "large" such as cattle, horses, donkeys, mules, llamas, alpacas, emus, ostriches, and
rheas; animals to be considered "medium" such as goats, potbellied pigs (only when kept as "pets" by special permit), sheep, turkeys, and miniature
horses; and animals to be considered "small" such as chickens, chinchillas, rabbits, ducks, geese and bees. For purposes of this title and regulation, bees
are to be considered as "agricultural animals" and are specifically addressed in section 10-21-4 of this title under "apiary" guidelines.
ANIMALS, DOMESTIC PET: An animal that lives in or near the habitations of humans, often tamed, which is kept for companionship or utility but not for
commercial purposes, including, but not limited to, amphibians (nonvenomous), cats, dogs, birds (excluding licensed birds of prey), reptiles (lizards,
nonvenomous snakes), rodents (hamsters, gerbils, mice, rats, ferrets), aquarium fish and rabbits (although these are often "farmed"), and insects. Also,
any agricultural animal so designated by permit from the planning director.
ANIMALS, EXOTIC: Animals not usually considered to be pets or agricultural animals. The term connotates unique, nonnative, or special in nature. See
definition of Animals, Exotic, Wild.
ANIMALS, EXOTIC, WILD: Species (including hybrids) not native to the state of Idaho, whether or not in captivity, including, but not limited to, chukar, red
fox, squirrels, lions, tigers, elephants, llama (allowed as agricultural animal), monkeys, dangerous reptiles like alligators, crocodiles, and gila monsters,
valley quail, pheasants, turkeys (allowed as agricultural animal), also includes feral animals.
ANIMALS, NATIVE WILD: Free ranging species (including hybrids) presently native to the state of Idaho including bats, black bears, beavers, birds of prey
(eagles, falcons, hawks, vultures, owls), magpies, mountain quail, mink, muskrats, bobcats, cougars, deer, elk, moose, kit fox, coyotes, gray wolf, skunks,
weasel, badgers, raccoons, chipmunks, marmots, pocket gophers, ground squirrels, rabbits, mice, wood rats, river otters, porcupines, lizards, turtles,
snakes, toads, frogs, songbirds, waterfowl (e.g., ducks), ravens, crows, various fish, insects.
ANIMALS, WILD: Any animal of any size or species considered potentially dangerous or to have a greater than average chance to create nuisances and
thereby disturb the public or whose presence in the community is an abnormality. These are animals not normally kept in captivity and may include, but are
not limited to, the animals listed under "animals, exotic, wild" and "animals, native wild" as defined herein. Other animals normally associated with a zoo
environment or considered protected or endangered species, are included here as well. (Note: Persons, groups, or centers commonly associated with
maintaining wild animals include rehabilitators, falconers, and game ranches who are all to be licensed by various state and federal agencies.)
APIARY: Bees and hives wherever they are kept, located, or found (except native wild colonies).
AREA OF CITY IMPACT: The development area around but outside the city where the action or inaction of one jurisdiction affects another jurisdiction.
AUTOMOBILE OR MOBILE HOME SALES AREA: An open area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles or
mobile homes in operable condition and where no repair work is done, but not including the rental of mobile homes as dwelling units in the sales area.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR: Property whereupon vehicle repair is conducted (whether completely in a building or otherwise). Sales of vehicles on the same
property may be allowed if such is allowable in the zone wherein the repair facility is located. Also, limited vehicle parts salvage and storage may be
allowed provided that the area devoted to storage of parts for sale or being stored does not exceed the area devoted to repair of vehicles and that such
activity does not, to the reasonable observer, become the predominant activity conducted by the business on the property. Any such storage must comply
with storage restrictions (e.g., screening requirements) that may be in force on the property per zoning codes.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING: The dismantling or disassembling of used motor vehicles or mobile homes, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled,
obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building between floor and ceiling, which is partly below and partly above grade, but so located that the vertical distance
from grade to the floor below is less than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling. A basement, when designated for or occupied by business or
manufacturing shall be considered a story. See section 10-1-18, figure 2 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 214/410
BED AND BREAKFAST: A dwelling operated as a form of regular business wherein lodgers and/or boarders are housed and fed for compensation at any
one time for a temporary time frame; similar to a small motel or form of boarding house.
BEES: Honey producing insects (of all life stages) of the genus Apis.
BUILDABLE (LOT OR PARCEL): Jargon referring to whether or not a building permit may be issued for construction or modification of a principal structure
upon a property.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof. When a use is required to be within a building, or where special authority granted pursuant to this title requires that
a use shall be within an entirely enclosed building, then the term "building" shall mean one so designated and constructed that all exterior walls of the
structure shall be solid from the ground to the roofline, and shall contain no openings except for windows and doors which are designed so that they may
be closed.
BUILDING FRONT: Wall(s)/elevation(s) of a building that most directly adjoin(s) and face(s) the street from which the property the building sets upon
derives access. This connotes that, generally, a building's "front" wall will run laterally parallel to the frontage street serving the property. In cases where
more than one street abuts a property, then each such frontage may be considered a front or street side by the planning and zoning department, planning
and zoning commission or building and site design committee as a case warrants.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the established grade to the highest point on the roof or parapet walls for buildings. Also, see definition of
Story (Building).
BUILDING HEIGHT (MAXIMUM): Elevation in feet and/or stories which a building must be under in order to conform to code.
BUILDING HEIGHT (MINIMUM): Elevation in feet and/or stories which a building must exceed in order to conform to code. Where a minimum height is
specified, at least twenty five percent (25%) of the roofline or roof structure must jut above the minimum height in order to be considered acceptable.
BUILDING LINE: The line of that face, corner, roof or part of a building nearest the property line.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the property on which the building is situated.
BUILDING SITE: A total horizontal area within the property lines excluding external street, public or private.
BULK REQUIREMENTS: Refers to zoning code established minimum, quantifiable, dimensional standards or measurements applicable to properties. For
example, setback, density, height regulations are all bulk type zoning controls.
CARETAKER UNIT: A trailer located on a site to provide living quarters for a watchman/security guard. This definition shall not connotate, nor does it allow,
use of vehicles or tents, etc., to be considered as legitimate caretaker dwelling units.
CARPORT: A stationary structure to house or protect motor vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the principal building and which has at least
forty percent (40%) of the total area of its sides open to the weather.
CELLAR: That portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is wholly or partly below grade and so located that the vertical distance from grade to
the floor below is equal to or greater than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling. See section 10-1-18, figure 2 of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: A permit, issued by the city, to occupy a premises after inspection has verified compliance with the requirements and
provisions of this title and applicable building and fire codes.
CHURCH/CHURCH USES: Church or place of worship is a building for regular assembly for religious worship that is used primarily for such purpose,
which may or may not contain accessory activities that are customarily associated therewith and which may or may not contain the place of residence for
ministers, priests, nuns, rabbis or others who lead religious worship on the premises. Church or place of worship shall not include such nontraditional
accessory uses as retail sales of nonreligious and nonchurch related goods, residential uses (other than as permitted hereinabove), or sports and/or
entertainment facilities when not used for church purposes or when rented out for revenue purposes.
CIRCUS: A commercial variety show featuring animal acts among others for public entertainment.
CLINIC, LARGE ANIMAL: Any building or portion thereof or business establishment designed or used for the care or administration of veterinary services
for any agricultural or exotic animals. This use can also include veterinarian uses.
CLINIC (MEDICAL/DENTAL/HEALTH CARE): A property designed and used for the medical, dental or surgical diagnosis or treatment of patients under
the care of doctors and/or nurses, or for the provision of other healthcare related services.
CLINIC, SMALL ANIMAL: Any building, or portion thereof, or business establishment designed or used for the care or administration of veterinary services
for any of the following animals: dogs, cats, primates, birds, waterfowl, reptiles, rodents and similar animals, domestic pet animals on an outpatient basis.
This use can also include small animal grooming businesses or veterinarian uses.
CLUB: An incorporated or unincorporated association of persons organized for social, fraternal, athletic, educational, literary or charitable purpose.
Property occupied by a club is deemed to be semiprivate in character and is subject to the regulations governing public buildings and places, excluding
groups organized primarily to render a service which is normally considered a business.
COLONY, BEE: A group of bees having a queen.
COLONY, FERAL BEE: A colony of bees (usually perceived by the public as wild in nature) in a natural cavity or a manufactured structure not intended for
beekeeping on movable frames and comb.
COLORATION: The appearance or pattern of color on an object.
COMMERCIAL USE: An activity with goods, merchandise or services for sale or rent.
COMMISSION: Planning commission as established in title 2 of this code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 215/410
COMMON AREA: Land within a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the common use or
enjoyment of the residents of the development and owned by a home or property owners' association (which in turn is owned by, or whose membership
consists of, property owners within the development). It may include complementary structures and improvements. Common areas are often found in
subdivision or PUD type developments and are often mostly comprised of open, landscaped space(s).
COMMUNITY SHOPPING CENTER: A shopping center which provides, in addition to the convenience goods of the neighborhood center, a wider range of
facilities for the sale of shopping goods such as apparel and furniture. A junior department store, variety store or discount department store is the principal
tenant.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A plan adopted by the council, which includes such things as the general location and extent of present and proposed physical
facilities including housing, industrial and commercial uses, major transportation, parks, schools and other community facilities.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use that may be permitted (if approved through a public hearing process by the planning and zoning commission) in one or more
zones as defined by this title but which, because of characteristics peculiar to such use, or because of size, technological processes or equipment, or
because of the exact location with reference to surroundings, streets, and existing improvements or demands upon public facilities, requires a special
degree of control to make such uses consistent with and compatible to other existing or permissible uses in the same zone(s). Also, sometimes referred to
as a special use.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: The documental evidence of authority granted by the planning commission to locate a conditional use at a particular
location.
CONDOMINIUM: A building or complex in which units of property, are owned by individuals and common parts of the property, such as the grounds and
building structure, are owned fractionally and jointly by the unit owners. The units are, in reality, three-dimensional legally described, titled, blocks of air
space designated for a use such as an apartment, office or store inside of a structure (such as an apartment building).
CONGREGATE RESIDENCE: Single-family dwelling unit (usually a rental situation) wherein not more than four (4) persons over age eighteen (18), who
are not related by blood or marriage, live together as a single housekeeping unit.
CONJUNCTION: The joining together or combining of two (2) or more things.
CONVENIENCE STORE: A neighborhood store engaging primarily in the sale of basic food items. Nonfood items may also be sold provided they are
considered everyday convenience goods.
CORBEL: A bracket of brick or stone that juts out of a wall to support a structure above it.
CORPORATION YARD, SERVICE YARD: Buildings and premises, including offices, used by any person or by the city for storage, maintenance, repair
and processing of equipment, materials and other items involved in construction or maintenance of physical facilities having permanent fixed locations, or
in the operation of a fleet of rolling stock.
COURT: An open, unoccupied space other than a yard, on the same lot with a building(s) which is bounded on two (2) or more sides by such building(s),
including the open space in a house or apartment providing access to the units.
DAY NURSERY: Any institution, establishment or place in which are commonly received at one time more than twelve (12) children not of common
parentage, under the age of six (6) years, for a period not exceeding twelve (12) hours, for the purpose of being given board, care or training for
compensation or reward.
DEDICATION: The assignment of private property to a specific public use and its acceptance for use by a government entity.
DENTIL: One of a series of small, square projecting blocks in the molding of a cornice.
DETACHED BUILDING: A building surrounded on all sides by open space.
DEVELOPMENT SITE: Any location, be it on one or more parcels, lots or tracts of ground where land development, building and/or a project is planned to
happen, is in process of being developed/built or is in place. For the purpose of this definition, ownership of a development site is deemed to include a
lease of not less than fifty (50) years' duration, with an option to renew such lease so as to provide a total lease of not less than seventy five (75) years'
duration.
DISTINCTIVE: Uniquely characteristic of a particular person, group or thing.
DISTRICT OR ZONE: A portion of the territory of the city within which certain uniform regulations and requirements, or various combinations thereof, apply
under the provisions of this title.
DRIVE-IN ENTERPRISE: A business activity or other use of land consisting of sales or service activity predominantly rendered to patrons who normally
receive the products or utilize the services at least in part while in automobiles upon the premises. This definition includes, inter alia, automobile service
stations, automotive car washes and drive-in or drive-through restaurants.
DRIVE, SERVICE: See definition of Service Drive.
DRIVEWAY: A type of service drive typically considered to be a section of ground providing direct vehicle access to a structure on a site, usually a singlefamily
residential unit (i.e., a house).
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: Anything defined or named under Idaho Code section 37-2701 as "drug paraphernalia".
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA STORE/HEAD SHOP: Any store or shop that carries as product lines and/or sells any commodity/substance that has been
banned and deemed illegal as a controlled substance by the state of Idaho, the Idaho pharmaceutical board, or the federal government.
DUPLEX: See definition of dwelling, two-family (duplex).
DWELLING, CONGREGATE: A detached single-family building used for two (2) or more persons but not to exceed six (6) persons not related by blood or
marriage as a residence (e.g., college kids rooming together). This definition does not and shall not include or be interpreted to include transition homes as
herein defined.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 216/410
DWELLING, FOUR-FAMILY (FOUR-PLEX): A building designed or used exclusively for the occupancy of four (4) families living independently of each
other in four (4) joined dwelling units and having separate housekeeping facilities (i.e., kitchen, bathrooms, entryways) for each family, contained in
separate living units that are joined by common wall and roofline, without necessity that each unit be affixed to the ground. The minimum connection
"length" between units, to qualify for four-plex status, shall be nine (9) linear feet. The structural connection shall provide for a functional, usable and
enclosed space.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY (FIVE OR MORE-PLEX): A building designed or used exclusively for the occupancy of five (5) or more families living
independently of each other in five (5) or more joined dwelling units and having separate housekeeping facilities (i.e., kitchen, bathrooms, entryways) for
each family, contained in separate living units that are joined by common wall and roofline, without necessity that each unit be affixed to the ground. The
minimum connection "length" between units, to qualify for multiple-plex status, shall be nine (9) linear feet. The structural connection shall provide for a
functional, usable and enclosed space.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY (Including Term GROUP RESIDENCE): A detached building designed or used exclusively to serve as living (i.e., cooking,
sleeping, general living) quarters for the occupancy of one "family" (as defined herein) and having housekeeping facilities for that family. A single-family
dwelling (i.e., a home or house) incorporates habitable rooms which are occupied or which are intended or designed to be occupied by one family with
housekeeping facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. Dwellings (dwelling units) shall not be deemed to include vehicles (e.g., camp trailers, cars,
trucks, trailers, buses, RVs, towed pop tents, camper shells, and as elsewhere defined) nor other mobile and temporary shelters such as tents, boxes, etc.,
nor accessory buildings such as garages and storage sheds.
Furthermore, it also refers to any "group residence" dwelling unit in which eight (8) or fewer unrelated physically and/or mentally handicapped or
elderly persons legally reside as a single housekeeping unit who are supervised at the "group residence" in connection with their handicap or age
related infirmity. Resident staff, if employed, need not be related to each other or to any of the mentally and/or physically handicapped (including
those suffering from a drug or alcohol addiction) or elderly persons suffering from (an) age based infirmity(ies) residing in the group residence. No
more than two (2) staff shall reside in that dwelling/group residence at one time. Such facilities are also referred to/labeled as residential care
facilities/homes by the International Building and Fire Codes. No conditional use permit, zoning variance, or other zoning clearance is or shall be
required by this Code of a legal group residence, as heretofore defined, which is not also required of a single-family dwelling unit in the same zone
wherein a group residence is located as long as the group residence is licensed as such with the Department of Health and Welfare. The City
reserves the right to require or verify or administer licensing to assure resident eligibility under the above referenced fair housing protected classes
(mentally or physically handicapped or elderly).
The limitations provided for in this definition do not apply to tenancy or planned tenancy in a "group residence" (hereinafter termed a "transition
home"), as defined above, by persons who are under the supervision of the State Board of Corrections on probation or parole or who are required to
register pursuant to chapter 83 or 84, title 18, Idaho Code (as more expressly noted below) pursuant to section 20-219, Idaho Code, or whose
tenancy would otherwise constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical
damage to the property of others. A separate set of land use categories are listed in this title for group residences of persons under the supervision
of the State Board of Corrections (or other appropriate licensed agency) who are required to register as sexual offenders.
As a limit to "group residences", persons convicted of manufacturing or distributing a controlled substance, juvenile offenders, and registered sex
offenders are not construed to be handicapped by the City of Nampa and, therefore, in accordance with Idaho Code section 83-18-8331(1) may not
reside together in residential dwelling units or residences in groups larger than two (2) offenders.
DWELLING, THREE-FAMILY (TRI-PLEX): A building designed or used exclusively for the occupancy of three (3) families living independently of each
other in three (3) joined dwelling units and having separate housekeeping facilities (i.e., kitchen, bathrooms, entryways) for each family, contained in
separate living units that are joined by common wall and roofline, without necessity that each unit be affixed to the ground. The minimum connection
"length" between units, to qualify for tri-plex status, shall be nine (9) linear feet. The structural connection shall provide for a functional, usable and
enclosed space.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX): A building designed or used exclusively for the occupancy of two (2) families living independently of each other in
two (2) joined dwelling units and having separate housekeeping facilities (i.e., kitchen, bathrooms, entryways) for each family, contained in separate living
units that are joined by common wall and roofline, without necessity that each unit be affixed to the ground. The minimum connection "length" between
units, to qualify for duplex status, shall be nine (9) linear feet. The structural connection shall provide for a functional, usable and enclosed space.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more habitable rooms which are occupied or which are intended or designed to be occupied by one family with housekeeping
facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. Dwellings (dwelling units) shall not be deemed to include vehicles (e.g., camp trailers, cars, trucks, trailers,
buses, RVs, towed pop tents, camper shells, and as elsewhere defined) nor other mobile and temporary shelters such as tents, boxes, etc., nor accessory
buildings such as garages and storage sheds.
EIFS: Exterior insulation finish system, an exterior finish system with insulation.
EASEMENT: Right to use land for special purpose, excluding alleys.
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming or causing containment suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and
suitable to confine an animal in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner such as tethering of the animal. Any enclosure, per title
6 of this Code, shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal from
escaping.
ESTABLISHED GRADE: The high point of the sidewalk at the front or side lot line as established by the City.
FACADE: Any face of a building, especially the principal or front face showing prominent architectural features.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or a group of not more than three (3) persons not related by blood or marriage, living
together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. (This is not to suggest that a family cannot have friends, guests or renters staying with them in
the same house as long as they live there and have their residential tax exemption assigned there. This then is distinct from a regular rental house wherein
the owner(s) thereof do not typically reside in the same dwelling/house as the renters or from a congregate house as herein elsewhere defined.)
FASCIA: The flat horizontal surface immediately below the edge of a roof.
FINAL PLAT: The final map, drawing or chart on which the subdivision is presented to the City for approval.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 217/410
FLOODPLAIN: The relatively flat area or lowland adjoining the channel of a river, stream, watercourse, lake or other body of standing water, which has
been or may be covered by water of a flood of 100-year frequency. The floodplain includes the channel, floodway and floodway fringe as established by
the Army Corps of Engineers.
FOSTER DAILY CARE HOME: See definition of day nursery.
GARAGE, REPAIR: A building used for the storage, parking, care or repair of motor vehicles, or where such vehicles are kept for remuneration, hire or
sale.
GRADE (GROUND LEVEL): The average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet
(5') of a sidewalk, alley or other public way, the above ground level shall be measured at the elevation of the sidewalk, alley or public way. See section 10-
1-18, figure 3, of this chapter.
GRANTOR: Synonymous with gifter, provider, bequeather; that is, the one that grants versus receives.
GROOMING ESTABLISHMENT, ANIMAL: Any place where animals (notably cats and dogs) are cared for by administering haircuts, or clipping, are
bathed or otherwise conditioned as pets and/or for show in exchange for a fee. Such establishment shall be considered a small animal clinic for purposes
of regulation.
GROSS FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of a building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls
and the centerline of division walls. Floor area shall include basement space, elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor, mechanical equipment rooms or
attic spaces with headroom of seven feet six inches (7'6") or more, penthouse floors, interior balconies and mezzanines, and enclosed porches. Floor area
shall not include accessory water tanks and cooling towers, mechanical equipment or attic spaces with headroom of less than seven feet six inches (7'6"),
exterior steps or stairs, terraces, breezeways and open spaces.
HIVE, ABANDONED BEE: Any hive with or without bees, that evidences a lack of being properly managed in that it has not been supered in the spring,
except nucs, or unsupered in the fall, or is otherwise not managed and/or left without authorization and is unattended on the property of another person or
on public land.
HIVE, BEE: Any receptacle or container, or part of any receptacle or container, which is inhabited by a live colony of bees.
HOME OCCUPATION: An accessory use of a dwelling unit or accessory structure on the same property as a dwelling unit for gainful employment of a
person or one or more members of a family residing on a property, that involves the manufacture, provisions, or sale of goods and/or services, subject to
the standards prescribed in this chapter. Also referred to as a "home based business".
Home occupations shall be conducted on (howbeit inside a structure) property whereat the owner/operator(s) lives. This means that the
owner/operator(s) shall, on a daily basis, eat, sleep, and otherwise live there. The owner/operator(s) shall receive their mail at that property, have
their trash picked up from that property, send any of their children off to school from that property, have their homeowner's exemption assigned to
that property, have their personal vehicle registration describing that property as their current residential address, etc.
Daycare home occupations are restricted to a maximum of twelve (12) children (family members of the owner/operator(s) under the age of 6 shall be
included). Excepting, however, daycare home occupations in RS (single-family residential) zones providing care for seven (7) or more children may
only be allowed by conditional use permit.
HOME, REST, CONVALESCENT, FOR THE AGED: A home operated similarly to a boarding house but not restricted to any number of guests or
guestrooms, and in which nursing, dietary and other personal services are furnished to convalescents, invalids and aged persons. In such homes no
persons are kept who are suffering from an acute mental illness, or from a contagious or communicable disease, and no surgery is performed or other
primary treatments such as are customarily provided in hospitals, and in which no persons are kept or served who normally would be admitted to a mental
hospital.
HOME, RETIREMENT: A place of residence for several families or individuals in apartment like quarters, rented, cooperative or condominium, which may
feature services to retired persons such as limited nursing facilities, minimum maintenance living accommodations, and recreation programs and facilities.
HOSPITAL: An establishment which provides accommodations, facilities and services over a continuous period of twenty four (24) hours or more for
observation, diagnosis and care, of two (2) or more individuals, not related by blood or marriage to the operator, who are suffering from illness, injury,
deformity or abnormality, or from any condition requiring obstetrical, medical or surgical services.
HOSPITAL, SMALL ANIMAL: Premises for the medical or surgical treatment of animals or pets, including dog, cat and veterinary hospitals, including the
boarding of hospitalized animals.
HOTEL (MOTEL, MOTOR HOTEL): Any building or group of buildings used for transient residential purposes containing six (6) or more guestrooms
without housekeeping facilities which are intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied for sleeping purposes by
guests.
INFILL HOME: A home of any size which is placed on a less than normal size(d) lot in accordance with allowance(s) made in section 10-27-4 of this title.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Any lot, building or enclosure, or portion thereof, in which more than two (2) dogs and/or cats of at least six (6) months of age
are kept commercially for board or propagation or treatment. This includes centers where police, guard, or seeing eye dogs are trained and/or kept for
sale. A kennel license is required per section 6-2-20 of this Code for this use.
KENNEL, NONCOMMERCIAL: Any lot, building or enclosure, or portion thereof, in which more than two (2) dogs and/or cats of at least six (6) months of
age are kept and/or boarded. A kennel license is required per section 6-2-20 of this Code for this use.
LOADING SPACE: An off street space or berth on the same lot with a principal building or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of
commercial vehicles while loading or unloading, and which abuts a street, alley or other appropriate means of ingress or egress.
LOT: A lot included in, and shown as, a part of a recorded, platted subdivision. From time to time is identified as a "lot of record" or a "property".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 218/410
Lot types:
A. Corner lot: A lot or development site either: 1) bounded entirely by streets, or 2) a lot which adjoins the point of intersection of two (2) or more
streets; one lot side to each street, or 3) a lot bounded on two (2) contiguous sides by one street where that street's interior angle is one hundred
ten degrees (110°) or less. In the event any street line is a curve at its point of intersection with a lot line other than a street line, the tangent to
the curve at that point shall be considered the direction of the street line. See section 10-1-18, figure 6 of this chapter.
B. Interior lot: A lot or development site other than a corner lot with frontage only on one street. See section 10-1-18, figure 6 of this chapter.
C. Through lot: A lot or development site other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street. Also referred to as a "double fronted" or
"double frontage" lot.
D. Flag lot: A lot or parcel of land that has a narrow projection or "flagpole" to the public right of way. The flagpole, which shall not be considered
as part of the lot area, serves as a private or privately shared access to the "buildable" area of the lot or parcel.
MASS: The physical volume or bulk of a solid body.
MEAN DEPTH: The depth of a property measured approximately perpendicular to the fronting street and midway between the side property lines of such
property.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR: Any person or party who, as a function of operating a temporary use, uses a "vehicle" as defined by this title as the base and
an instrument of the temporary use in order to prepare, cook or otherwise make available food, snacks, beverages, etc., for sale from the vehicle or site
upon which the vehicle is stationed at any given time.
MOBILE HOME: A vehicle or structure constructed with wheels for use on the public highways, which has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, is
intended for human occupancy and is being used for residential purposes. The term mobile home does not apply to any prefabricated section of a factory
built house to which wheels may be attached for the purpose of moving it to a permanent location where it becomes affixed to the real property. Also
referred to herein at times as a type of "prefabricated home".
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any privately owned place where two (2) or more mobile homes used for human occupancy are parked within five hundred feet
(500') of each other on a lot, tract or parcel of land under the same ownership.
MOBILE HOME SPACE: A plot of land within a mobile home park designated for the accommodation of a mobile home.
MODEL HOME OFFICE: A structure built as a house that will, at some point, be used as a single-family dwelling residence, but is temporarily being used
as a sales office for homes and/or properties.
MOTEL: A building or buildings, detached or in connected units or designed as a single structure the units of which are used as individual sleeping or
dwelling units, having their own private toilet facilities and may or may not have their own kitchen facilities, and are designated primarily for the
accommodation of transient automobile travelers. Accommodations for mobile homes are not included.
MOTOR HOTEL: A specialized hotel designated and operated to provide hotel services and accommodations to the motoring public and where the
sleeping accommodations normally do not exceed one week's duration.
NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING CENTER: A shopping center which provides for the sale of convenience goods and personal services for the day to day
living needs of the immediate neighborhood. These are goods such as food, drugs, hardware and personal services. A supermarket is the principal tenant.
NET FLOOR AREA: Gross square feet of a building, minus the following square footage: floor area devoted to accessory water tanks and cooling towers
or HVAC equipment, attic space with headroom of less than seven feet six inches (7'6"), exterior steps or stairs, terraces, breezeways and open spaces
(such as lobbies, unless adjoining customer service counter space), closets (including utility/janitorial), bathrooms, break rooms, hallways, fire riser rooms
or other spaces determined to be exempt by the planning and zoning director.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING/USE/SITUATION: A building, land use or site situation/condition which is not permitted or is noncompliant (e.g., a setback,
parking stall count, paving or landscaping provision) according to the regulations of the zone/district in which it is located, but which was permitted by, or
conformed to, requirements of a preexisting zoning ordinance in effect prior to ordinance 2140's adoption on April 17, 1989.
OPEN SPACE: Any part of a property unobstructed from the ground upward.
OUTDOOR LIVING AREA: Outdoor or semioutdoor area designed to provide a more pleasant and healthful environment for the occupants of a dwelling
unit and the neighborhood in which such dwelling unit is located. It includes natural ground areas, paved or rooftop areas, balconies, porches, patios,
terraces, verandas, or similar areas developed for active or passive recreation activities.
A. For the purpose of measuring "outdoor living area" the following shall apply:
1. Private space, open or roofed, which is accessible to the occupant of one dwelling unit only must meet the following qualifications:
a. Minimum dimension four and one-half feet (41/2'); minimum area thirty five (35) square feet.
b. Minimum height seven feet (7').
c. At least sixty five percent (65%) of the longest dimension open and unobstructed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 219/410
2. Semiprivate space, open or roofed, which is accessible to all occupants of the building (may be provided on rooftops of buildings or on parking
structures, at grade or in any other way) is subject to the following qualifications:
a. Minimum dimension ten feet (10'); minimum area one hundred (100) square feet.
b. Minimum height seven feet (7').
c. At least sixty five percent (65%) of the longest dimension open and unobstructed.
B. That portion of exterior balconies which serves as required exits for the building shall not be considered as "outdoor living area".
OWNER(S), ANIMAL: Any person(s), partnership(s), or corporation(s) owning, keeping, or harboring, possessing, or caring for or having any custodial
duties over one or more animals.
PARAPET: A low protective wall built, for example, along the edge of a balcony, roof or bridge.
PARKING AREA OR LOT: Privately or publicly owned property, other than streets and alleys, on which parking spaces are defined, designated or
otherwise identified for use by the tenants, employees or owners of the property for which the parking area is required by this title and not open for use by
the general public.
PARKING SPACE: A permanently maintained space with proper access for one standard size automobile as indicated in chapter 22 of this title.
PASTURE: An enclosure for animals in which no feed is provided except that which the animals obtain by grazing.
PEN(S): Any construction used to enclose, restrain, harbor, house, trap, or otherwise hold an animal within its confines that does not meet the criteria for a
kennel, or shelter. The term is synonymous with run.
PERFORMING ANIMAL EXHIBITION: Any spectacle, display, act, or event, other than circuses, in which performing animals are used.
PERMITTED USE: Any use authorized or permitted alone or in connection with another use in a specified district and subject to the limitations of the
regulations of such use district.
PERMITTEE: Recipient of a permit (also may refer to an applicant for a permit).
PIG, POTBELLIED: Vietnamese or Chinese "minipig" kept at times as pets (allowed in Nampa up to a maximum size of 160 pounds and 24 inches in
height).
PLANNING DIRECTOR: A city official charged with the administration and enforcement of provisions of this title.
PREFABRICATED HOME: Term referring to either a mobile or manufactured home whose components are largely constructed off site and then
assembled on a property.
PRIMARY USE: The principal or predominant use to which the property is or may be devoted, and to which all other uses on the premises are accessory.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES: Offices maintained and used as a place of business for professionals including, but not limited to, engineers, attorneys,
architects, certified or licensed public accountants, landscape architects and other design services, management services, occupational therapists,
geologists, surveyors, real estate agents, realtors, financial planners or advisors, appraisers, social workers, and other persons providing services that
commonly require specialized training or professional certification. Professional offices do not include offices maintained and used as a place of business
for medical, dental or health care related professions, which are addressed under the definition for Clinic (Medical/Dental/Health Care).
PROPERTY: A piece and/or portion of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and provide such
yards and other open spaces as are herein required; such land shall have frontage or legal access to a public street, and may consist of:
A. A single lot of record.
B. A portion of a lot of record.
C. A combination of complete lots of record, or portions of lots of record considered as a group.
D. A parcel of land described by metes and bounds or a record of survey.
E. A portion of a parcel.
F. A combination of parcels or portions of parcels considered as a group.
PROPERTY AREA: Term often used as part of an expression of a minimum standard; it refers to the land defined and confined by property lines. A
property may be a lot or parcel. In order to meet minimum zoning area standards, property area may not include unusable areas on a property (e.g., land
contained within usable portions of any drainage, or utility easement or waterway(s) access, or made a part of public right of way).
PROPERTY, CORNER: See property types.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 220/410
PROPERTY COVERAGE: That portion of a property that, when viewed directly from above, would be covered by one or more buildings, or any part of a
building, except any area covered by a structure where fifty percent (50%) or more of the perimeter of such structure is open to the air at or from grade.
See section 10-1-18, figure 4 of this chapter.
PROPERTY DEPTH: Shall be considered to be the distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side property
lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lines in the rear. See section 10-1-18, figure 5 of this chapter.
PROPERTY FRONTAGE: That portion of a property nearest to, or abutting, a street.
PROPERTY LINE, FRONT: A property line contiguous with the street line. For corner properties, the front line may be considered either side of the
property abutting the street, as best befitting any existing building orientation, addressing, setback pattern of nearby properties or proposed building
project. See section 10-1-18, figure 5 of this chapter.
PROPERTY LINE, REAR: A property line that is opposite and most distant from the front property line. For a triangular or gore shape lot, the "rear property
line" shall mean a line ten feet (10') in length within the lot or parcel that is parallel to the front property line, or parallel to the chord of a curved front
property line. See section 10-1-18, figure 5 of this chapter.
PROPERTY LINE, SIDE: A property line that is not a front or rear property line. See section 10-1-18, figure 5 of this chapter.
PROPERTY WIDTH: Shall be considered to be the distance between straight lines at each side of the property, measured across the rear of the required
front yard (except for flag lots as noted hereafter), provided the width between side property lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the
street line) shall not be less than eighty percent (80%) of the required property width, except in the case of properties on the outer radius of cul-de-sacs,
where the eighty percent (80%) requirement shall not apply. In the case of flag lots, lot width is and shall be assessed in the area of a lot or parcel where
the flagpole terminates and the lot/parcel "opens up" to create a "buildable" area.
PUBLIC UTILITY: A public service corporation performing some public service and subject to special governmental regulations, or a governmental agency
performing similar services, the services by either of which are paid for directly by the recipients thereof. Such services shall include, but are not limited to,
water supply, electric power, gas and transportation for persons and freight.
QUOIN: To build an outer corner of a wall using blocks that are different, for example, in size or texture, from the other blocks or bricks used to build the
wall.
RECREATIONAL (HOBBY) VEHICLE/TRAILER: A vehicular unit primarily designated as temporary living quarters or used for recreational purposes
including general recreation, fishing, camping, or travel which either has its own power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. Examples of such
vehicles include, but are not limited to, the following: travel trailers, camping trailers, truck campers, motor homes, fifth wheels, RVs, etc. Other recreational
vehicle types for purposes of this definition shall include, but not be limited to: boats and boat trailers, transport trailers (e.g., used to haul motorcycles, jet
skis, snowmobiles, 4-wheelers), etc.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: A plot of land upon which two (2) or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established or maintained for
occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes. This term shall not include or
denote areas set aside as RV storage yards in subdivision and/or PUD developments wherein RVs may be kept/stored as a benefit (whether paid for on a
rental basis by property owners in that subdivision or not) to property owners living or having property located in and a part of that particular subdivision
and/or PUD.
RESIDE: To dwell permanently or continuously; to occupy a place as one's legal domicile; this means that a resident shall, on a regular basis, eat, sleep,
and otherwise live on a property (in an approved dwelling unit type). Evidence of residency for the purposes of this code include, but are not limited to:
voter registration, receiving mail, application for homeowner's exemption, and vehicle registrations with that address.
RESTAURANT: Any premises (other than a boarding house) where meals are provided for compensation. In order to serve beer, wine or liquor (as defined
by title 23, Idaho Code) in a restaurant, liquor receipts shall constitute less than forty percent (40%) of gross receipts for food and liquor combined.
Restaurants whose liquor receipts constitute forty percent (40%) or more of gross receipts for liquor and food combined shall be classified as taverns.
RETAIL PET STORE: A place or person that obtains domesticated animals and/or animal supplies and offers them for sale, exchange, barter, or hire to the
general public as a principal or agent, or on consignment, or who holds himself to be so engaged in said retail practice or use. Includes "pet shops" but
does not include:
A. Establishments or persons who deal in dogs used as guides by the visually impaired, or for hunting, security, or breeding purposes;
B. Establishments or persons exhibiting, selling, or offering to exhibit or sell any wild or exotic or other "nonpet" species of warm blooded animals
(except birds), such as skunks, raccoons, primates, squirrels, ocelots, foxes, coyotes, etc.;
C. Any establishment or person selling warm blooded animals (except birds, and laboratory rats and mice) for research or exhibition purposes;
D. Any establishment wholesaling any animals (except birds, rats, and mice);
E. Any establishment exhibiting pet animals in a room that is anywhere off the retail pet store premises;
F. Any approved home occupation business dealing in or with pets.
RIDING SCHOOL (ACADEMY) OR STABLE: Any place that has available for hire, boarding, and/or riding instruction, any horse, pony, donkey, mule, or
burro, or similar animal; or any place that regularly buys, sells, or trains the above animals, including a small racetrack, trotting track, or rodeo.
SALVAGE/RECYCLING/JUNK/WRECKING YARD: Property whereupon the primary use is to salvage, strip, store and/or recycle junk, waste, junk
vehicles, discarded or salvaged materials/parts in preparation for future dismantling, destruction, resale, repair or rebuilding. As pertaining to vehicles, this
definition connotates that vehicles within such areas are inoperable either physically and/or legally (i.e., licensed and registered). While, expectedly,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 221/410
occasional sale or trading of items being stored may occur, this use classification/definition does not expect that such will become the primary activity
conducted from the site. Specific examples (in common vernacular) of such uses include, but are not limited to, the following: automobile wrecking yards
(see also definition of Wrecking Yard), house wrecking yards, junkyards, salvage yards, etc. See also definition of Automobile Wrecking.
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL: A building where instruction is given in arts, crafts or trades and operated as a commercial enterprise as distinguished from
schools endowed and/or supported by taxation.
SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY, JUNIOR OR SENIOR HIGH, INCLUDING PUBLIC, PRIVATE AND PAROCHIAL: An institution of learning which offers
instruction in the several branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools by the Idaho state board of education.
SECONDARY USE (INCIDENTAL OR ACCESSORY): A minor or second use for which a lot, structure or building is designated or employed in
conjunction with, but subordinate to, its primary use.
SEMIPRIVATE FACILITY: Any facility to which a class or a group of the public is permitted to attend or use subject to the regulations of a club or other
organization owning or regulating such facility.
SERVICE DRIVE: An area of land of varying dimensions intended to sustain vehicles' passage. Essentially, service drives function as driveways howbeit
for nonsingle-family type developments (e.g., offices, apartments and apartment complexes, commercial and industrial business sites and complexes).
Often service drives provide back up/maneuvering area for parking spaces besides providing paths of travel. They are also sometimes referred to as
"access" drives or even driveways and are distinct from private or public streets or alleys.
SERVICE STATION OR FILLING STATION: A retail place of business engaged in supplying goods and services essential to the normal operation of
vehicles such as dispensing of fuel and motor oil, vehicle washing and lubricating services, and the sale and servicing of tires, batteries, replacement items
and other automotive accessories.
SETBACK, YARD REQUIREMENTS: The distance (typically expressed in measurements in feet) that buildings or uses must be removed from the
property lines of the lot or parcel upon which they rest or will be placed. Setbacks are to be measured from property lines. Front yard setbacks for any
property are and shall be established when and where said property abuts a public street/right of way. "Street side" setbacks for corner lots shall apply to
that side of a property that abuts a public right of way which is determined by the city to not be the (main) frontage road serving the property. "Double
frontage" or "through properties" abut streets, one at one end and another at the opposite end of the property, said streets running roughly parallel. Street
side setback requirements in Nampa are often distinct from front setback yard requirements - especially in residential zones. Double fronted properties
must treat each yard area that abuts a right of way as being a "front". Properties with three (3) frontages may choose one side as a "street side" with the
other two (2) yards as "fronts" provided those are opposite each other, or roughly so. Properties surrounded by streets (e.g., abutted on all 4 sides) shall
be required by the planning and zoning department to consider at least two (2) sides as fronts with the other two (2) as street side unless determined
otherwise by the planning director who may be more restrictive in application of setback requirements to a property.
Setback and front yard requirements are established to ensure that arterial and collector streets that traverse through the zone attain an aesthetically
pleasing and symmetrical character, provide a buffer area for protection from smells, sounds, and lights, pedestrian walkways, and to establish
landscape corridor vistas, etc.
SHELTER, ANIMAL: A facility used to house or contain stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals and that is owned, operated, or maintained by a
public body, an established humane society, animal welfare society, Society For The Prevention Of Cruelty To Animals, or other nonprofit organizations
devoted to the welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals. Animals are contained within the facility for care, confinement, return to owner,
adoption, or euthanasia. This use shall be considered as equivalent to a large animal clinic for purposes of regulation.
SOFFIT: The underside of a structural component of a building, for example, the underside of a roof overhang or the inner curve of an arch.
SOLID PLANTING: A planting (e.g., hedge) of evergreen trees and shrubs that will thoroughly prevent penetration of sight or light.
STORAGE/IMPOUND YARD: Property whereupon the principal use in operation entails storage of building materials, contractors' materials, equipment,
vehicles or other nonjunk, waste, refuse, or discarded materials. This connotates that vehicles within such areas are operable both physically and legally
(i.e., licensed and registered). While, expectedly, occasional sale or trading of items being stored may occur, this use classification/definition does not
expect that such will become the primary activity conducted from the site. Salvaging as a principal business practice is not an allowed activity within
storage yards. Specific examples of storage/impound yard types include, but are not limited to, keeping/impounding of vehicles, buildings, heavy
construction or farming or railroad or trucking equipment/machinery, contractor and/or construction/utility line materials of all sorts, etc.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor above, except that the topmost story
shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling above. See definitions of Basement and Cellar.
STORY (ABOVE GRADE PLANE): Any story having its finished floor area surface entirely above grade plane, or in which the finished surface of the floor
next above is:
A. More than six feet (6') above grade plane; or
B. More than twelve feet (12') above the finished ground level at any point.
STORY (BUILDING): That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above. It is
measured as the vertical difference from top to top of two (2) successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces and, for the topmost story, from the top of
the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to top of the roof rafters. All levels that conform to this description are stories,
including basements. A mezzanine is considered part of the story in which it is located. Bonus space or rooms within rafters or trusses and usable for living
quarters shall not be considered as floors for purposes of this definition provided that the truss or rafter system used provides living space in its confines
without using chords that serve, effectually, as walls.
The determination of the allowed height of a building is based on the number of stories above grade plane or by a set measurement expressed in
feet in the code. The height definition applies to those stories that are fully above grade plane. It also includes those stories which may be partially
below finished ground level, but the finished floor level is more than six feet (6') above grade plane. It also includes those floor levels which, due to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 222/410
irregular terrain, have a finished floor level more than twelve feet (12') above finished ground level at any point surrounding the building. Any building
level not qualifying as a story above grade plane is, by definition, a basement.
STORY, HALF: Any basement or cellar, except as provided in this title, which has less than six feet (6') of its height above grade.
STREET, ARTERIAL OR MAJOR: A fast or heavy traffic continuous street used primarily as a traffic artery for intercommunication among large areas.
STREET, COLLECTOR OR SECONDARY: A street which carries from minor streets and which serves for the circulation of traffic in residential areas or
developments.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC OR DEAD END: A minor street with only one outlet.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC OR MINOR: A street used primarily for access to the abutting properties.
STREET LINE: A lot line separating a street from other land. See section 10-1-18, figure 5 of this chapter.
STREET, MARGIN ACCESS: This is a street which is parallel and adjacent to arterial streets and which provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
STREET, PRIVATE: A thoroughfare that does not meet public street standards and has not been deeded, dedicated and accepted by the city. Such
thoroughfares are distinct from service drives, access and driveways, alleys by way of design and identification. Private streets require city approval in
order to be developed.
STREET, PUBLIC: A public thoroughfare or right of way dedicated, deeded or condemned which has been officially approved by the commission and
accepted by the council for use as such, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place,
way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare, except as excluded in this title.
STRUCTURE: A combination of materials constructed and erected permanently on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on
the ground or on a movable support system like skids. Typically structures are buildings. Not included are residential fences less than six feet (6') in width,
retaining walls, rocketries and similar improvements of a minor character less than three feet (3') in height.
STUCCO: Plaster used for surfacing interior or exterior walls, often used in association with classical moldings.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person commencing proceedings to effect a subdivision of land for himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a developed or undeveloped tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more parts for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of sale or of building development; provided, that if any person within a calendar year divides any tract into three (3) or more parts, or if a new street
is involved in any division of a parcel of land, such land shall be deemed a subdivision within the meaning of this title. This definition shall not include the
following:
A. A readjustment of lot lines which does not reduce the area, frontage, width, depth or building setback lines below the minimums required.
B. A subdivision of land into parcels where such parcels are no larger than one-fourth (1/4) of one-fourth (1/4) of a section of land or are lots in a section
of land all as shown on the official U.S. government general land office township survey maps including resubdivisions thereof, or are parcels that
are larger than forty (40) acres, all of which shall be designated exclusively for agriculture purposes, and which does not involve any new street
dedication or the creation of private easement accesses to lots or parcels which could otherwise be provided access by a publicly dedicated street.
C. An allocation of land in the settlement of an estate or a court decree for the distribution of property thereunder with the stipulation that the land may
not be divided into more than four (4) parcels with a size per parcel to be five (5) acres.
D. The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal condemnation as defined and allowed in the Idaho Code and when the dedication of a right of way for
public purposes is initiated by a public body.
E. The exchange of land for the purpose of straightening property boundaries or adding land to existing parcels by trade or sale which does not result
in change of the present land use or in any way result in land parcels which do not meet existing zoning and other regulations.
SWARM: A natural group of bees having a queen(s), which is the progeny of a parent colony, without a hive, and not a feral colony.
SWIMMING POOL: A receptacle for water or an artificial pool of water intended for the purpose of immersing human beings and which has a depth at any
point of more than three feet (3') including all pertinent equipment.
TAVERN: Any premises where beer, wine or liquor (as defined by title 23, Idaho Code) is sold for consumption on premises and liquor receipts constitute
forty percent (40%) or more of gross receipts for food and liquor combined; including bars, lounges and nightclubs associated with restaurants. This shall
not include individual restaurants where the principal business is the sale of food and receipts from liquor sales are less than forty percent (40%) of gross
receipts for food and liquor combined.
TEMPORARY: Structure/building not having or requiring permanent attachment to the ground, or involving structures which have no required permanent
attachment to the ground.
TEMPORARY RESIDENCE: As approved for use by this title shall denote an approved mobile or manufactured home but not a vehicle of any kind.
TEMPORARY (SEASONAL) FIREWORKS STAND: A temporary structure from which fireworks are sold and/or offered for sale to the general public.
TOWNHOUSE: An arrangement of two (2) or more separate, single-family dwelling units joined by a common wall(s) and roofline, with each separate unit
being affixed to the ground on a separate lot. All structural elements of each individual townhouse unit shall be located exclusively on the lot whereupon
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 223/410
the principal structure rests. The minimum connection "length" between units, to qualify for townhouse status, shall be nine (9) linear feet. The structural
connection shall provide for a functional, usable and enclosed space.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person or party who engages in a temporary business of selling, trading, offering for sale or trade, or displaying for the
purpose of sale, trade, or giveaway of any goods, wares, merchandise, or services and does so within city limits, and, who in the furtherance of such
purpose(s) hires, leases, uses or occupies any premises, including any parking lot or lot/parcel.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT FACILITY: Any tangible structure including, but not limited to, a stall, stand, booth, box, table, rack, ground cover cloth, pallet,
trailer, cart, vehicle, structure, container, or other form of offering, displaying, selling, or storing of goods and/or services used in conjunction with a
transient merchant. No food preparation is permitted in a transient merchant facility.
TRANSITION HOME: Any group residence wherein two (2) or more persons currently under the supervision of the state board of corrections or other
agency or who are required to register pursuant to chapter 83 or 84, title 18, Idaho Code, or whose tenancy would otherwise constitute a direct threat to
the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. Also often colloquially
termed as a "halfway house".
UNAUTHORIZED PERMANENT, PRINCIPAL DWELLING UNITS: Are and shall include vehicles (e.g., camp trailers, cars, trucks, office, horse and utility
trailers, buses, RVs, towed pop tents, camper shells, fifth wheels, boats), other portable and temporary shelters including, but not limited to, tents and
boxes, and accessory structures including, but not limited to, carports, garages and storage sheds, but excluding guesthouses and lawful caretaker units
approved by the city.
USE: The purpose of land, buildings or structures for which it is occupied, maintained, arranged, designed or intended.
USE, SEASONAL: Any temporary use where merchandise is sold in connection with a holiday season or the growing season. These uses shall include,
and are limited to, the following: produce stands, fireworks stands, pumpkin sales lots, Christmas tree lots, and farmers' markets.
USE, TEMPORARY: Any activity on a site operating for a limited time of operation. Such uses may include, but are not limited to, seasonal, event related
or holiday sales of products or placement of temporary structures on a lot incidental to construction occurring on the lot, outdoor sales of merchandise,
foodstuffs, temporary residences, offices or use of a permanent structure, visiting carnivals or amusement businesses, recycling containers placed on a
site, and/or any other uses which the director, or his/her authorized designee, may deem as able to function without permanent permits for a short time as
allowed by this code.
VARIANCE: An adjustment made in the application of the specific regulations of this title to a particular piece of property, which property because of
special circumstances applicable to it is deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zone or vicinity and which adjustment
remedies disparity in privileges. A variance is a form of special exception.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street excepting devices moved
exclusively by human power or used upon stationary rails or tracks. Examples include, but are not limited to, the following: cars, trucks, motorcycles, RVs,
trailers, campers, boats, buses, tractors, pop tents/trailers, ATVs and vans.
VEHICLE, EMERGENCY RESPONSE/RESPONDER: A vehicular unit primarily used by law enforcement, emergency services or accident response.
Specific vehicle types include, but are not limited to, the following: an ambulance, police car, "incident response" rig, tow truck (with 1 wrecked vehicle
hooked thereto being allowable), paramedic or fire command official car, pickup or SUV, but shall not include a conventional "firetruck", armored box
van/truck, military vehicle, or any three (3) axle plus vehicle.
VEHICLE, GENERIC COMMERCIAL: Any of the following:
A. Any solid waste collection vehicle, tractor truck/semitrailer or tractor truck/trailer combination (or part thereof), dump truck, concrete mixer truck, box
type truck, flatbed truck, commercial vehicle step vans, cube vans, buses, stake trucks, tank trucks, commercial or construction equipment, whether
located on private property or on a truck, trailer, or semitrailer; or
B. Any trailer, semitrailer, or other vehicle in which food or beverages are stored or sold; or
C. Any trailer or semitrailer used for transporting landscaping or lawn care equipment whether or not such trailer or semitrailer is attached to another
vehicle; or
D. Any taxicab or limousine(s); or
E. Any truck or vehicle registered as a commercial vehicle; or
F. Any other trailer or semitrailer used for commercial purposes; or
G. Vehicles exceeding a maximum gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of fifteen thousand (15,000) pounds (excluding pickup, dually style trucks, and
SUV type vehicles used for residential purposes).
VENDOR CART: Construed to be any cart, trailer, or similar nonmotorized vehicle that requires a person to move/propel it from place to place.
VISION CLEARANCE: Vision clearance in districts where front yards are required shall be:
A. That triangle of land defined on any corner lot by measuring from the intersection of the curb lines of the two (2) adjacent streets, forty feet (40')
along each curb line and connecting the two (2) points with a straight line. See section 10-1-18, figure 7 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 224/410
B. That triangle of land defined adjacent to any alley or driveway intersecting a street by measuring along the alley or driveway edge and the back of
sidewalk of the adjacent street seven and one-half feet (71/2') and connecting the two (2) points with a straight line.
Where curbs or sidewalks do not exist or a street improvement project is anticipated the measurement shall be taken from the projected future
curb/sidewalk lines.
WRECKING YARD: See definition of salvage/recycling/junk/wrecking yard.
YARD: Required space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from a point thirty inches (30") above grade, upward, except as
otherwise provided herein. Another term used for a required yard is "setback".
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending between lot lines which intersect a street line, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the street
line and a line parallel thereto on the lot. See section 10-1-18, figure 8 of this chapter.
YARD, INTERIOR: A yard adjacent to any lot line which is not a street line, the depth of which yard shall be the horizontal distance measured at right
angles to the interior lot line and a line being parallel with said side lot line. See section 10-1-18, figure 8 of this chapter.
YARD, SALVAGE: See definition of salvage/recycling/junk/wrecking yard.
YARD, STORAGE: See definition of storage/impound yard.
YARD, STREET SIDE: In the case of through or corner lots or parcels, is/shall be that yard (required setback area) abutting a street but not designated to
be the front yard.
ZONING PERMIT: A document issued by the City certifying that proposed buildings, structures or uses are consistent with the terms of this title so long as
they comply with other requirements hereof.
ZOO: A facility used to house and exhibit principally exotic animals under the supervision of trained, professional keepers as regulated by the Idaho
Zoological Society. (Ord. 3459, 6-6-2005; amd. Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008; Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011; Ord. 4010, 3-19-2012; Ord. 4050, 2-19-2013; Ord. 4070, 10-7-
2013; Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015; Ord. 4190, 7-20-2015; Ord. 4282, 9-19-2016; Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
10-1-3: INTERPRETATION OF TITLE:
The provisions of this title shall be interpreted and applied as the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience,
general welfare and other purpose.
If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this title and/or any other Code provisions and/or
laws are declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of other parts, sections, subsections, paragraphs, subparagraphs, sentences, phrases, clauses, terms, or
words of this title and/or any other Code provisions and/or laws contained in this title (including the prohibition on billboards contained herein). (Ord. 4282,
9-19-2016)
10-1-4: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
It is unlawful to use, occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any premises, or part thereof created, erected, changed, concerted or altered or enlarged in
its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy shall have been signed by the Planning Director and issued by the building official stating that the
proposed use of the building conforms to the requirements of this title and with all conditional provisions that may have been imposed. A certificate of
occupancy authorizes only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in the approved plans and applications. Violations of this section or this title
shall be, and are, punishable as provided in section 1-1-7 of this code unless otherwise specifically stated in a section. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-1-5: CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE STATED IN APPLICATIONS:
A. Plans, Permits, And Certificates Of Occupancy: Building permits or certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by
the building official authorizes only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use,
arrangement or construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement or
construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this section and shall be and is punishable as provided in section 1-1-7 of
this code. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-1-6: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED UPON A CHANGE, EXPANSION OR ENLARGEMENT OF BUILDING(S) AND/OR
PRINCIPAL PROPERTY USE:
Improvements as defined in subsection C of this section are required to be emplaced on a lot or parcel or in a structure whenever:
A use on a lot or parcel, or one or more structures on a parcel or lot is expanded or enlarged in accordance with subsection A of this section (exception:
Building and site design standards requirements shall not apply to existing facades unless they themselves are to be physically altered.); or
When there is either a change of occupancy of a structure on a lot or parcel in accordance with subsection B of this section; or
Substantial refurbishment of a parking lot occurs, in accordance with subsection A5 of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 225/410
All changes of use of a structure require the issuance of a building permit and the subsequent certificate of occupancy from the city of Nampa, building
safety division.
A. Specific Scope Of Requirement(s) Relating To Structural And/Or Use Expansions Or Parking Lot Refurbishments: Site improvements shall be made to
a property whenever one of the following situations occurs:
1. The principal use of a structure and/or a property is changed to another as stipulated in subsection B of this section; or
2. The principal use of a single structure and/or portion of a property devoted to a use (i.e., building footprints, enclosed yard areas, parking areas) is
expanded or enlarged by twenty five percent (25%) or more of the existing use's area or building square footage (by devoting more land to a
particular use, and/or, adding additional structures to a property devoted to a use). However, unenclosed, noncommercial awnings, patio covers and
shade ports additions that will not have the effect of increasing a building's occupancy rating are, and shall be, exempt from this requirement unless
they are (to be) larger than fifty percent (50%) of an existing building's footprint; or
3. When amongst multiple structures on the same property, a single structure is expanded or enlarged by twenty five percent (25%) or more of that
particular structure's square footage, regardless of the areas of the other structures; or
4. When a group of two (2) or more structures on the same premises is expanded or enlarged either by twenty five percent (25%) or more of the
combined square footage of either of those structures, added collectively, or twenty five percent (25%) or more of the area of all the structures on the
property. (Ord. 4143, 9-15-2014)
5. When a parking lot is expanded, or torn up and reconstructed (as opposed to being just resealed and/or striped) only the parking lot area itself (i.e.,
that part being renovated) shall be improved to meet current code(s). This shall require that landscaping and ADA parking be emplaced in and/or
around the parking area such that the parking area complies with chapters 22 and 33 of this title including the fifteen foot (15') wide landscape strip
noted in subsection C4 of this section. Also, any engineering, water, wastewater or fire division/department improvement requirements shall apply to
the "new" parking area. For example, such things as curb, gutter, sidewalk, curb cuts, drainage features, etc., shall all be improved or emplaced as
part of the refurbishment of the parking area as required by the city.
A site improvement permit shall be required of an applicant and reviewed by the city (as specified in chapter 22 of this title) to ensure correct
execution of this requirement unless the parking lot is being renovated because of concurrent interior structure remodeling occurring, or slated to
occur, on the same property. In the case of parking lots simply being restriped (whether a slurry seal is used or not), the parking shall be arranged to
comply with section 10-1-18, figure 1 of this chapter, but the parking lot need not be landscaped.
B. Change Of Use: Change of use shall be considered as occurring, or when there is proposed:
1. Except in the DH zone, any change of occupancy group of a structure(s) according to the city's currently adopted edition of the international building
code. Per chapter 3, use and occupancy classification, the principal occupancy groups are:
Group A Assembly
Group B Business
Group E Educational
Group F Factory and industrial
Group H High hazard
Group I Institutional
Group M Mercantile
Group R Residential
Group S Storage
Group U Utility/miscellaneous
2. Any changes of the primary use(s) of a property from being vacant/open to having new development/construction proposed upon it; and/or
3. Any change of the majority of use to multi-tenant structures (e.g., shopping centers). (Such structures shall be treated as single use facilities when
dealing with changes.) The aggregate area of a center devoted to retail uses versus, for instance, office use(s) shall be used when determining
whether a change of use has occurred. Hence, for example, a large mall with various retail lessees shall not be required to upgrade with needed
landscaping unless a majority of the retail users have left and offices or other noncommercial sales businesses have filled their space(s). (Ord. 4190,
7-20-2015)
C. Emplaced Improvements: Improvements required to be emplaced with or upon occurrence of an expansion or change of use as previously explained
include:
1. General property landscaping as required by chapter 33 of this title. (Ord. 4143, 9-15-2014)
2. Street, curb, gutter, stormwater collection and discharge, driveway approach, sidewalk and related improvements as required by the city engineer or
his/her designee and/or any currently adopted downtown revitalization or streetscape plan. (Ord. 4190, 7-20-2015)
3. On site loading, parking lot/space improvements (including parking lot landscaping treatment). Such improvements shall include new paving or
resurfacing and/or striping, as needed, to provide clear designated parking, loading and maneuvering space areas, and such shall be arranged in
accordance with design regulations imposed by this title.
4. A fifteen foot (15') wide landscaped buffer area developed in accordance with standards set forth in chapter 33 of this title shall be provided on
properties along streets identified by the adopted Nampa street/path master plan map, Nampa comprehensive plan, and/or the city engineer as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 226/410
arterial or collector thoroughfares.
Along arterial and collector status rights of way, the landscape strip is required regardless of what a zoning district may require/allow for a front
parking setback/landscaped yard. In the event that a front yard setback area is required to be wider/deeper than fifteen feet (15') from the street line
(e.g., in U, GB1, GB2 and BC zones, etc.), then the fifteen foot (15') strip shall be contained in the greater front setback strip and shall be made a
part of the overall landscaping of that yard area.
(For example, in a commercial zone with 20 foot front setbacks, the 15 foot strip shall be placed along the road frontage and then 5 feet behind the
strip landscaped and blended in with the 15 foot strip. Exception: In the downtown [DB, DV and DH] zones, in lieu of the corridor landscape strip
requirement being made applicable to development, the Nampa streetscape plan shall apply although required setback areas/yards in the DB and
DH zones shall [also] be landscaped.)
The strip shall be emplaced when a property is newly developed or redeveloped or expanded as described in subsections A1 through A5 of this
section or the use is changed as described in subsection B of this section. Any land between the landscape strip and the developed roadway within
the abutting right of way shall also be landscaped but only with grass, crushed rock or gravel, shrubs and/or flowers.
5. Provision of pathway/trailway space by easement, or deed and dedication or by making the space a common lot in a subdivision as required by the
planning and zoning department in accordance with the "Nampa bicycle and pedestrian master plan" and the city's comprehensive plan. This
requirement shall apply against those properties that physically adjoin or abut a proposed trailway section as shown on the "Nampa proposed
bikeway and off street pathway network map in the Nampa bicycle and pedestrian master plan" or its currently adopted parks and recreation plan.
6. Work on any "preexisting" residential structure(s) on a property to change the same into a nonsingle-family residential structure (e.g., expansion of a
house into a duplex) shall be performed such that either said preexisting dwelling structure is first or concurrently made to comply with city of Nampa
currently adopted building and zoning codes as part of site/project development, or, is removed from the site. Such work shall of necessity be
satisfactorily accomplished before a certificate of occupancy may be issued by the city for the new or newly expanded/converted residential
structure. (Ord. 4143, 9-15-2014)
7. Provision of improvements required by the currently adopted streetscape standards design manual for the downtown historic zone (DH). (Ord. 4190,
7-20-2015)
D. Completion Of Improvements: Unless otherwise provided, all improvements may be made a condition(s) of any building/occupancy permit, and they
shall be completed prior to final inspection and permanent occupancy of the building or property. (Ord. 4143, 9-15-2014)
10-1-7: MISCELLANEOUS, UNILATERAL HEIGHT, AREA, YARD REGULATIONS INCLUDING STRUCTURE HEIGHT
EXCEPTIONS, LOT AREA EXCEPTIONS, STRUCTURE QUANTITY AND LOT SPLITTING CONTROLS, SWIMMING POOL
SECUREMENT REQUIREMENTS, SETBACK INTRUSION ALLOWANCES, ETC.:
A. Building Height Exceptions:
1. Through Lots:
a. On through lots having a depth of one hundred fifty feet (150') or less, the building height may be measured from the adjoining sidewalk level on
either street.
b. On through lots having a depth of more than one hundred fifty feet (150'), the height regulations and basis of height measurements for the street
permitting the greater height shall apply to a depth of not more than one hundred fifty feet (150') from such street.
2. Roof Structures: Roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans and similar equipment required to operate and
maintain the building, fore or parapet walls, skylights, towers, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, wireless masts, TV and CB antennas, satellite
dishes, steeples and similar structures may be erected above the height limits prescribed in each of the use districts, provided that no roof structure,
feature or any other device above the prescribed height limit shall be allowed or used for the purpose of providing additional floor space.
3. Additional Height Allowed For Public Buildings: Public utility buildings, public and parochial schools and churches may be erected to any height
provided the building is set back from required building setback lines at least one foot (1') for each additional foot of building height above the
maximum height, in feet, permitted in the zone within which the building is located.
4. Minimum Height Of Principal Building(s): Structures that have their entire or the majority of their superstructure underground (i.e., basement style
houses not houses with basements) shall not be permitted anywhere within the city limits.
B. General Yard/Frontage/Access Regulations:
1. Legal Access To Or Frontage On A Public Street:
a. Generally: All building lots/parcels, or lots/parcels proposed as future building lots, in all land use zones whereon some structure will be emplaced
are, and shall be, required to have legal access to a public street before any building permits for structures on those lots/parcels may be issued by
the city (as noted in the definition of "property" in section 10-1-2, "Definitions", of this chapter).
b. Abutting A Public Street: All building lots/parcels abutting or proposed to abut a public street shall comply with any street frontage requirement
required by the zoning district within which those lots/parcels are, or will be, located.
c. Abutting A Private Street Or Common Driveway: Lots/parcels abutting or proposed to abut an approved private street or an approved common
driveway shall have, or be demonstrated to have, legal access to a public street (often accomplished via viable and recorded easements) before
any building permits for structures on those lots/parcels may be issued by the City.
2. Yard Requirements For Property Abutting Partial Or Future Street Rights-Of-Way: No building shall be erected on a lot which abuts a public street
having only a portion of its required width dedicated, unless the lot/parcel area provided and maintained in connection with such building has a width
and/or depth needed to complete the street width and provide the width and/or depth of land necessary to comply with the required setbacks
according to the regulations of the zone within which the structure will be placed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 227/410
3. Open Space And Yards Around Buildings:
a. No yard (setback area) or open space around any building shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building.
b. No yard (setback area) or open space on adjoining property shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for another lot or development
site. (Ord. 3895, 1-7-2010)
c. No structure/building, whether principal or accessory, shall occupy or be placed over a required setback or an easement except as may be allowed
for portable, temporary stands allowed by the Planning Director to so reside in conjunction with provisions in section 10-1-12 of this chapter. No
structure/building, whether principal or accessory, shall be placed over a property line. (Ord. 4189, 7-20-2015)
4. Setback For Garages And Carports: Any newly proposed or existing garage or carport structure shall be required to comply with zoning district
setback requirements pertinent to the land whereon the garage or carport lies, or, is proposed be emplaced. Furthermore, there shall be provided at
least twenty feet (20') of driveway from the street line (i.e., front or side street property line) to the foremost entry point of any attached/detached
garage's or attached/detached carport's door or entry respectively.
Garages or carports on corner or through (double fronted) lots/parcels whose doors or entries face, or are intended to face, and access a side street
must be set back twenty feet (20') from that side street line; notwithstanding any ten foot (10') setback allowance stated elsewhere in the rest of
these zoning regulations (this title). However, garages or carports on corner lots/parcels with the middle of their auto bay doors/entries turned at least
fifty five degrees (55°) away from the side street may use the ten foot (10') setback instead of twenty feet (20'). In such cases, the ten foot (10')
setback will be measured from the point of the garage nearest the street, perpendicularly, to the edge of the adjoining right-of-way. (Ord. 3895, 1-7-
2010)
5. Vision Clearance: Trees in the vision clearance area shall be trimmed at least nine feet (9') above the street to provide clear visibility up to that
height. Shrubs and site obscuring fences or walls in vision clearance areas shall not exceed two and one-half feet (21/2') (i.e., 30 inches) in height
above the curb line.
On all corner properties located at the intersection of the alleys or streets with adjacent streets, unless otherwise permitted by the City Engineer and
commission, there shall be provided vision clearance in accordance with the definition of "vision clearance" in section 10-1-2 of this chapter. (Ord.
4340, 9-18-2017)
6. Common Property Line: When the common property line separating two (2) or more contiguous properties, if and when under common ownership, is
covered by a building such properties shall constitute a single development site and the interior yards (setbacks) as required by the district(s)
pertinent thereto shall then not apply to the intervening, common property lines (except in the case of carport structures which shall not be allowed to
connect over property lines). This Code's stated allowance to have structures straddle property lines of lots/parcels under the same ownership shall
not have or be construed to have the effect of abrogating codes, laws, regulations or requirements as administered by other agencies (e.g., Building,
Stormwater and Fire Codes) pertaining to such common connections.
7. Dwellings Where Permitted In Commercial Zones Above Nonresidential Buildings: The front and interior yard requirements for residential uses shall
not be applicable, provided that all yard requirements for the district in which such building is located are complied with. (Ord. 3895, 1-7-2010)
C. Lot Area Exceptions: The following exceptions shall be deemed to exist and to be eligible for legal, nonconforming status when demonstrated to be
legitimate (a historical reality):
1. Lots of record with less than the area required by each use district of an imposed subdistrict which existed prior to June 11, 2002.
2. Lots or development sites which, as a process of their creation, were approved with substandard area by the commission.
D. Principal Buildings And Uses; And Number Of Accessory Buildings Allowed:
1. On any property in any residential zone, except the RML, RMH and RP districts, there shall be allowed only one principal use (as allowed by section
10-3-2 of this title) or structure (containing an allowed use). Still, in the RML, RMH or RP zone, if land division is proposed and/or executed in order
to separate structures (apartment buildings) once planned and/or proposed, perhaps, as a singular development, then all new parcels/lots created
shall meet zoning dimensional, setback and property area standards in order to be considered as acceptable and "conforming to code".
New parcels/lots shall also be encumbered with sufficient easements/maintenance agreements to allow shared vehicular maneuvering and parking
access across and via service drives between the buildings unless total site redevelopment, that would legally separate parking for each building, is
done. The planning director or his/her designee may review and/or inspect such proposals to determine their legitimacy before the law.
2. Either a record of survey or subdivision plat shall be required to be approved and recorded in order to divide property that the city will recognize and
may issue building permits upon. That is, creation of new lots or parcels merely/solely by creation of metes and bounds descriptions is/shall not be
considered an acceptable means of land division (where the intent is to split a property into various properties for immediate or future conveyance)
and will prevent the city from issuing building permits upon such pieces of land so divided. Lot splits done by description for lending purposes shall
not create nonconforming setbacks or lot areas without variance approval as reiterated in subsection G of this section. This restriction shall not
preclude site clearance work nor emplacement of utilities where approved by city engineering and/or the state division of environmental quality.
3. In any single-family residential district, there shall be no more than two (2) accessory buildings on any lot or development site.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge of any premises to facilitate and/or allow any person(s) to
permanently reside in or stay more than thirty (30) days and nights in an "unauthorized dwelling unit" (as defined by this code) on their private
property (or that which they manage) unless approved otherwise via a CUP. Use of guesthouses as/for residential unit rentals is prohibited (see
section 10-3-2 of this title). (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
E. Property Coverage, Parking Coverage And Outdoor Living Area Requirements: Refer to provisions of specific districts. (Ord. 3895, 1-7-2010)
F. General Setback (Required Yard(s)) Exceptions And Permitted Intrusions Into Required Yards (Setbacks): The following intrusions may project into
required yard (setback) space to the extent and under the conditions and limitations indicated:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 228/410
1. Depressed Ramps Yard Intrusions Allowed: In any district, openwork fences, hedges, guardrailings or other landscaping or architectural devices for
safety protection around depressed ramps or stairs may be located in required yards provided that such devices are not more than three and onehalf
feet (31/2') in height.
2. Accessory Structures Yard Intrusions Allowed:
a. In Front Yards On Through/Double Fronted Lots: In any case where a through property has a depth of not more than one hundred forty feet (140'),
accessory structures, except for garages or carports, may be located in one of the required front yards provided that every portion of such
accessory building is not less than ten feet (10') from the nearest street line, that same front yard is thereafter identified and serves as the
functional rear yard, and that the accessory building is fenced from view from any adjoining street.
3. Projecting Building Features Yard Intrusions Allowed: The following features may project into the required front yard no more than five feet (5') and
into the required interior yards no more than two feet (2') provided that such projections are no closer than three feet (3') to any interior lot line:
a. Eaves, cornices, bay windows lacking floor area, belt courses, sills, awnings, buttresses or other similar features.
b. Chimneys and fireplaces, provided they do not exceed eight feet (8') in width.
c. Porches, platforms, ramps, decks or landings that do not extend above the level of the ground more than forty two inches (42").
4. Structure Setback Measurement Criteria: Setbacks in all zones for all structures and parking or landscaping features shall not be measured off of or
from utility easement edges. Setbacks shall only measure from the edge of an access type easement (e.g., private driveways, private roads, service
drives) if such access easement abuts/adjoins a property's boundary, but does not cross over/traverse that property. If such an easement crosses or
traverses a property or any portion thereof, then setbacks shall not be taken off the easement's edges but rather the property lines, as commonly
done.
5. Swimming Pools: Swimming pools not completely enclosed within a building having solid walls shall be set back at least five feet (5') from the
property lines of the lot upon which the pool is located and shall either be completely surrounded by a fence (either around the pool or encompassing
the yard/property wherein the pool is located) that shall be at least five feet (5') tall (there shall be no openings in the fence larger than 36 square
inches, except for a gate(s), which shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices), or, an approved safety cover shall be provided to
cover the pool. An approved safety cover may be allowed as a substitution for a fence provided the cover is of design agreeable to the planning
director and set forth in written policy.
G. Lot Splitting:
1. In the process of splitting property, unless otherwise allowed in accordance with applicable city ordinances, no space needed to meet the width,
depth, yard, area, coverage, parking or other requirements of this title for a property or building may have ownership transferred apart from such
property or building unless other space is simultaneously provided back to the grantor in order to keep the grantor property compliant with pertinent
bulk zoning requirements.
2. Unless otherwise allowed in accordance with applicable city ordinances, no property that has less than the minimum width, depth and area
requirements for the zoning district in which it is located, may be divided off from a larger property for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for
building or development and still be considered a "buildable" lot or parcel.
3. Division of a building into condo units may and shall not have the effect of increasing the density of dwelling or nondwelling (e.g., office, store, or
storage) units of said building beyond that normally allowed in the zone in which the building is located. (For example, division of a single-family
dwelling into 2 condo units shall not be allowed but division of a legal fourplex into 4 condo units could be allowed.) (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
H. Bus Stop Benches: Bus benches and signage may only be installed by an authorized entity of the regional transportation organization that has entered
into a memorandum of understanding with the city of Nampa to provide bus service for the same.
Bus stop benches with signage affixed thereto may be located on public right of way only with prior authorization from the city engineer. Bus stop
benches may be located on private residentially zoned, U or GB2 zoned properties; or private properties zoned commercially or industrially even if said
properties in those zones already have preexisting, freestanding signs located on them along/in the same street frontage yard area as a/the newly
proposed bus bench location(s).
Bus stop benches with signage affixed thereto shall not be placed on properties zoned DH, DV or DB. (For additional details regarding bus bench
signage controls, refer to subsection 10-23-18D and section 10-23-20 of this title.) Bus stop benches without signage affixed thereto may be placed in
the DH, DV or DB zones in accordance with the regulation in the first paragraph of this subsection. (Ord. 3895, 1-7-2010)
10-1-8: FENCES AND WALLS:
A. Permit Required: It is unlawful for any person to construct or place a fence or masonry wall upon any property within the city limits without first having
applied for and obtained a building permit to do so and without thereafter complying with all the provisions of said permit. Height of fences, walls or
other screens whether stand alone or combined with other screening elements (e.g., a fence on top of a berm) shall be measured at grade level within
six inches (6") of the bottom of the fence or screen/wall/berm. (Ord. 3211, 4-7-2003)
B. Fences On Rights Of Way Or Easements: Residential fences may be permitted to be constructed on/within public rights of way and easements subject
to the sidewalk and vision clearance restrictions set forth herein. On commercial and industrial properties, fences shall not be placed within or blocking
from view areas established as required yards (setbacks) but instead shall be on the side of those setbacks closest to the center of the property (i.e.,
behind the setbacks when viewed from off the property); provided, however, when fences are required for the protection of public wells and
infrastructure, they may be erected within a designated setback. Where circumstances permit, fences may be built along a property line, providing that
permission to construct fences on rights of way (where desired) shall be first obtained from the city engineer.
1. Regarding Fences In Rights Of Way Or Easements: Upon receiving notification from the city, it is the property owner's responsibility to remove
fences from public rights of way or easements, at owner's expense, should the city need to utilize any right of way or easement for maintenance or
construction of any public facility or improvements or it is determined to be in the interest of the city or in the opinion of the city creates a safety
hazard. Fences which constitute structures, as defined under this chapter, shall not be permitted upon or within public rights of way or easements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 229/410
The design and height of any fences proposed for emplacement abutting Idaho state highway right of way shall be subject to the approval of the
Idaho transportation department. (Ord. 4203, 10-19-2015)
C. General Requirements: For the purposes of this subsection, walls (e.g., block, brick, straw), latticework, screens, hedges, berms and plantings shall be
considered functionally equivalent to fences and shall be built, restricted in height and maintained in compliance with the fencing provisions contained
in this chapter.
1. Electric Fences: Electric fences shall only be allowed in the city as provided in this section, subject to the following standards:
a. IEC Standard 60335-2-76: Unless otherwise specified herein, electric fences shall be constructed or installed in conformance with the
specifications set forth in international electro technical commission (IEC) standard 60335-2-76; and
b. Energizer: The energizer for electric fences must be driven by a commercial storage battery not to exceed twelve (12) volts DC. The storage
battery is charged primarily by a solar panel. However, the solar panel may be augmented by a commercial trickle charger; and
c. Charge Limit: The electric charge produced by the fence upon contact shall not exceed energizer characteristics set forth in paragraph 22.108 and
depicted in figure 102 of IEC standard 60335-2-76; and
d. Installation Requirements: No electric fence shall be installed or used unless it is completely surrounded by a nonelectrical fence or wall that is not
less than six feet (6') in height save in the case where the fence serves to contain agricultural animals in which case the fence may be no higher
than six feet (6'); and
e. Outdoor Storage Areas: Electric fences shall be permitted on any nonresidential outdoor storage area property; and
f. Signage: Electric fences shall be clearly identified with warning signs that read, "Warning - Electric Fence" placed at intervals not less than sixty
feet (60') apart; and
g. Governing Regulations: Electric fences shall otherwise be governed and regulated under burglar alarm regulations and permitted as such.
h. Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to install, maintain or operate an electric fence in violation of this section save those fences designed
and operated to contain agricultural animals. Those fences shall comply with traditional practice and industry standards applicable to livestock
enclosure. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
2. Barbed Wire: Barbed wire may be permitted in commercial or industrial zones when used as the top section for security fences, provided barbed
wires are a minimum of seventy two inches (72") above grade and do not project over public right of way.
3. Construction Impairment: No fence shall be permitted in or across a sidewalk area or in a location that may impair construction. (Ord. 3211, 4-7-
2003)
4. Fence Owner Responsibility: In the event any fence restricts access to or use of established rights of way and/or easements, it shall be the fence
owner's responsibility, at his expense, to provide access upon demand of the city or other entitled party.
Any existing fence or fence to be constructed which restricts access to any utility meter shall provide a way of access through the fence by a "man"
gate. In addition, no fence shall be constructed within thirty six inches (36") of a fire hydrant. (Ord. 3250, 8-18-2003)
5. Vision Clearance: "Vision clearance" for fences at street and alley intersections shall be as defined in section 10-1-2 of this chapter.
6. Screening Sport Venues: Fences utilized to screen playing fields, ball diamonds, tennis or basketball courts shall be exempt from the height
regulations of this section (but not from setback or vision clearance requirements) provided they are considered to meet typical industry standards in
terms of height and type and method of construction.
7. Materials And Appearance: Fences shall be constructed using common fencing materials commercially available. Fences shall be constructed such
that one material (e.g., wood, vinyl, metal) is used throughout and its color(s), pattern, and composition are consistent. Slats inserted into chainlink
fences shall be wide enough to completely fill the gaps they are inserted into/through. Slats inserted into chainlink fences shall be oriented vertically
or diagonally. Chainlink fences shall have top rails. (Ord. 3211, 4-7-2003)
D. Residential Districts (Including RP Zoned Properties Whereon A Residential Use, Like A House, Is Located Or Proposed To Be Located):
1. Interior Lots: Solid/closed nonvision perimeter fences up to a height of thirty six inches (36"), or open vision fences to a height of forty eight inches
(48"), may be built in the required front yard (setback area) from the setback line/mark to the inside of an existing sidewalk or to the inside of a
proposed, future sidewalk.
Perimeter fences up to a height of seventy two inches (72") may be built from a point behind the front of the dwelling unit to and along the rear
property line. In no case shall solid/closed vision type fences exceeding thirty six inches (36") in height be built across the front of a residence
between side property lines unless approved via issuance of a variance permit. Solid fences higher than thirty six inches (36") or open vision fences
higher than forty eight inches (48") may link a fence that runs along a side property line to a house or accessory building but must be kept behind the
front wall of the main dwelling and/or attached garage or carport.
2. Corner Lots: Solid/closed nonvision perimeter fences to a height of thirty six inches (36") or open vision perimeter fences to a height of forty eight
inches (48") may be built in the front yard setback area up to the inside of an existing sidewalk or to the inside of a proposed future sidewalk. A
perimeter fence up to seventy two inches (72") in height may only be built along the side property lines adjacent an interior lot from the front of the
dwelling unit to and along the rear property line, provided that no fence which exceeds thirty six inches (36") in height may be erected in a vision
clearance triangle.
Perimeter fences may be built to a height of seventy two inches (72") along the side street of corner lots starting at a point fifty feet (50') away from
the back of curb of the street in front of the property to and along the rear property line provided the following conditions are complied with:
a. A seven and one-half foot (71/2') vision triangle is maintained when the rear property line abuts an alley or drive approach.
3. Private Covenants, Codes And Restrictions: Recognizing that many subdivisions/properties have private covenants, codes and restrictions that in
part govern the type, placement, height and appearance of fences, a fence permit as issued by/from the city of Nampa shall not be construed to be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 230/410
an abrogation of a property owner's responsibility to comply with pertinent, private covenants. The city of Nampa, accordingly, shall undertake no
efforts to enforce any fence provisions stated in private covenants, but shall only enforce the fence code as contained within this title and chapter.
(Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
E. Commercial, Healthcare, Or Industrial Districts (Including RP Zoned Properties Whereon A Professional Or Commercial Use, Like An Office Or Store, Is
Located Or Proposed To Be Located, And, All Kinds Of Multiple- [Nonsingle-] Family Residential Projects In All Zones): Fences not to exceed eight feet
(8') in height (6 feet for multiple-family residential projects) may be located or maintained on any commercially or industrially zoned property. In the
case of security fences, when a barbed wire top section is utilized, the eight foot (8') maximum height limitation may be exceeded by up to thirty inches
(30") only by the barbed wire security top section. (Ord. 4203, 10-19-2015)
Perimeter fences erected on commercially or industrially zoned property, or, for any form of multiple- (nonsingle-) family residential project, shall,
when/if placed, be set back behind required yards/setbacks as viewed from off the property or from an abutting street. In some cases, where zero foot
(0') setbacks are required, then the fences may be located right on the property line, except within vision clearance areas unless appropriately reduced
in height. Likewise, open vision perimeter fences to a height of six feet (6') may be built out to the inside of an existing or future projected sidewalk,
provided that: 1) the abutting property's required yard/setback along the sidewalk is zero feet (0'), and 2) no barbed wire or other security top section is
utilized and fences comply with vision clearance requirements for fences to be located at intersections. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
F. Fences Required For Sight/Site Obstruction:
1. Certain uses are declared and others may be declared in the future by the city to possess characteristics that require sight/site obstruction in order to
preclude damage, hazard, nuisance or other detriment to public health, safety or welfare, or to prevent a materially injurious situation to property or
improvements in a given vicinity.
2. Greenbelt or sight/site obscuring fences, where required by provisions of this subsection, shall be of dense coniferous planting, or climbing varieties
of nondeciduous vines on permanently installed aluminum mesh fencing or solid nonvision type fencing of such design and materials that retains its
attractiveness with nominal maintenance.
3. The following uses are declared to require sight/site obscuring fences: junkyard(s), wrecking yard(s), equipment storage yard(s), vehicle salvage
and/or storage yard(s), sanitary landfill(s), and any other uses determined to be similar in nature to the preceding uses by the planning director or
his/her designee.
G. Abatement Of Unlawful Fences: The following fences are declared unlawful nuisances and shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of section 3-
4-2, "Abatement Of Nuisances", of this code:
1. Any fence that is in whole or in part weak, or constructed of broken, unsightly, inferior or old, worn materials of an inflammable nature that may
impair the value of the adjoining land.
2. Any fence constructed or maintained for the purpose of maliciously annoying the owners or occupants of an abutting property.
3. Any fence not constructed or maintained in accordance with this section. (Ord. 3211, 4-7-2003)
10-1-9: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All operations conducted on the premises shall not be allowed to constitute a nuisance by reason of smoke, fumes, odor, steam, gases, vibrations, noise,
hazards or other causes, beyond the property boundary lines, and shall comply with the performance standards of this section.
Any dissemination incident to a permitted use shall comply with the following standards:
A. Noise: Noise emanating from a commercially or industrially zoned property, which lies abutting or adjacent to residentially zoned and used property, is
subject to antinoise regulations listed in section 6-7-3 of this code. Exception: Noise caused by construction between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. shall be exempt from such regulations if the owner or contractor holds a special waiver permit issued by the city's building
department. (Ord. 4143, 9-15-2014)
B. Lighting And Eye Safety: Industrial and exterior lighting shall not be used in a manner that produces glare on public highways and neighboring property.
Arc welding, acetylene torch cutting or similar processes shall be performed so as not to be seen from any point beyond the outside of the property.
(Ord. 3247, 8-4-2003)
C. Flammable And Combustible Liquids And Gases:
1. Storing And Handling: Storing and handling of flammable and combustible liquids and gases and all explosives shall, in terms of fire and safety
hazards, comply with rules and regulations falling under the jurisdiction of the Nampa fire department, as well as other applicable federal, state and
local laws.
2. Bulk Storage: Bulk storage of flammable and combustible liquids and gases below ground shall be permitted; however, the tank type, design and
location shall fall under the jurisdiction of the Nampa fire department, shall meet adopted fire code requirements and regulations, and, in any event,
be located no closer to the property line than the greatest dimension (diameter, length or height) of the tank or as otherwise required by adopted fire
code requirements and regulations, whichever is more restrictive.
3. Aboveground Tanks: No flammable or combustible liquids or gas shall be stored in aboveground tanks which exceed five hundred (500) gallons'
capacity, except in the HC, IL, IP and IH zones. All storage, handling and dispensing shall fall under the jurisdiction of, and be approved by, the
Nampa fire department and shall meet adopted fire code requirements and regulations.
4. Location Of Fuel Pumps Used For The Dispensing Of Flammable And Combustible Liquids: Fuel pumps (and their locations) used for the dispensing
of flammable and combustible liquids shall fall under the jurisdiction of the Nampa fire department and shall meet adopted fire code regulations.
Moreover, fuel pumps (and their locations) used for the dispensing of flammable and combustible liquids shall be set back not less than twenty feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 231/410
(20') from any street line to which the pump island is at right angles, and fifteen feet (15') from any street line to which the pump island is parallel, and
not less than twelve feet (12') from any residential district boundary line. If the pump island is set on an angle on the property with respect to the
street, it shall be so located that vehicles stopping for service will not extend over the property line. In no case shall pumps (and their locations) used
for the dispensing of flammable and combustible liquids be set closer than fifteen feet (15') from any street line. In the event that adopted fire codes
or NFPA regulations require setbacks greater than the afore noted, then the fire codes or NFPA regulations shall prevail.
Canopies when supported by a column may be located within the setback, but not closer to a street than fourteen feet (14'). (Ord. 4207, 10-19-2015)
D. Power Safety: Provisions must be made for necessary shielding or other preventive measures against interferences occasioned by mechanical,
electrical, electronic and nuclear equipment, uses or processes with electrical apparatus in nearby buildings or land uses.
E. Emissions:
1. General Prohibitions: The emission of obnoxious odors of any kind, as well as any toxic or corrosive fumes or gases is not permitted.
2. Industrial Dust: Dust created by an industrial operation shall not be exhausted or wasted into the air.
3. Smoke And Particulate Matter: The emission or smoke or particulate matter of a density equal to or greater than number 3 on the "Ringelmann
chart", as currently published and used by the U.S. bureau of mines, is prohibited at all times.
Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such sources as storage areas and roads shall be minimized by appropriate landscaping,
paving, oiling or other acceptable means. Emission of particulate matter in excess of 0.2 grain per cubic foot of conveying gas or air measured at any
property line is prohibited.
The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources on any property shall not exceed a net weight of one pound per acre of property during
any one hour.
F. Waste Products: Liquid and solid wastes, as well as the storage of animal or vegetable wastes, which attract insects, rodents or otherwise create a
health hazard, shall be prohibited. No waste products shall be exposed to view from eye level from any property line.
G. Open Storage: All industrially related storage shall be located within an area not closer than twenty feet (20') from the street right of way line and
enclosed with a heavy wire fence or of a similar type, with the type of said fence not less than six feet (6') above the adjoining street level, or by an
attractive hedge or board fence at least six feet (6') high.
In case of the open storage of lumber, coal, or other combustible material, a roadway designed and developed in accordance with accepted city
standards shall be provided, graded, surfaced and maintained from the street to the rear of the property to permit free access of firetrucks at any time.
H. Fabrication, Repair: Not more than five (5) persons shall be engaged in the fabrication, repair and other processing of goods in any establishment and
not more than twelve (12) aggregate horsepower shall be employed in the operation of all machines employed for the aforesaid purposes in a BC zone.
(Ord. 3247, 8-4-2003)
10-1-10: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
The home occupation ordinance presupposes that many small scale business ventures (e.g., at home offices, crafts making, at home daycares, small
scale vehicles repair, etc.) might not be sustained if it were necessary to lease commercial quarters for them. The intent of the home occupation ordinance
is to only allow for home based businesses that are, or will expectedly be, compatible with the residential neighborhoods in which they are located in order
to provide supplement retirement income, juvenile self-employment, mothers who must remain at home with preschool children, etc.
In other words, it is the intent of the home occupation ordinance that full scale commercial or professional type operations that would change the
appearance or condition of a residence and/or be detrimental to neighborhood character, and would ordinarily be conducted in a commercial or industrial
district, continue to be conducted in such district and not at, or from, residential property/dwelling unit.
Thus, home occupations shall be conducted on (howbeit inside a structure) property whereat the owner/operator(s) lives. That means the
owner/operator(s) shall, on a daily basis, eat, sleep, and otherwise live there. Further evidence that a location is lawfully functioning as a suitable location
for a home occupation to be conducted shall be considered if an owner/operator (if a renter) has their rental agreement identifying that location as their
residence, and/or (if a renter or homeowner) receives their mail at that property, has their trash picked up from that property, accumulates the majority of
their domestic utility bills on/from that property, sends any of their children off to school from that property, has their homeowner's exemption assigned to
that property, even has their personal vehicles registration describing that property at their current residential address, etc.
A. Home Occupations Subject To Conditional Use Permits In Any District: Certain types of home occupations require special consideration and approval
because of the nature of the use and its potential incompatibility with residential living. The following businesses, if proposed to be conducted on
residential property as home occupations, shall require conditional use approval prior to their being permitted in any residential zoning district: repair
garages including truck, auto, motorcycle, boat, etc.; major appliance repair; paint shops; welding; woodworking and cabinet shops; daycare home
occupations in certain zones with seven (7) or more children (including the caregiver's if they are under 6 years of age); and any other use determined
by the planning director to be similar to the aforementioned activities.
B. Home Occupation Standards: "Home occupation" shall mean any occupation or profession carried on by a member of the family residing on the
premises (in or from the dwelling unit or structures accessory thereto), provided the following conditions are satisfied:
1. Signs: No sign is used other than a nameplate not over two (2) square feet in area and nonilluminated.
2. Space: The amount of floor area used solely for the home occupation (either in the dwelling unit or in an accessory building beside or behind the
dwelling unit) shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit involved.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 232/410
3. Storage And Display: There is no outdoor display of goods or outside storage of equipment or materials used in the home occupation that would
indicate from the exterior that the building is being used in whole or in part for any purpose other than residential use. (Ord. 3878, 8-17-2009)
4. Commercial Vehicles: Not more than one commercial vehicle, not to exceed fifteen thousand (15,000) GVWR, may/shall be kept by the operator of
the home occupation on their residentially zoned property. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
5. Employment: There are not outside paid employees (except in short term instances when the resident operator must be temporarily away from
home).
6. Traffic: It is intended that vehicular or pedestrian traffic to or from a residential property operating a home occupation not be generated in volumes
beyond that normal to the residential zoning district in which the home occupation is located. If additional parking for the home business is needed,
then that parking shall be provided upon the property whereupon the home occupation is to be/is being operated. The parking area (including
driveway access to the same) shall be paved, any right of way permit needed for it obtained, shall be for no more than two (2) vehicles, where
possible shall not be located in front of the house relative to a street, and shall comply with any required parking area setbacks.
7. Residential Appearance: The building retains the appearance of residential use in terms of operating characteristics and does not destroy the
residential character of the neighborhood.
8. Nuisances: No equipment or process shall be used which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the
normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a singlefamily
residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any
radio or television receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. Home occupations involving storage of
flammable or combustible materials shall conform with the city fire code for residential occupancy.
9. Sales: Infrequent residential or out of home sales (i.e., garage sales, estate auctions/sales, moving sales, block sales, patio sales) may occur in
residential areas, provided sales are conducted not more than three (3) days at a time and no more frequently than once per calendar quarter. The
seller shall not be in the business of regularly selling the same or similar property as that which is offered for sale at the yard. No temporary use
permit is required for this kind of activity.
C. Statement Of Compliance; Registration: The person(s) desiring to operate the home occupation shall sign a statement that they are aware of all
standards and conditions under which the occupation is allowed and that if any of the standards are violated they shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The
filing of the statement/registration shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council.
D. Complaint Procedures: Complaints on conditions of subsections B1 through B4 of this section will be handled routinely by the planning department.
Complaints on conditions of subsections B5 through B9 of this section will be dealt with as follows: The commission shall review home occupations
upon receipt of two (2) written complaints from two (2) separate households located within three hundred feet (300') of the boundary of the affected
property. Said complaints shall set forth the nature of objection(s).
Such complaints shall be investigated by the city and the results reported to the commission at a public hearing. The public hearing procedure and
notification process shall be the same as outlined for conditional use permits in chapter 25 of this title.
Standards for judging objections shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Generation of excessive traffic.
2. Monopoly of on street parking spaces.
3. Frequent deliveries and pick ups by motor freight trucks.
4. Noise in excess of that created by normal residential use (either interims of volume or hours of operation).
5. Smoke, fumes or odors in excess of those created by normal residential use.
6. Other offensive activities not in harmony with a residential neighborhood.
E. Action By Commission: The commission, upon hearing the evidence may:
1. Approve the use as it exists.
2. Require the use to be terminated.
3. Impose appropriate restrictions, such as limiting hours of operation, establishing a phase out period, or other measures ensuring compatibility with
the neighborhood.
The determination of the commission becomes final fifteen (15) days after the date of the decision unless appealed to the council.
F. Appeals: During the fifteen (15) day period written appeals from action of the commission may be taken to the council by the applicant or other
interested party in accordance with the appeal provisions of chapter 25 of this title. The home occupation shall not become effective until the conclusion
of any appeal pending against it. (Ord. 3878, 8-17-2009)
10-1-11: USE OF HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS:
Buildings declared historically significant shall be eligible for conditional use permit consideration for light commercial or office usage irregardless of zoning
classification. The purpose of these regulations shall be to provide a method of protection and preservation for buildings historically significant to the
community.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 233/410
A. Application For Declaration: Building owners may make application to the planning commission for official declaration of historical significance by
submitting a letter of request to the planning director.
B. Review Criteria: The following criteria shall guide the commission in their review and evaluation of individual requests:
1. The building possesses integrity of location, design, setting, materials or workmanship.
2. The building is associated with events or persons significant to the history of Nampa.
3. The building embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction, or represents a significant and distinguishable
design whose components may lack individual distinction.
C. Declaration Of Historical Significance: Following review and evaluation, in accordance with the above criteria, the commission may declare buildings to
be historically significant to the city.
D. Light Commercial Usage Of Historically Significant Buildings: Buildings declared historically significant shall be eligible for conditional use permit
consideration for light commercial or office usage regardless of zoning classification. The commission may also approve an exception to the required
number of off street parking spaces for such usages provided it can be shown that existing on street and off street parking is inadequate for the
proposed use without monopoly of adjacent on street parking. The conditional use permit procedures of chapter 25 of this title shall govern such
requests. The following uses shall be eligible for consideration:
1. Professional offices.
2. Light commercial establishments such as gift shops, antique shops, curio shops, hobby shops, clothing apparel shops, florists and small restaurants.
3. Any other uses determined to be similar to those listed above which would not have any different or more detrimental effect upon the adjoining
neighborhood areas.
E. Preservation Of Buildings: The commission shall require buildings and premises issued conditional use permits under this section to be renovated and
restored in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Historic Preservation Projects.
The commission may also designate any other conditions it deems necessary to secure the purposes of this section for the protection and preservation
of historical buildings. (Ord. 2210; amd. Ord. 2218)
10-1-12: PROVISIONS APPLYING TO MISCELLANEOUS AND TEMPORARY AND TRANSIENT USES:
All miscellaneous and temporary uses as identified in this section shall be subject to the terms, regulations and conditions of this section as set forth
hereafter. It shall be unlawful for any person or party to establish, maintain, operate or have a temporary use on property in the City of Nampa except in
accordance and compliance with the following regulations:
A. Regulations Of Certain Temporary Uses: Regulations governing establishment and operation of certain temporary uses in the City of Nampa according
to their respective categorizations/definitions in section 10-1-2 of this chapter are and shall be as follows: (Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
1. Transient Merchants As Temporary Uses:
a. Locations Allowed: Transient merchants are and shall be prohibited from locating on properties not commercially zoned and/or in any of the
following locations:
(1) In any location whereat the City has reasonable grounds to believe that establishment and/or operation of the proposed temporary use would
violate covenants, conditions and restrictions of any local subdivision, neighborhood or planned unit development community that has
jurisdiction over the area wherein the temporary use permit is proposed to be exercised.
b. Duration, Frequency And Hourly Time Limits: Time allotted to/for transient merchant operation(s) shall be as follows:
(1) Shall not be allowed to locate on any given lot or parcel for longer than nine (9) calendar days in any given calendar year; and
(2) Shall only operate between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight from an approved location; and
(3) An eligible lot/parcel may only host one transient merchant one time per, and in, any given calendar year. (This does not and shall not prevent a
lot/parcel from being host to an approved seasonal temporary use in accordance with the regulations/allowances established in this section for
such types of temporary uses.)
c. Land Use Regulations Governing Use And Operation Thereof:
(1) No more than one transient merchant use may or shall be established/allowed and operated from any given eligible lot/parcel at a time. It shall
be illegal for more than one transient merchant to locate on an eligible lot/parcel at the same time; and
(2) Placement of a structure(s), merchandise, and/or vehicles related to/part of a transient merchant use or operation, within a required setback
shall be prohibited unless specifically approved in writing by the Director or his/her designee on a case by case basis where no peril to health,
safety or public welfare is foreseen or expected in connection with allowing setback intrusion; and
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing, no structure(s), merchandise, or vehicle(s) related to/part of a transient merchant use or operation shall be
allowed to be placed or parked in a required vision triangle, in or blocking an area of a service drive required to permit legal ingress into or
egress from a lot/parcel, over or blocking an ADA parking space, over or blocking a public sidewalk, blocking access to a trash dumpster, too
close to a fire hydrant, adjacent a section of curb painted and designated as reserved for fire department use, in a position to obscure a city
traffic regulation sign, in or overhanging a public right of way, or in or overhanging a public easement. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 234/410
2. Mobile Food Vendors (e.g., "Taco Trucks, Lunch Wagons, BBQ Grills/Ranges On Trailers, Vendor Carts, Etc.") As Temporary Uses:
a. Locations Allowed: Mobile food vendors are and shall be prohibited from locating on properties not commercially zoned or zoned DB, DV, DH, or
industrially zoned and/or in any of the following locations:
(1) At any location where the city has reasonable grounds to believe that establishment and/or operation of the proposed temporary use would
violate covenants, conditions and restrictions of any local subdivision, neighborhood or planned unit development community that has
jurisdiction over the area wherein the temporary use permit is proposed to be exercised.
b. Duration And Hourly Time Limits: Mobile food vendors' approved hours of operation shall be as follows:
(1) Neither vehicles, as defined by this title, nor vendor carts shall be used/set up as permanent (or effectually permanent) diners, eateries,
restaurants, etc., nor feature outdoor facilities for dining purposes in any location in the city. Outdoor "eateries" or facilities are considered to be
any business using seating, tables or some kind and/or some form of shelter (e.g., umbrellas, tents, canopy) to provide a place to sit and eat out
of doors. It shall be illegal to do otherwise; correspondingly;
(2) Mobile food vendors shall not be or stay parked overnight (12:00 midnight to 6:00 A.M.) in any of those locations where they may legally sell
food products (subsection A2a of this section); and
(3) Mobile food vendors shall obtain a temporary use permit every one hundred eighty (180) days in order to lawfully sell food or other consumable
commodities within the city.
c. Land Use Regulations Governing Use And Operation Thereof:
(1) Mobile food vendor vehicles or vendor carts are and shall not be allowed to be placed or parked in a required vision triangle, in or blocking an
area of a service drive required to permit legal ingress into or egress from a lot/parcel, over or blocking an ADA parking space, over or blocking
a public sidewalk, blocking access to a trash dumpster, too close to a fire hydrant, adjacent to a section of curb painted and designated as
reserved for fire department use, or in a position that obscures a city traffic regulation sign. Furthermore, mobile food vendor vehicles shall not
be allowed to be placed or parked in or overhanging a public right of way, or in or overhanging a public easement; and
(2) Mobile food vendors are required to have a temporary use permit in order to lawfully operate within the city of Nampa (refer to subsection
A2b(3) of this section); and
(3) A current and valid copy of the Southwest district health (SWDH) department permit shall be submitted in conjunction with any application for a
temporary use permit and must be maintained and displayed on or in the vendor's vehicle in plain public view when open for business; and
(4) Vendor carts shall also require a right of way permit to sanction their use if/when they are proposed to be or are operated/stationed in/on public
right of way (e.g., on a sidewalk). (Ord. 4010, 3-19-2012)
3. Seasonal/Holiday Sales As Temporary Uses:
a. Locations Allowed: Seasonal/holiday vendors are and shall be prohibited from locating on properties not commercially or industrially zoned and/or
in any of the following locations:
(1) Location: In any location whereat the city has reasonable grounds to believe that establishment and/or operation of the proposed temporary
use would violate covenants, conditions and restrictions of any local subdivision, neighborhood or planned unit development community that has
jurisdiction over the area wherein the temporary use permit is proposed to be exercised.
(2) Additional Restrictions For Fireworks Stands: Placement of fireworks stands shall also be required to be in accordance with regulations listed in
title 5, chapter 11 of this Code. (Note that other restrictions respecting such stands are also provided in that chapter.)
b. Duration And Hourly Time Limits: Seasonal/holiday temporary merchandise sales/uses shall be allowed four (4) times per calendar year, once in
each quarter of the year (and in addition to any other transient merchant sales allowed on the same property during the year), on lots/parcels in the
City according to the following schedule(s):
(1) Fireworks stands shall not be erected before June 24 nor remain up after July 5 to sell for the 4th of July holiday nor shall they be erected
before December 27 or remain up after January 1 for the New Year holiday and they shall not be allowed to sell merchandise until twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight June 24 through twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight July 5 for the 4th of July holiday nor shall they be allowed to sell merchandise
for the New Year holiday until twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight December 26 through twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight January 1 (sections 5-11-4
and 5-11-5 of this Code).
(2) Christmas tree lots shall not be established before November 15 and sales shall shut down operation by no later than twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight while such lots are in operation.
(3) Pumpkin sales lots shall not be established before October 1 and sales shall shut down operation by no later than twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight while such lots are in operation.
(4) Valentine's Day and Mother's Day sales shall not be established more than seven (7) days and not left in place and/or operation more than
three (3) days after those respective holidays. Sales shall shut down operation by no later than twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
c. Land Use Regulations Governing Use And Operation Thereof:
(1) Land use regulations governing use and operation of seasonal uses shall be the same as per other temporary uses as regulated in this section
except that fireworks stands shall also be governed by those regulations contained in title 5, chapter 11 of this Code pertaining to their
placement, operation and maintenance; and
(2) For fireworks stands, an additional permit from the Nampa Fire Department is required to be obtained first in order to apply for a temporary use
permit in order to lawfully emplace/operate a stand; and
(3) Lighting for outdoor seasonal sales shall be oriented so as to not illuminate nearby residential areas where at all possible.
4. Off Site Vehicle Sales Events As Temporary Uses:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 235/410
a. Locations Allowed: Off site vehicle sales events are and shall be prohibited from locating on properties not GB1 or BC zoned, or that are not
Municipal properties (e.g., the Idaho Center, civic center, public parks, etc.) and/or in any of the following locations:
(1) In any location whereat the City has reasonable grounds to believe that establishment and/or operation of the proposed temporary use would
violate covenants, conditions and restrictions of any local subdivision, neighborhood or planned unit development community that has
jurisdiction over the area wherein the temporary use permit is proposed to be exercised; and (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
b. Duration And Hourly Time Limits: Off site sales events shall be limited to a five (5) day duration and shall not be conducted past eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. in the evening nor earlier than seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. in the morning. An eligible lot/parcel may only host six (6) off site sales
events six (6) times per, and in, any given calendar year. (This does not and shall not prevent a lot/parcel from being host to an approved seasonal
temporary use in accordance with the regulations/allowances established in this section for such types of temporary uses. It shall be illegal for the
owner of an eligible lot/parcel to allow any transient merchant to establish themselves on said lot more than once per calendar year.) (Ord. 4332,
8-21-2017)
c. Land Use Regulations Governing Use And Operation Thereof: Off site sales events shall be allowed signage in accordance with subsection 10-23-
18Q and section 10-23-19 of this title notwithstanding the temporary use signage provisions stated elsewhere in this section. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
5. Job, Hiring And Contractor Trailers/Shacks As Temporary Uses:
a. Locations Allowed: On job sites including one per single-family subdivision, on multi-family, commercial, university, gateway, or industrially zoned
construction sites.
b. Duration And Hourly Time Limits: Job, hiring and contractor trailers/shacks may be in use for a period of time as requested by the applicant and
agreed to by the director or his/her designee but not to exceed a period of three hundred sixty five (365) calendar days unless an extension to that
time frame is granted by the city. Up to two (2) one-year extensions may be granted. (Complaints regarding the operation of the use from
neighbors shall serve as grounds to deny requests for extensions.)
c. Land Use Regulations Governing Use And Operation Thereof:
(1) Shall only be those mobile units designated as "commercial coaches" which bear the label of the state of Idaho division of public safety. This
label shall designate the unit's approval number, occupancy group classification and construction type as specified in the international building
code (IBC); and
(2) Shall only be placed on a property for which a building permit has been issued against the same and an erosion control permit approved and
issued against/on the same property; and
(3) Shall only be accessed by employees, potential employees, customers, contractors, subcontractors, inspectors, builders, or developers
working directly with/on construction of site improvements being made on the property whereon the job, hiring and contractor trailer/shack is
placed. (Ord. 4010, 3-19-2012)
6. Subdivision Homes Sales Offices As Temporary Uses: Sales offices shall be either commercial ADA accessible coaches/trailers, or, homes
converted wholly or in part of office use. Homes so utilized shall maintain their original appearance and shall be converted back into sellable
residences when no longer in use as sales office space.
a. Locations Allowed:
(1) Shall only be located on a lot or lots in a residential subdivision to which they appertain assuming that said subdivision's covenants, conditions
and restrictions (CC&Rs) do not disallow them.
b. Duration And Hourly Time Limits:
(1) Shall be operated from/in a (future) house intended to be used for a period of one year or less unless an extension is granted by the director or
his/her designee based on current market conditions. Up to two (2) one-year extensions may be granted.
c. Land Use Regulations Governing Use And Operation Thereof:
(1) Shall be exclusive to the subdivision within which they are located, excepting however in those instances where the broker, contractor and
developer are the same company. They may, in such instances, serve as a temporary office for the broker/contractor/developer (but still must be
removed/converted back into a home when the subdivision is finished); and
(2) Shall serve for execution of real estate business only and not for other commercial or retail transactions or uses including builders' or
contractors' offices save in instances referenced in subsection A6a(1) of this section; and
(3) Shall provide/have two (2) legal on site parking spaces; and
(4) Shall, in addition to the signage allowances prescribed by this section, be entitled to have one freestanding sign no larger than thirty two (32)
square feet in area; and
(5) Shall not have outdoor display or storage of building materials or fixtures unless the same is intended to allow for equipment and material that
are ancillary to the development under construction (which may be 1 building lot/parcel up through a multiphased development with various lots
encompassed therein). In such cases where storage is present, then it shall not be allowed in front of the sales office or trailer relative to the
street and shall be otherwise screened from view of the street and shall not be composed of garbage, refuse, junk or salvaged materials. (Ord.
3960, 4-4-2011)
7. Fruit/Vegetable Vehicle Sales Or Stands As Temporary Uses:
a. Locations Allowed: Fruit/vegetable stands/tents are and shall be prohibited from locating on properties not commercially zoned, zoned residential
professional, and/or in any of the following locations: (Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
(1) In any location whereat the city has reasonable grounds to believe that establishment and/or operation of the proposed temporary use would
violate covenants, conditions and restrictions of any local subdivision, neighborhood or planned unit development community that has
jurisdiction over the area wherein the temporary use permit is proposed to be exercised.
b. Duration And Hourly Time Limits: Shall be allowed for a maximum duration of ninety two (92) days on any given lot/parcel.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 236/410
c. Land Use Regulations Governing Use And Operation Thereof:
(1) An eligible lot/parcel may only host one fruit/vegetable stand one time per, and in, any given calendar year. (This does not and shall not prevent
a lot/parcel from being host to an approved seasonal temporary use in accordance with the regulations/allowances established in this section for
such types of temporary uses.)
8. Temporary Outdoor Amusements: Such temporary uses include, but are not limited to, circuses, carnivals, petting zoos and similar amusements:
a. Locations Allowed: Outdoor amusements are and shall be prohibited from locating on properties not zoned IL, AG, BC, DB, DV or DH and/or in
any of the following locations:
(1) In any location whereat the city has reasonable grounds to believe that establishment and/or operation of the proposed temporary use would
violate covenants, conditions and restrictions of any local subdivision, neighborhood or planned unit development community that has
jurisdiction over the area wherein the temporary use permit is proposed to be exercised.
b. Duration And Hourly Time Limits: Temporary outdoor amusements shall be allowed for a period not exceeding fourteen (14) days unless
Christmas or Thanksgiving or Independence Day season related and advertised, in which case they may occupy a lot/parcel for up to ninety (90)
days if approved by the director or his/her designee;
c. Land Use Regulations Governing Use And Operation Thereof:
(1) Such facilities, if proposing to use a commercial power source or Idaho Power lines shall require electrical permits from the city as appropriate;
and
(2) In the event that such uses are proposed to be operated from property that lacks cement or asphalt surfacing for the parking of vehicles by
persons working at, using or attending the amusement, then the owner of the property or of the amusement shall be required to provide dust
control to the satisfaction of the city prior to the use commencing operation; and
(3) No parking areas, booths, rides, corrals or other structures shall be placed in a clear vision triangle, required setback area, over an easement
or in public right of way nor positioned so as to cover or block required ADA accessible parking spaces or their loading/unloading areas, or so as
to interfere with fire lanes or access to fire hydrants; and
(4) Signage for such facilities shall be limited to two (2) portable signs (1 per street frontage), no larger than thirty two (32) square feet each
frontage adjacent to the use's position on a property and to that signage attached or painted on rides, corrals, booths or other accessory
structures which are already an integral part of the amusement facility(ies)/fixtures; and
(5) Lighting for outdoor seasonal sales shall be oriented so as to not illuminate nearby residential areas where at all possible.
9. Storage/Overflow Containers (Including, But Not Limited To, Pods, Intermodal Containers, Trailer Boxes, Cvans/Milvans, And Large Containers Of
Like Type/Form/Construction/Material(s)/Function) As Temporary Uses:
a. Locations Allowed:
(1) Shall not be located in "front" (as defined by this title) of a/the principal structure(s) on the property on which the storage/overflow containers
are emplaced unless it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director or his/her designee that there is no other suitable location on the
property to temporarily position the container or the container is being used in conjunction with moving into or out of a dwelling unit (see
subsection A9b(1) of this section); and
(2) Shall not be allowed to be placed on any paved street unless: parking is allowed along that street already by code, and the container projects
from the closest curb line of the street no farther than nine feet (9') into the street, and the container is properly identified with reflectors and/or
other safety device; and a general right of way permit is first applied for and approved by the city engineering division; and
(3) Shall not be located over or blocking a city sidewalk; and
(4) Shall not be positioned so as to be in or blocking an alley or on or blocking a service/common/shared drive.
b. Duration And Hourly Time Limits:
(1) Storage/overflow containers when used in conjunction with moving into or out of a permanent structure (e.g., a house), shall be limited to being
used on or adjoining a site for seven (7) days. No temporary use permit fee shall be required for containers used in this fashion;
(2) Storage/overflow containers when used for/in a residentially used property shall be limited to providing emergency storage for thirty (30) days
one time in a calendar year;
(3) Storage/overflow containers, when used as a temporary storage/overflow container for/in a commercially or industrially used property (e.g.,
when used by a store to keep extra merchandise during a national holiday), shall be kept at the site for no more than thirty (30) days at a time,
two (2) times per calendar year;
(4) Storage/overflow containers, when proposed for more than thirty (30) consecutive days on any nonresidential lot/parcel, shall require approval
via a building permit. (This requirement shall not pertain to those lawfully approved businesses that keep/maintain containers on their
property(ies) for the purpose of renting, selling, transferring, or shipping the container(s) as the principal/primary function of their business.)
c. Land Use Regulations Governing Use And Operation Thereof:
(1) Storage/overflow containers shall not cover "code required" parking spaces/stalls including and especially ADA accessible parking spaces or
their associated loading/unloading areas; and
(2) Storage/overflow containers shall not be allowed in required setback/yard areas as established by the land use zone in which they are located
or proposed to be located; and
(3) Storage/overflow containers shall not be placed in or over any established/recorded easements; and
(4) Storage/overflow containers shall not be stacked one on top of another; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 237/410
(5) Storage/overflow containers shall not be used as welding, vehicle body repair, customization or paint shops/facilities/booths (or, in any event,
for conducting of those activities); and
(6) Storage/overflow containers, when intended to be made into permanent facilities, shall be screened from public view via a sight/site obscuring
fence placed around the entire perimeter of the container(s). Such screening shall receive design approval from the director or his/her designee
prior to being installed; and
(7) Storage/overflow containers, when intended to be made into permanent facilities, shall comply with all city building department requirements
pertaining to them; and
(8) Storage/overflow containers shall not have commercial advertising signs affixed/attached to them or painted on them notwithstanding signage
allowances stated in this section or in chapter 23 of this title. Storage/overflow containers shall not be used as a sign or equivalent advertising
device. This regulation shall not apply to plaques or painted signs that only advertise the storage/overflow container's owner; and
(9) Storage/overflow containers shall not be allowed to be used as accessory structures on any residentially zoned lot/parcel.
10. Concrete Batch Plant, Asphalt Plant, Stone Crushing And/Or Processing Operations As Temporary Uses: Temporary batch plants and material
processing operations located on site for approved construction projects may be allowed with a temporary use permit as follows:
a. Locations Allowed:
(1) Concrete batch plant, asphalt plant, stone crushing and/or processing are and shall be prohibited from locating on properties not zoned BC, BF,
IH, IL or AG.
(2) Such uses may not be allowed within one-fourth (1/4) mile of a residentially platted subdivision; whether city or county.
b. Duration And Hourly Time Limits: Such facilities shall be permitted only for the period of construction activity for the singular project for which they
were intended to supply material except, in no case, shall they be allowed to remain on a property longer than two hundred seventy (270) days.
Only by issuance of an extension by the planning and zoning commission may they remain longer. The commission may approve up to an
additional one hundred eighty (180) day extension.
c. Land Use Regulations Governing Use And Operation Thereof:
(1) Prior to the establishment of the use, photos of the site shall be submitted in conjunction with application for a temporary use permit; and
(2) Primary routing to/from as well as ingress/egress to/from the site shall be over/along/from a collector or arterial roadway unless deemed by the
director or his/her designee to be unreasonable because of site location, access constraints including topography, or interference with safe traffic
flow to/from the streets from off the nearest collector or arterial roadways; and
(3) Such facilities shall only be allowed in association with a construction project which itself is located, or to be located, in the city of Nampa. Upon
completion of construction activity(ies) related to any particular facility, the concrete batch plant, asphalt plant, stone crushing and/or processing
operation shall be terminated and the site whereon it operated shall be restored to a city acceptable degree of predevelopment condition; and
(4) Prevention of any dust, fumes, vapors, mists or gas nuisances due to operations shall be maintained at all times in accordance with established
city and EPA nuisance control and abatement standards.
11. Temporary Residences As Temporary Uses:
a. Locations Allowed:
(1) Temporary residences used as pre-"move on" homes shall be allowed on legal building lots/parcels located in zones wherein a single-family
house is allowed by right according to section 10-3-2 of this title; and
(2) Temporary residences used for the care and keeping of an immediate family member for healthcare/caregiving purposes shall be allowed on
legal building lots/parcels located in zones wherein a single-family house is allowed by right according to section 10-3-2 of this title; and
(3) Use of a temporary residence for other than the above two (2) stated purposes shall not be allowed.
b. Duration And Hourly Time Limits:
(1) Temporary residences used as pre-"move on" homes shall be allowed for a maximum period of three hundred sixty five (365) calendar days
from the date of approval. One 180-day extension may be sought and approved for such uses.
(2) Temporary residences used for/as caregiving domiciles shall be removed once the family member being cared for either moves out or passes
away.
c. Land Use Regulations Governing Use And Operation Thereof:
(1) Emplacement: In placing any temporary residence, required setbacks shall be complied with, height regulations of the zone wherein the
structure is intended to be placed shall be complied with, minimum structure separation and adequate fire protection shall be maintained, any
utility service provided shall require installation or hookup approval in accordance with city adopted codes.
(2) Temporary Residences:
(A) Type Of Structure(s) Allowed: Temporary residences shall either be a mobile or manufactured home structure. It shall be illegal to use any
form of mobile vehicle (e.g., RVs or buses) as, or for, a temporary residence; and
(B) Permit Required: Temporary residences used for/as caregiving domiciles shall also require a conditional use permit to commence operating;
and
(C) Separate Address Prohibited: Temporary residences used for/as caregiving domiciles shall not have separate addresses; and
(D) Parking Spaces: Temporary residences used for/as caregiving domiciles may have two (2) additional paved parking spaces provided that
said spaces are legally placed, be allowed provided that any right of way permit application required for new or modified site access is submitted
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 238/410
and then approved by the city and any necessary right of way permit is also obtained from the city engineering division (in the case of work done
to curb, drive approaches, sidewalks, etc.); and
(E) Additional Requirements: Any conditional use permit issued for temporary caregiving residences shall require recording by the city of a
document denoting the requirement that the caregiving unit be removed from the property for which it was approved once the family member
residing therein moves or passes away.
12. Temporary Animal Pens, Kennels, Enclosures, Runs, Etc.:
a. Locations Allowed: Temporary animal pens, kennels, enclosures, runs, etc., shall be allowed in residential (R) zones wherever detached
accessory structures are allowed by right according to section 10-3-2 of this title or on property zoned AG.
b. Duration And Hourly Time Limits: Not applicable.
c. Land Use Regulations Governing Use And Operation Thereof: Temporary animal pens, kennels, runs, etc., shall be allowed and be treated as
accessory structures as far as required setbacks, maximum sizes and maximum heights allowable are concerned excepting that no such structure
shall be maintained closer than forty feet (40') to any apartment house, condominium, hotel, restaurant, boarding house, retail food store, or
building used for school, worship or hospital services, or other similar use determined by the director or his/her designee. (Subsections 10-1-8C1
through C5 of this chapter contain regulations regarding electric or barbed wire fencing solely used to contain animals.)
13. Temporary Placement Of RVs And Similar Vehicles:
a. Locations Allowed: Placement of RVs in mobile home parks as a substitute for a mobile or manufactured home is and shall be prohibited.
14. Drop Off Recycling Collection Containers And/Or Sites: (The containers herein noted are those types which are equivalent in nature and size to
regular trash dumpster and not the small recycling boxes left or collected curbside.)
a. Locations Allowed: Temporary recycling containers are and shall not be allowed to be placed or parked in a required vision triangle, in or blocking
an area of a service drive required to permit legal ingress into or egress from a lot/parcel, over or blocking an ADA parking space, over or blocking
a public sidewalk, blocking access to a trash dumpster, too close to a fire hydrant, adjacent a section of curb painted and designated as reserved
for fire department use, in a position to obscure a city traffic regulation sign, in or overhanging a public right of way, or in or overhanging a public
easement. Any violations of the foregoing prohibition(s) are and shall be deemed illegal.
b. Duration And Hourly Time Limits: Not applicable.
c. Land Use Regulations Governing Use And Operation Thereof:
(1) Containers shall be kept in a good state of repair; and
(2) Containers shall be emptied on a regular basis to prevent overflow; and
(3) Containers shall be clearly marked/labeled as to the materials therein able to be deposited. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
15. Temporary Gravel Parking Lots:
a. Locations Allowed: Shall be allowed in AG, BC, IL, IH Zones only, with staff approval, but shall only be allowed in other zones with pre-approval by
the City Council. (Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
b. Duration And Hourly Time Limits: Shall be allowed on a property for a period not to exceed three hundred sixty five (365) consecutive calendar
days.
c. Land Use Regulations Governing Use And Operation Thereof:
(1) In addition to the submittal requirements associated with application for a temporary use permit, the following additional issues shall be
addressed in a written narrative to be provided at time of application:
(A) Shall be provided with wheel stops/bumper blocks at the head end of any automobile parking spaces; and
(B) Shall provide for any required ADA parking space and loading/unloading area to be paved (either asphalt or concrete) as well as provide a
paved access route to link the ADA space's loading/unloading area to a building's main entrance and/or the public right-of-way; and
(C) Shall comply with regulations/standards in subsection 10-22-5D of this title.
16. Coffee/Snow Cone/Smoothie Shacks And Similar Facilities:
a. Locations Allowed: Coffee/snow cone/smoothie shacks and similar facilities are and shall be prohibited from locating on properties not
commercially or industrially zoned and/or in any of the following locations:
(1) In any location whereat the City has reasonable grounds to believe that establishment and/or operation of the proposed temporary use would
violate covenants, conditions and restrictions of any local subdivision, neighborhood or planned unit development community that has
jurisdiction over the area wherein the temporary use permit is proposed to be located.
b. Duration And Hourly Time Limits: Coffee/snow cone/smoothie shacks and similar facilities approved hours of operation shall be as follows:
(1) Coffee/snow cone/smoothie shacks and similar facilities shall be allowed to remain a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) days in any
calendar year on any given lot/parcel; and
(2) Coffee/snow cone/smoothie shacks and similar facilities shall only operate between daytime business hours (6:01 A.M. to 11:59 P.M.); and
(3) Coffee/snow cone/smoothie shacks and similar facilities, as defined by this title, shall not be used as permanent (or effectually permanent)
diners, eateries, restaurants, etc., in any location in the City unless site improvements are emplaced around and pertinent to the same
equivalent to what other permanent uses in the City establish when newly built or "redeveloped" as regulated in section 10-1-6 of this chapter. It
shall be illegal to do otherwise; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 239/410
(4) Coffee/snow cone/smoothie shacks and similar facilities shall obtain a temporary use permit in order to lawfully sell food or other consumable
commodities within the City.
c. Land Use Regulations Governing Use And Operation Thereof:
(1) Coffee/snow cone/smoothie shacks and similar facilities are and shall not be allowed to be placed in a required vision triangle, in or blocking an
area of a service drive required to permit legal ingress into or egress from a lot/parcel, over or blocking an ADA parking space, over or blocking
a public sidewalk, blocking access to a trash dumpster, too close to a fire hydrant, adjacent a section of curb painted and designated as
reserved for Fire Department use, in a position to obscure a City traffic regulation sign, in or overhanging a public right-of-way, or in or
overhanging a public easement; and
(2) Coffee/snow cone/smoothie shacks and similar facilities are required to have a temporary use permit in order to lawfully operate within the city
of Nampa. (Refer to subsection A2b(3) of this section.)
17. Service Oriented Businesses Or Service Based Extensions Of Permanent Businesses (e.g., Emissions Testing Vehicles, Windshield Repair Tents,
For Profit Car Washes, Light Vehicle Repair Or Inspection Uses, Etc.) (To be considered a service based temporary use, the nature of the use must
be evaluated. A good example of a service based use would be one in which more than 50 percent of the transactions thereof must be noncash
based by being insurance based):
a. Locations Allowed: Service businesses or service based extensions of permanent businesses are and shall be prohibited from locating on
properties not commercially zoned and/or in any of the following locations:
(1) In any location whereat the city has reasonable grounds to believe that establishment and/or operation of the proposed temporary use would
violate covenants, conditions and restrictions of any local subdivision, neighborhood or planned unit development community that has
jurisdiction over the area wherein the temporary use permit is proposed to be exercised.
b. Duration, Frequency And Hourly Time Limits: Time allotted to/for a temporary service business or service based extension of a permanent
business' operation(s) shall be as follows:
(1) Shall not be allowed to locate on any given lot or parcel for longer than ninety (90) calendar days in any given calendar year; and
(2) Shall only operate between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight from an approved location; and
(3) An eligible lot/parcel may only host one service oriented temporary business one time per, and in, any given calendar year. (This does not and
shall not prevent a lot/parcel from being host to an approved seasonal temporary use in accordance with the regulations/allowances established
in this section for such types of temporary uses.)
c. Land Use Regulations Governing Use And Operation Thereof:
(1) No more than one service business or service based extension of a permanent business use may or shall be established/allowed and operated
from any given eligible lot/parcel at a time. It shall be illegal for more than one service business or service based extension of a permanent
business to locate on an eligible lot/parcel at the same time; and
(2) Placement of a structure(s), merchandise, and/or vehicles related to/part of a service business or service based extension of a permanent
business use or operation, within a required setback shall be prohibited unless specifically approved in writing by the director or his/her designee
on a case by case basis where no peril to health, safety or public welfare is foreseen or expected in connection with allowing setback intrusion;
and
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing, no structure(s), merchandise, or vehicle(s) related to/part of a service business or service based extension of a
permanent business use or operation shall be allowed to be placed or parked in a required vision triangle, in or blocking an area of a service
drive required to permit legal ingress into or egress from a lot/parcel, over or blocking an ADA parking space, over or blocking a public sidewalk,
blocking access to a trash dumpster, too close to a fire hydrant, adjacent a section of curb painted and designated as reserved for fire
department use, in a position to obscure a city traffic regulation sign, in or overhanging a public right of way, or in or overhanging a public
easement. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
B. Additional General Regulations Pertaining To Temporary Uses And/Or Their Establishment Or Operation: These regulations are in addition to (as
applicable) and not in lieu of those specific standards in subsection A of this section.
1. Food/Beverage Sales:
a. From A Temporary Structure: When conducted from a temporary structure, food preparation shall not entail any cooking process and/or equipment
that generate(s) grease laden vapors unless the Nampa fire department certifies that the proposed cooking "setup" meets applicable requirements
of the most current edition of the National Fire Protection Association regulations they enforce. "Grease laden vapors" are vapors containing
rendered animal fat, vegetable shortening, and other such oily matter used for the purposes of and resulting from cooking and/or preparing foods.
b. Vehicles: As already previously stated, vehicles, as defined by this title, shall not be used as permanent (or effectually permanent) diners, eateries,
restaurants, etc., in any location in the city.
c. Outdoor Eateries: Temporary outdoor eateries, unless used as an extension of a permanent restaurant (i.e., outdoor patio seating) or a fair,
carnival, advertised sales promotions by permanent businesses and/or recognized civic event, shall not be allowed. Outdoor eateries are
considered to be any business using seating, tables or some kind and/or some form of shelter (e.g., umbrellas, tents, canopy) to provide a place to
eat outside. Drive-throughs associated with such businesses shall also be prohibited whether arranged on site or created by serving food to
vehicles traveling along or pulling off of a street.
2. Hard Surface For A Base: Temporary uses shall be placed on a noncombustible surface (i.e., only gravel, concrete or asphalt) and must be at least
twenty five feet (25') away from combustible materials (e.g., weeds patches, board fences and permanent structures).
3. Property Owner's Permission: Written permission of the property owner(s) of a lot/parcel whereon a temporary use is proposed to be established and
operated shall be required to be submitted to the city in conjunction with any application for a temporary use permit in order for the city to entertain
approving such a permit request.
4. Accessibility: Temporary uses shall provide adequate accessibility as required by ADA standards.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 240/410
5. Sanitary Facilities: In those cases where sanitary facilities are not provided within a structure being used in conjunction with a temporary use, the
applicant for a temporary use permit shall provide written evidence of an agreement between the proprietor/operator of the temporary use and the
owner or property landlord of the lot/parcel whereon the temporary use is proposed to be located at the time of application for a temporary use permit
that access to sanitary facilities will be made available to persons working in/at the temporary use via those facilities on site in a primary
structure/use already located on the same site.
6. Number Allowed; Exception: No more than one temporary use shall be allowed/located on a property at a time unless one of the uses is a seasonal
use or mobile food vendor use, in which case two (2) temporary uses may co-share a property for a limited time as defined in this section.
7. Temporary Uses As Principal Or Permanent Uses: No temporary use shall be allowed to occupy a vacant lot/parcel by itself (thus becoming,
effectually, the primary/principal use of that property). No temporary use shall be allowed to remain established on or operate from a lot/parcel longer
than the time periods allotted to said use by this section or by the terms and conditions of a temporary use permit issued to that use and its
proprietor, whichever is more restrictive.
a. Structures under one hundred twenty (120) square feet used in conjunction with a temporary use (e.g., for sale of food/beverage products
including, but not limited to, coffee shacks, smoothie shacks, snow cone shacks, etc.) shall be allowed to become permanent provided that they:
(1) Are an accessory structure to another principal structure on site; and
(2) A zoning certificate and a site design permit (if a drive-through is proposed, or, if the site area whereon the structure and its requisite parking
are intended to be placed is not already paved) are applied for and granted by the city. Thus, in order to sanction their permanent
establishment/emplacement a requisite paved parking and service drive area (in accordance with requirements found in chapter 22 of this title)
must be provided to/for them (i.e., their employees and clientele).
Such uses not intended to be increased to over one hundred twenty (120) square feet and whose proprietors do not intend to make permanent,
shall be removed after one hundred eighty (180) days of being emplaced on a property. Another temporary use permit to allow more than one
hundred eighty (180) days in the same calendar year shall not be allowed/granted.
b. Tent type structures shall:
(1) Be able to resist wind up to seventy five (75) miles per hour; and
(2) Be a wire supported suspension; and
(3) Be water resistant; and
(4) Be made out of quality and sturdy materials (e.g., 2 inch anodized aluminum, frame with galvanized connectors, 22 inch x 2 foot round concrete
feet at 200 pounds each); and
(5) Shall respect clear vision triangles and setbacks (as any other temporary use must also do).
C. Regulation(s) Exceptions Allowances: The provisions of this section shall not apply to temporary uses including:
1. Any sales conducted under special court order;
2. Traveling salespersons, commercial travelers or the like who exclusively or primarily sell to or solicit orders for delivery, from local retailers, local
businesses, local governments, local schools, or local wholesale firms;
3. The sale of farm or garden products at a farmers' market event or the operation of a farmers' market itself;
4. The sale of newspaper subscription in which the seller is a person engaged in both the delivery and sale of the newspaper;
5. The occasional sale of admission by local school students to a function of their school or fundraising sales by local service groups or clubs such as
Elks, Kiwanis, Lions, Rotary or Boy or Girl Scouts;
6. Any political group seeking funds or membership, conducting a political rally or election activity;
7. Garage, yard or similar sales lawfully conducted by individuals at their residence or place of business (such sales are regulated in part by this code);
8. Private community center events. Such shall include craft and art shows, meetings, exhibitions and similar events;
9. Any activity conducted as a "special event" as sponsored and so identified by the city of Nampa;
10. Curbside lemonade stand(s) operated by persons under the age of eighteen (18) years in front of their own residence using a few chairs, a table
and supplies;
11. Charitable/benefit car wash(es), bake and rummage sales, onetime annual events on a single lot/parcel for no longer than seven (7) days' duration
from said person as conducted only by churches, recognized 501(c)(3) nonprofit organizations, service clubs, schools or ancillaries thereto for the
purpose of fundraising;
12. Idaho Youth Games;
13. Events conducted at the parks of the city or at the Idaho Center including equestrian events and concerts;
14. God And Country Rally;
15. Weddings and funeral ceremonies conducted at churches, cemeteries, private facilities and residences;
16. On premises sales of garden produce;
17. Any uses similar to the aforelisted as approved/exempted by the director or his/her designee not to include those uses listed in subsection A of this
section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 241/410
D. Director Or Designee Discretion In Imposing Additional Approval Conditions Or Classifying A Proposed Temporary Use Not Identified Herein As Similar
To Another Temporary Use Identified Herein And Regulating The Same: Where discretion is exercised by the director or his/her designee to determine
whether a given proposed temporary use operation should be treated/regulated as equivalent to one of the types specifically recognized and
categorized by this title, no allowance shall be made for the establishment or operation of such uses from properties within the city which, in order to be
operated permanently from the same site, would be required to first obtain a conditional use permit from the city's planning and zoning commission.
(Ord. 4050, 2-19-2013)
E. Temporary Use Permit Submittal Requirements And Review/Issuance Procedures: Temporary use permits shall be the form and permit used by the city
to receive information, requisite fees, and permissions suitable to review and approve, approve with conditions or deny requests by transient merchants
and/or mobile food vendors as well as all other temporary use permits as defined, categorized and regulated by this title. Application requests for
information, application procedures and submittal requirements shall be as set forth on a form to be provided by the director or his/her designee and
made available at the city and may include a requested copy of a temporary use vendor's sales tax exemption number or certificate to verify legitimacy.
F. Fees And Refunds:
1. Fee: Temporary use permits shall have a fee which shall be established by resolution of the city council. The fee may be adjusted by the council from
time to time as circumstances warrant.
2. Refunds: No refund of a fee paid for in conjunction with submittal of an application for a temporary use permit shall be given once paid.
3. Exceptions: Payment of the application fee shall be waived when the petitioner is the city, county, state (including state sponsored institutions of
higher learning) or federal government. All other agencies, organizations and entities shall be required to pay all required fees unless such fees are
waived by the city council.
G. Sign And Advertising Regulations For Temporary Uses:
1. All temporary uses wherein a structure is used in conjunction with, or as the base of, the use (except for seasonal fireworks stands and outdoor
amusements) shall be limited to having no more than three (3), nonilluminated, wall signs on the structure (either painted or cabinet style) no larger
than four feet by four feet (4' x 4') each in area or dimension. Only one such wall sign per wall of the structure shall be allowed. As exceptions, off site
vehicle sales and seasonal temporary uses may use signage in accordance with subsection 10-23-18Q of this title plus up to two (2) banners.
2. Temporary window signs may be used in temporary structures in accordance with subsection 10-23-7H of this title.
3. No freestanding, portable or temporary signs shall be used in conjunction with a temporary use except as allowed for "off site sales", for merchants
not using a vehicle or structure in association with their temporary use (because they only use tables, rug racks, etc.) and model home sales offices
as herein explained.
4. Banners, streamers, flags and pennants shall not be allowed in conjunction with operation of a temporary use as prohibited by subsection 10-23-8E
of this title.
5. Mobile food vendors shall only be allowed advertising on their vehicles (i.e., no movable [portable] signs shall be used/displayed in conjunction with
their operation).
H. Appeals Of Temporary Use Permit Approvals, Conditions Or Denials: The act of a requested temporary use permit having been approved, denied or
assigned conditions by the planning and zoning department may be appealed. If a permit was reviewed by a staff member, then appeal to the director
may be made and if the director handled the permit, appeal to the planning and zoning commission may be made regarding the approval, approval
conditions or denial of the permit. Appeals shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the director with an accompanying fee as set by resolution of the
council within ten (10) calendar days of the date of a decision on the permit in question in order to be valid and acceptable. Appeals shall be handled
as routine business matters.
I. Revocation Of Temporary Use Permits: The following regulations shall govern the rescinding of temporary use permits issued by the city:
1. Temporary use permits granted in accordance with the provisions of this section may be revoked if any of the conditions or terms of the permit are
violated or if any law or ordinance is violated in connection with the establishment/setup or operation of the temporary use;
2. Any temporary use permit issued by the director or his/her designee shall be considered null and void if the setup, operation and/or activity of the
use does not conform to the approved site plan layout or plan of operation(s). Any major deviations requested from the originally approved site plan
or plan of operations shall require application for a new temporary use permit. Minor changes may be approved in the planning and zoning
department office or "in the field".
J. Enforcement:
1. Violations: Violations of the temporary use code found in this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor and punishable as such in accordance with
section 1-1-7 of this code;
2. Exemption/Abrogation: Imposition of and compliance to the regulations set forth in this section does not excuse, exempt or otherwise abrogate a
person or party responsible for a temporary use from satisfying all applicable requirements (e.g., peddler's permit, building permit, fire department
approval, etc.) of other city departments or other agencies who might be involved in the review of a temporary use permit;
3. Failure To Clean Site: Temporary uses that do not clean up the premises (including the removal of any temporary use related structure) whereon
they were permitted to operate after cessation of their respective temporary use may be fined, be subject to abatement, and/or have further issuance
of temporary use permits suspended by either the planning and zoning or fire departments in addition to being subject to fines and legal enforcement
actions as noted hereafter;
4. Compliance Notice And Enforcement:
a. Upon finding that a temporary use proprietor or operator is in violation of the regulations of this section or of the zoning ordinance, the director or
his/her designee may declare the use illegal and in violation of zoning codes. The director may then instruct the owner or operator of the use to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 242/410
immediately remove it from the premises on which it is then established by giving a written demand/directive to vacate the premises. Alternatively
or in addition thereto, the director or his/her designee may request that the city's code enforcement division notify and remove the offending
temporary use via their normal or emergency abatement process(es) (in accordance with section 3-4-2 of this code, or the uniform abatement for
dangerous buildings code) as the situation warrants;
b. In the event that enforcement proceedings are initially handled by staff members of the planning and zoning department and all reasonable
attempts by said staff to remove a violator from a lot/parcel fail, then staff shall inform the appropriate code enforcement officer of the violation(s)
committed by the violator for purposes of pursuing prosecution;
5. Removal Of Unlawful Use(s): Any temporary use found in violation of this section may be abated, impounded and sold or otherwise disposed of by
the city or its lawful agents as follows:
a. Impoundment And Expense: Any unlawful temporary use which has not been removed following expiration of the notice to comply period, may be
impounded at the request of the planning director or his/her designee, and the costs of removal and storage shall constitute a lien in favor of the
city upon and against such temporary use structure, or the city may levy a special assessment of the premises whereon the temporary use was
located to defray cost or to reimburse the city for the cost of abating the same. The city has the authority to employ such labor as necessary to
carry out the provisions of this chapter and allow the bills therefor. Neither the city nor its agents shall be liable for any structure damage at the
time of removal or storage. If removal or storage costs have not been paid and the structure reclaimed within thirty (30) days of its removal by the
city, the city may proceed to sell or otherwise dispose of the temporary use in accordance with subsection J5c of this section.
b. Proof Of Ownership: Any person claiming ownership of any impounded temporary use structure shall furnish proof of ownership. The applicant
listed on the temporary use permit application shall be presumed to be the owner of the temporary use structure thereon, unless otherwise brought
to the attention of the planning director. The structure shall be released to the owner upon payment of all the costs assessed against the structure.
c. Sale Or Disposal Of Impounded Temporary Use Structure: All temporary use structures which are not reclaimed shall be subjected to sale to the
highest bidder for cash in the manner provided in subsection J5d of this section. Any proceeds in excess of removal and storage costs shall be
paid to the owner. In the event there are no purchasers for the sale of such structure, the city may discard such signs in any way deemed
convenient.
d. Notice Of Sale Or Disposal: Whenever any temporary use structure shall be sold hereunder, written notice shall be given to the owner as well as
notice in one issue of the official newspaper five (5) days prior to the date of sale. The notice shall state that a sale of such structure will be had
giving the time and place of such sale, that all bids shall be for cash to the highest bidder and that the city reserves the right to reject any or all
bids. Upon payment of the bid prices, the City shall execute and deliver a bill of sale to the purchaser of such structure. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
10-1-13: RESERVED:
(Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
10-1-14: STREET WIDTHS:
A. Purpose: The establishment of planned street widths and building setback lines is necessary in order to ensure that there will be adequate amounts of
light and air, to provide adequate visibility when entering or leaving the streets, to provide a proper setting for buildings away from the noise and fumes
of traffic, to promote safety, to reduce congestion and to provide space for landscaping, both now and in the future when all streets and highways have
been widened to their ultimate width.
B. Procedure: The Council, after holding a public hearing on a proposal to establish the width of any street or group of streets, may establish street widths
and such width determination shall be used in calculating the required yards and building setback lines set forth in this chapter.
When a front or side yard is required for a building abutting on a street to be widened or constructed, as designated by the Council, the depth of such
front or side yard shall be measured from the planned street line, and no structure or building or any portion thereof shall be erected within the building
setback lines. (Ord. 2210; amd. Ord. 2218)
10-1-15: ANNEXATION APPLICATION; FILING OF; FEE:
Prior to consideration of any petition or request for annexation into the City, an application for annexation must be filed with the Office of the Planning
Director. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount established by Council resolution and which is nonrefundable. The application
shall be furnished by the City1. (Ord. 2210; amd. Ord. 2218)
10-1-16: CALDWELL BOULEVARD SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
No permanent buildings or structures, except for signs or advertising structures or permanent improvements of any type, shall be placed within sixty four
feet (64') either way and perpendicular from the centerline of Caldwell Boulevard, also being designated as U.S. 30, as said road lies in the City limit
boundary of said public road. No permanent signs or advertising structures shall be placed within any easement, right-of-way, or projected future rights-ofway
of said public roadway. Projected future rights-of-way shall be determined by the City Engineer. (Ord. 2210; amd. Ord. 2218)
10-1-17: FEES:
All fees corresponding to items in this title are established by recommendation of the commission and adopted by resolution of the Council, and such fees
are nonrefundable unless approved otherwise by the Planning Director. (Ord. 2210; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-1-18: FIGURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 243/410
FIGURE 1 - MINIMUM PARKING LOT REQUIREMENTS
Nampa, Idaho
FIGURE 2 - BASEMENT/CELLAR
BASEMENT: When "A" is more than "B"
CELLAR: When "A" is equal to or less than "B"
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 244/410
FIGURE 3 - GRADE
GRADE: Average of elevations of finished ground levels at points A, B, C, & D. Grade in this example is 12.75'.
OR
FIGURE 4 - LOT COVERAGE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 245/410
FIGURE 5 - LOT LINES, DEPTH AND WIDTH
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 246/410
FIGURE 6 - LOT TYPES
(Ord. 2210)
FIGURE 7 - VISION CLEARANCE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 247/410
*Vision Clearance.
In districts where front yards are required vision clearance dimension (A) is 40' for corner lots and 7.5' for lots at alley intersections. (Ord. 2210; amd. Ord.
3805, 7-21-2008)
FIGURE 8 - YARDS
FIGURE 9 - NORTHERN LOT LINE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 248/410
(Ord. 2210)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-1-19: PROFESSIONAL, PUBLIC MINI-STORAGE FACILITY DESIGN REGULATIONS:
The following site and building design standards shall be made to apply to any and all public self-/mini-storage facilities ("storage facility" or "project"
hereinafter) proposed to be newly constructed or otherwise developed or converted on or from open ground, an existing private storage facility or from
another use already on an RP or BN zoned property within the city of Nampa shall comply with the following regulations in order to be able to lawfully
operate:
A. Locations Allowed: All public storage facilities shall be constructed/located on a property that has direct access to/from a public street and also
abuts/fronts the same; although the service drive(s) in the storage facility may remain private; and shall not be farther than three hundred feet (300')
from a collector or arterial street in any event; and
B. Structure Appearance:
1. Any portions of a building wall visible from a public street and longer than one hundred feet (100') shall include facade changes such as bases,
fenestration, offsets, or wall plane jogs built into the same; and
2. External building materials shall be limited to masonry (e.g., brick, stone, quality concrete, quality concrete block), glazing, and EIFS systems. No
vinyl, metal, or wooden material shall be used except that overhead doors may be metal; and
3. Exterior finish materials used on/for buildings in a storage facility shall be nonreflective and shall include use of at least three (3) colors and three (3)
material textures or three (3) different materials in exterior wall composition; and
4. Shall on all buildings made a part of a facility feature a residential roof structure, minimum three to twelve (3:12) pitch. Any roof mounted vents (e.g.,
on the office building) shall be painted to match the color of the roof; and
5. Exterior paint colors shall be earth tone with no white, black or reflective/fluorescent coloring allowed; and
6. Storage facility offices shall, in addition, have at least twenty five percent (25%) glazing on their primary facade(s); and
7. Storage buildings shall be limited to ten feet (10') in height at the edge of eaves.
C. Project Design And Layout:
1. Service drives accessing and running between the units shall comply with standards adopted either by the Nampa fire department (as they also
serve as fire lanes) or by regulations found in chapter 22 of this title, whichever is more restrictive; and
2. All service drives and parking areas excepting for large recreational vehicle storage shall be paved. Parking areas exclusively designed for the
parking of recreational vehicles (including trailers, RVs, boats and motorcycle/4-wheeler/ATV vehicles on trailers, etc.) may be graveled and may be
covered with a carport structure not exceeding sixteen feet (16') in height; and
3. Buildings may be used as perimeter side and rear yard fencing when not adjoining a residentially zoned or used property. (In the case of the latter
circumstance, a sight/site obscuring fence at least 6 feet in height and not more than 8 feet shall be emplaced on the intervening property line
between the storage facility and residential neighbor in lieu of using the buildings as screening/fencing. Accordingly, the building(s) closest to that
property line shall comply with interior yard setback requirements pertinent to the zone within which the storage facility will be developed.); and
4. A storage facility project shall comply with front yard setback requirements pertinent to the zone within which the facility is proposed to be developed;
and
5. The office of/for a storage facility project, if constructed/emplaced, shall be located in front of (i.e., closer to the main street which the project fronts)
than the storage buildings of said project.
D. Lighting And Security:
1. All exterior structure lighting shall be shielded, screened, and/or shuttered from with ninety degree (90°) cutoff luminaries and shall be otherwise
directed so as to prevent illumination of adjoining properties, particularly when located adjoining or across the street from residentially used or zoned
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 249/410
properties; and
2. Pole lights shall be limited to two (2) light poles per one hundred feet (100') of service drive and shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height. Such
lights shall also use ninety degree (90°) cutoff luminaries ("downlighting"); and
3. Electrical feeds to outdoor light fixtures shall be placed underground not overhead; and
4. Floodlights shall not be allowed; and
5. Security cameras shall be allowed but only directed inwardly toward areas of the facility itself excepting for the main entrance area of the project
which may be monitored from the office or other location; and
6. Audible alarms shall be controlled in decibel level so as to not exceed industry standard(s).
E. Signage:
1. Storage facilities in the RP and BN zones shall be entitled to use of and governed by sign provisions pertinent to those zones. (Ord. 3959, 3-21-
2011)
10-1-20: APPREHENSION OF ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE:
Apprehension of animals, including livestock, running at large shall be made the duty of the animal control officer or any other peace officer of the city or
participating municipalities to take up and confine the same in an animal shelter or livestock yard. (See also chapter 21 of this title.) (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
10-1-21: RELOCATED RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS:
Move-on houses, manufactured houses more than five (5) years of age (based on date of proposed move), garages, may be relocated into or within the
city of Nampa under the following conditions:
A. Relocated structures shall be brought into substantial compliance with current building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and energy codes as adopted
by the city of Nampa.
B. Structures requesting consideration for relocation must be inspected by the building safety department prior to moving. The inspection shall be done in
accordance with the provisions of section 4-6-4, "Inspection", of this code. The inspection report outlining the required reparations to bring the move-on
structure into substantial compliance with applicable codes shall be issued and become a condition of the building permit.
C. The property owner shall provide a cashier's check (preferable) or a letter of credit (acceptable but less preferred) in and for the amount of the
estimated demolition cost for the relocated structure and restoration of the property. The owner/permittee may obtain an independent third party bid
from a legitimate demolition contractor for the required demolition and site restoration. In the absence of a qualified bid the building official shall
estimate the amount of demolition and restoration, and the owner/permittee shall provide a bond in an amount of one and one-half (11/2) times the
estimate. The bond shall be made payable to the city of Nampa and shall be exercised upon failure of the owner/permittee to complete the work
specified by the building permit conditions.
D. Upon expiration of a building permit to emplace a move-on structure or, after one year from the date of the building permit's issuance, whichever is
sooner, the city will demand that all required reparations be completed as originally conditioned by the building permit.
If the owner fails to complete the work as required the building official shall issue a notice and order as specified in city's adopted abatement code (the
uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, 1997 edition). This notice and order shall specify a time not to exceed sixty (60) days for the
owner/permittee to complete the work. Failure to then finish the work shall, upon following proper due process, cause the city to raze the building using
the bond to cover costs. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
10-1-22: STORAGE OF CERTAIN VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (WHETHER OR NOT IN
ASSOCIATION WITH HOME OCCUPATION OPERATIONS):
The storage of generic commercial vehicles and equipment shall not be permitted on any residentially zoned property(ies), except as follows: a) one such
vehicle under fifteen thousand (15,000) GVWR may be allowed on a residential property as allowed by subsection 10-1-10B4 of this chapter, or b) "generic
commercial vehicles" stored on a property during the period of actual construction of improvements (e.g., a building) on that same property. (All such
vehicles and equipment when involved with on site construction shall not in any case, however, be kept or stored for more than 1 year on that property.)
(Ord. 4190, 7-20-2015)
Chapter 2
ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
10-2-1: POWERS AND DUTIES OF ENFORCING OFFICERS:
It is the duty of the planning director, or his/her authorized designee, to enforce all provisions of this title1 and, generally, as determined requisite refer all
violations to the city attorney, entering actions in the courts when necessary, and his failure to do so shall not legalize any violation of such provisions, nor
shall the failure of the city attorney to enter actions legalize any violation of such provisions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 250/410
The planning director, and his/her duly authorized designee, shall have the right to enter upon any land during the daytime in the course of his duties, and,
if approached by the property owner or lessor shall show proper identification and give that individual notice as to the purpose of the visit. The director or
his/her designee may enter in any building upon being invited by an owner or tenant and may enter a structure closed to them by will of an owner or
occupant or through absence of the same upon obtaining an administrative search warrant. They may seek accompaniment, as may be approved by a
judge to have other enforcement agency representatives accompany them. (Ord. 3182, 12-9-2002)
10-2-2: APPLICATION AND PLANS REQUIRED:
Any person desiring to construct a building in the city shall first apply for a permit to the building official. All applications for building permits shall be
accompanied by a site plan showing the size and location of the existing buildings and buildings to be erected. Before a building permit is issued all
requirements of this title shall be met. (Ord. 3182, 12-9-2002)
10-2-3: AMENDMENTS TO ZONING ORDINANCE AND ZONING MAP (REZONES):
A. Amendments: This zoning ordinance, including the map, may be amended but all proposed amendments shall be submitted first to the planning and
zoning commission for its recommendations, which recommendations shall be submitted to the council for its consideration. (Ord. 3182, 12-9-2002)
B. Application: Any person seeking an amendment of the zoning ordinance's language and/or land use map shall submit to the planning director an
application form as prescribed by the city together with a requisite, nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the council, designating the
change(s) desired, the reasons therefor, and how they perceive that the proposed amendment(s) would benefit the city.
1. Transmittal And Advertisements Required: The planning director shall transmit notice and copies of the requested amendment(s) to the commission
and other agencies or parties as deemed appropriate. At least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the hearing, notice of the time and place of the
amendment to be discussed shall be published one time in the official newspaper of the city.
2. Additional Notice For Map Amendment Applications: Additionally, in the case of proposed map amendments, further notice shall be provided by mail
to property owners or purchasers of record both within the land area being considered and three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the
same; and as may be determined by the planning director any additional area believed impacted by the proposed change. Notice signs shall also be
posted on the premises not less than one week prior to the hearing.
3. Mass Notification Procedure: When and if notice is required to be given to two hundred (200) or more property owners or purchasers of record, an
alternative form of procedure of official notice of the public hearing for both the commission and council shall be exercised. In lieu of mailing
individual notices to all purchasers of record in the area under consideration and/or posting notice on each property being considered for
reclassification or within three hundred feet (300') of the same, additional public notice shall be provided by publishing notice of upcoming
consideration of the matter in the official, locally provided newspaper two (2) consecutive times.
4. Commission Level Public Hearing Required: Following proper advertisement of the request(s) and receipt of the same, the commission shall conduct
at least one public hearing during which the public shall have an opportunity to present their opinions on the matter(s) and the commission shall
consider the proposed amendment(s). The commission shall make one or more recommendations on the request(s) to the city council. The
commission shall either: recommend approval of the request(s), approval with modifications to the request(s), or denial of the request(s).
Alternatively, they may vote to table or postpone taking action on the request(s).
5. Further Notice And Hearing: Following the commission's hearing, if the commission wishes after the fact to make a material change from what was
presented and decided during their public hearing review process, further notice and hearing shall be provided before the commission forwards their
revised recommendation(s) to the city council.
6. Commission Amendments To Zoning Map: The city planning and zoning commission may also recommend amendments to the official zoning map of
the city to the council on and of its own initiative but only after first holding an advertised and noticed public hearing as required by the aforestated
regulations. (Ord. 3247, 8-4-2003)
C. Conclusions Of Laws Pertinent To Proposed Zoning Map Amendments: Before the commission recommends an amendment to the city's official zoning
map and before the council approves any proposed zoning map amendment(s), the commission and the council must individually find and conclude:
1. The proposed map amendment(s) is, are or would be in harmony with the city's currently adopted comprehensive plan and comprehensive plan land
use map; and
2. The proposed map amendment(s) is, are or would provide for a proposed use or set of uses that would be at least reasonably compatible with
existing, adjoining property uses; and
3. The proposed map amendment(s) is, are or would make a change on the land use map of the city which would establish an area of zoning the same
as or compatible with immediately adjoining districts; and
4. The proposed map amendment(s) is not, are not or would not create a "spot" zone (having a section of one kind of zoning surrounded by another)
having no supportive basis per the adopted comprehensive land use map so as to only serve(s) to benefit the applicant(s); and
5. The proposed amendment(s) is, are or would be in the interest of the public and reasonably necessary.
D. Conclusions Of Law Pertinent To Proposed Zoning Ordinance Text Amendments: Before the commission recommends a text (content) amendment to
the zoning ordinance, and, before the council approves any proposed zoning code amendment(s), the commission and the council must individually
find and conclude:
1. That the proposed amendment(s) is, are or would be reasonably necessary, in the interest of the public, and in harmony with the goals and/or
policies of the adopted comprehensive plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 251/410
E. Public Hearing Required By Council, Notice: Amendments to this zoning ordinance or zoning map may be adopted only after a public hearing has been
held in relation thereto before the council in which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. The council shall use the same
notice and hearing procedures as involved with the commission's hearing.
F. Reversal Of Council Action: If the council adopts a zoning classification or map amendment pursuant to a request by a property owner, the council shall
not subsequently reverse its action or otherwise change the zoning classification of said property without the consent in writing of the current property
owner for a period of four (4) years from the date the council adopted said individual property owner's request for a zoning classification change or map
amendment. (Ord. 3182, 12-9-2002)
10-2-4: ANNEXATION(S):
It is the expressed policy of the state of Idaho that cities of the state should be able to annex lands which are reasonably necessary to assure the orderly
development of Idaho's cities in order to allow efficient and economically viable provision of tax supported and fee supported municipal services, to enable
the orderly development of private lands which benefit from the cost effective availability of municipal services in urbanizing areas and to equitably allocate
the costs of public services in management of development on the urban fringe.
A. General Annexation Authority: Nampa has, and shall exercise, the authority to annex land into the city upon compliance with the procedures required in
this section as allowed by state law.
B. Right(s) Of Way Annexation: In any annexation proceeding, all portions of highways lying wholly or partially within an area to be annexed shall be
included within the area annexed unless expressly agreed upon otherwise between the city of Nampa and the governing board of the Nampa highway
district no. 1. Provided further, that the council shall not have the power to declare such land, lots or blocks a part of the city if they will be connected to
Nampa only by a shoestring or strip of land that is comprised of a railroad or highway right of way.
C. Annexation Classifications: Annexations shall be classified and processed according to the standards for each respective category set forth herein. The
three (3) categories of annexation are:
1. Category A: Annexations wherein either:
a. All involved private landowners raise no objection to annexation; and/or
b. They entail or are composed of enclaved property, regardless of surface area, which are surrounded on all sides by land within Nampa city limits;
and/or
c. They entail property that is bounded on all sides by lands within Nampa and by lands for which owner approval must be given pursuant to
subsection D2d of this section; and/or
d. They entail property that is/are bounded on all sides by lands either within the city and by the boundary of the Nampa city impact area.
2. Category B: Annexations wherein either:
a. The subject lands contain less than two hundred (200) separate private ownerships and platted lots of record and where not all such landowners
have consented to annexation; or
b. The subject lands contain more than two hundred (200) separate private ownerships and platted lots of record and where landowners owning
more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the subject private lands have evidenced their consent to annexation at the outset of the annexation
process; or
c. The lands are the subject of a development moratorium or a water or sewer connection restriction imposed by state or local health or
environmental agencies; provided such lands shall not be counted for purposes of determining the number of separate private ownerships and
platted lots of record aggregated to determine the appropriate category.
3. Category C: Annexations wherein the subject lands contain more than two hundred (200) separate private ownerships and platted lots of record and
where landowners owning more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the subject private lands have not evidenced their consent to annexation at
the outset of the annexation process. For purposes of this section, prior consent to annex shall be deemed given when evidenced by written
authorization or approval executed by the owner or the owner's authorized agent.
Consent shall be implied for the area of all lands connected to a water or wastewater collection system operated by the city and for lands subject to a
written consent to annex recorded in the county recorder's office. Written consent to annex lands, if recorded in the county recorder's office, shall be
binding upon subsequent purchasers, heirs, or assigns of lands addressed in the consent. Lands need not be contiguous or adjacent to the city limits
at the time the landowner consents to annexation for the property to be subject to a valid consent to annex; provided however, no annexation of
lands shall occur, irrespective of consent, until such land becomes contiguous or adjacent to the city.
D. Annexation Procedures: Annexation of lands into Nampa shall follow the procedures applicable to the category of lands as established by this section.
The implementation of any annexation proposal wherein the city council determines that annexation is appropriate shall be concluded with the passage
of an ordinance of annexation.
1. Procedures For Category A Annexations: Lands lying contiguous or adjacent to Nampa may be annexed by the city if the proposed annexation
meets the requirements of category A. Upon determining that a proposed annexation meets such requirements, the city may initiate the planning and
zoning procedures set forth in this chapter to establish the comprehensive planning classification, where necessary, and zoning classification of the
lands to be annexed.
2. Procedures For Category B Annexations: The city may annex lands that would qualify under the requirements of category B annexation if the
following requirements are met:
a. The lands are contiguous or adjacent to the city and lie within the city's impact area; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 252/410
b. The land is laid off into lots or blocks or parcels containing not more than five (5) acres of land each, whether the same shall have been or shall be
laid off, subdivided or platted in accordance with Nampa's or Canyon County's subdivision ordinances, or otherwise whenever the owner or
proprietor or any person by or with his authority has sold or begun to sell off such contiguous or adjacent lands by metes and bounds in tracts not
exceeding five (5) acres, or whenever the land is surrounded by the city and is therefore enclaved.
Splits of ownership that occurred prior to January 1, 1975, and which were the result of placement of public utilities, public roads or highways, or
railroad lines through the property shall not be considered as evidence of an intent to develop such land and shall not be sufficient evidence that
the land has been laid off or subdivided in lots or blocks. A single sale after January 1, 1975, of five (5) acres or less to a family member of the
owner for the purpose of constructing a residence shall not constitute a sale within the meaning of this section; and
For purposes of this section, "family member" means a natural person or the spouse of a natural person who is related to the owner by blood,
adoption or marriage within the first degree of consanguinity.
c. Preparation and publication of a written annexation plan, appropriate to the scale of the annexation contemplated, which includes, at a minimum,
the following elements:
(1) The manner of providing tax supported municipal services to the lands proposed to be annexed; and
(2) The changes in taxation and other costs, using examples, that would result if the subject lands were to be annexed; and
(3) The means of providing fee supported municipal services, if any, to the lands proposed to be annexed; and
(4) A brief analysis of the potential effects of annexation upon other units of local government which currently provide tax supported or fee
supported services to the lands proposed to be annexed; and
(5) The proposed future land use plan and zoning designation or designations, subject to public hearing, for the lands proposed to be annexed;
and
(6) Compliance with the notice and hearing procedures governing a zoning district boundary change as set forth in this chapter on the question of
whether the property should be annexed and, if annexed, the zoning designation to be applied thereto; provided however, the initial notice of
public hearing concerning the question of annexation and zoning shall be published in the official, daily newspaper of the city and mailed by first
class mail to every property owner with lands included in such annexation proposal not less than twenty eight (28) days prior to the initial public
hearing. All public hearing notices shall establish a time and procedure by which comments concerning the proposed annexation may be
received in writing and heard and, additionally, public hearing notices delivered by mail shall include a one page summary of the contents of the
city's proposed annexation plan and shall provide information regarding where the annexation plan may be obtained without charge by any
property owner whose property would be subject to the annexation proposal.
d. In addition to the standards set forth elsewhere in this section, annexation of the following lands must comply with the following affiliated
requirements:
(1) Property, owned by Canyon County or any entity within the county, that is used as a fairgrounds area under the provisions of chapter 8, title 31,
Idaho Code, or chapter 2, title 22, Idaho Code, must have the consent of a majority of the board of Canyon County commissioners; and
(2) Property, owned by a nongovernmental entity, that is used to provide outdoor recreational activities to the public and that has been designated
as a planned unit development of fifty (50) acres or more and does not require or utilize any city services must have the express written
permission of the nongovernmental entity owner.
e. After considering the written and oral comments of property owners whose land would be annexed and other affected persons, the city council
may proceed with the enactment of an ordinance of annexation and zoning. In the course of the consideration of any such ordinance, the council
must make express findings, to be recorded in the written and verbal minutes from the meeting wherein the annexation is approved, as follows:
(1) That the land to be annexed meets the applicable requirements of this section and does not fall within the exceptions or conditional exceptions
contained in this section; and
(2) That the annexation would be consistent with the public purposes addressed in the annexation plan prepared by the city; and
(3) That the annexation is reasonably necessary for the orderly development of the city.
f. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, railroad right of way property may be annexed pursuant to this section only when property
within the city adjoins or will adjoin both sides of the right of way.
3. Procedures For Category C Annexations: The city may annex lands that would qualify under the requirements of category C annexation if the
following requirements are met:
a. Compliance with the procedures governing category B annexations; and
b. Evidence of consent to annexation based upon the following procedures:
(1) Following completion of all procedures required for consideration of a category B annexation, but prior to enactment of an annexation
ordinance and upon an affirmative action by the city council, the city shall mail notice to all private landowners owning lands within the area to be
annexed, exclusive of the owners of lands that receive water or sewer service and owners of lands that are subject to a recorded consent to
annex. Such notice shall invite property owners to either give consent or express opposition to the annexation, include a return addressed
postage paid postcard, and inform the landowners where the entire record of the subject annexation may be examined. Such mailed notice shall
also include a legal description of the lands proposed for annexation and a simple map depicting the location of the subject lands.
(2) Each landowner desiring to reply must do so within twenty one (21) days of the date of the initial mailing of such notice. The required response
postmark date shall be stated in the mailing that accompanies the reply postcard.
(3) The results of the mail poll shall be compiled by the city clerk and shall be determined by tabulating the physical area of the lands, as
expressed in acres or square feet, whose owners consent to annexation in their response, plus the area of all lands receiving water and sewer
service from the city and the area of all lands subject to a recorded consent to annex against the area of all lands whose owners object to
annexation. Objections received after the conclusion of the twenty one (21) day period shall not be considered unless the late objection is due to
the city's failure to follow the procedures provided herein. Objections received from owners of lands subject to a recorded consent to annex, or
from owners receiving water or sewer service from the city, shall not be considered objections for purposes of this section. Lands of landowners
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 253/410
to whom notice is mailed and who do not respond to the consent request shall not be counted or considered. The clerk shall report the results to
the city council.
(4) Upon receiving such report, the city council shall canvass the results and may thereafter confirm whether consent was received from the
owners of a majority of the land areas responding by mail and those providing written consent, in addition to all lands subject to the implied
consent provisions set forth herein and those subject to consent of record in the office of the county recorder. The results of the canvass shall be
reflected in the minutes of the city council.
If the canvass confirms that owners of more land area support annexation than oppose such annexation, the city council may enact an
ordinance of annexation, which thereafter shall be published and become effective according to the terms of the ordinance. If the canvass
confirms that owners of more land area oppose annexation than support such annexation, the category C annexation shall not be authorized.
E. Judicial Review: The decision of the city council to annex and zone lands as a category B or category C annexation shall be subject to judicial review in
accordance with the procedures provided in chapter 52, title 67, Idaho Code, and pursuant to the standards set forth in section 67-5279, Idaho Code.
Any such appeal shall be filed by an affected person in the appropriate district court no later than twenty eight (28) days after the date of publication of
the annexation ordinance. All cases in which there may arise a question of the validity of any annexation under this section shall be advanced as a
matter of immediate public interest and concern, and shall be heard by the district court at the earliest practicable time.
F. Annexation Of Noncontiguous Municipal Airfield: The city may annex land that is not contiguous to the city and is occupied by a municipally owned or
operated airport or landing field. However, the city may not annex any other land adjacent to such noncontiguous facilities which is not otherwise
annexable pursuant to this section. (Ord. 3182, 12-9-2002)
G. Exclusion Or Deannexation/Disannexation Of Land(s): Applications to exclude or deannex/disannex land from within the incorporated limits of the city
shall be processed in the same manner as applications to annex. The council may choose to grant or deny such applications to deannex, in its sole
discretion, as provided in Idaho Code section 50-225. Decisions to grant or deny any application for exclusion, deannexation or disannexation do not
require that the council articulate or provide findings justifying its decision. (Ord. 4189, 7-20-2015)
10-2-5: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
In accordance with allowances made by state law, a property owner or developer may request, or the city may require, that an application for rezone or
zoning map amendment be processed in conjunction with the execution of a development agreement. Through such agreements, a property owner or
developer may agree to make written conditional commitments concerning the use or development of a subject parcel in exchange for the change of
zoning requested. The purpose of such agreements shall be to allow development that provides benefits for both the property owner or developer and the
city by providing a balance between the owner's or developer's desire for certainty in the development process and the city's desire for control of the
impacts of the project. (Ord. 4189, 7-20-2015)
Conditional commitments made under such agreements are in addition to the regulations provided for in the zoning district by ordinance, and are
established to ensure compatibility of the resulting land use with the surrounding area. Unless multiple land use zones are used/applied within a project in
accordance with that which is allowed by the table at section 10-3-2 of this title, the use of a PUD permit process shall be the only means whereby the city
of Nampa will/shall entertain allowing uses in a zone not normally allowed therein; development agreement conditions not excepting. The following rules
shall govern development agreements: (Ord. 4050, 2-19-2013)
A. Creation And Form: At a minimum, development agreements shall include the following: 1) a legal description of the subject property, 2) a description of
the uses permitted on the land, 3) provisions for any reservation or dedication of land, 4) the duration of the agreement, 5) the commitments or other
terms of the agreement. Furthermore, agreements may include, if provided by an applicant and/or requested by the planning and zoning commission
and/or city council, 1) a conceptual site plan showing proposed arrangement of any structure(s), business or industrial or multi-family park/complex
freestanding signage, landscaping and parking area design(s), and/or 2) a set of building(s) elevations showing exterior building treatments and
design(s).
B. Commitments And Safeguards: The written commitments or conditions exacted shall not be vague and shall have a reasonable relation to the zoning
change approved. In addition, the following safeguards shall be applied:
1. A development agreement shall only be allowed in connection with annexations or rezones applied for within bona fide transitional areas, i.e., where
two (2) or more competing and incompatible uses have valid claims.
2. If a substantial amount of land surrounding a property zoned in connection with a development agreement is rezoned to the same zoning as
originally requested for the subject property, said development agreement and the commitments contained therein may be lifted by the city upon
request of the owner or developer after complying with the notice and hearing provisions of section 10-2-3 of this chapter.
3. A development agreement shall not prevent the city in subsequent actions applicable to the property, from applying new rules, regulations or policies
that do not conflict with commitments applicable to the property as set forth within any duly executed agreement.
4. If a conditional commitment involves ongoing performance and the owner or developer fails to comply with the commitment after completion of
construction, said failure may be dealt with by the city according to the violations and penalties provisions of section 10-2-6 of this chapter.
5. When a commitment is required to be satisfied prior to completion of construction, and it is not so satisfied, construction shall be halted until
compliance is established.
C. Recording: Development agreements shall be attached as an exhibit to the ordinance establishing the zoning map amendment. Agreements shall take
effect and shall be recorded in the Canyon County recorder's office upon the adoption of the ordinance establishing the zoning map amendment by the
city council. Should a development agreement be terminated by the city, and the zoning designation upon which the use is based be reversed, a
document recording such termination and zoning reversal shall also be recorded by the city in the office of the county recorder unless otherwise
modified or terminated by the city council. An agreement shall be binding on the owner of the parcel, each subsequent owner, and each other person
acquiring an interest in the parcel.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 254/410
D. Modification, Enforcement, Termination And Extension: A development agreement may be modified by request of an applicant or the city only after
receiving a recommendation by the city's planning and zoning commission and by an approving vote of the council after complying with the notice and
hearing provisions of subsection 10-2-3B of this chapter. Modification of and to an executed agreement shall be required by the planning director or
his/her designee under the following circumstances:
1. A change to any of the terms or conditions of the original development agreement is proposed; and/or
2. A substantial change to any established positioning of any structure over two hundred (200) square feet in area is proposed; and/or
3. A substantial change to any approved parking or landscaping area layout or arrangement is proposed; and/or
4. A substantial change to any approved set of building elevations or exterior appearance or design is proposed; and/or
5. A change to any development agreement approved freestanding commercial or industrial center signage or multi-family complex freestanding
signage is proposed.
A development agreement may be terminated by the city, and the zoning designation granted by the agreement reversed to the zoning that was in
effect on the pertinent site before the agreement was executed, upon the failure of the owner, developer, or each subsequent owner or each person
acquiring an interest in the subject parcel, to comply with the commitments in their agreement within two (2) years. Exception: The failure to begin
site development of all or a portion of a project proposed under a development agreement does not necessarily have to serve as impetus to claim
that an owner or developer has failed to comply with their commitments contained in their respective development agreement. Rather,
commencement of site work and/or construction then left in abandon or failure to abide by development agreement terms, as iterated above, shall
serve as impetus to consider termination of an agreement and reversion of zoning. A hearing for termination may be convened by the city after
complying with the notice and hearing provisions of subsection 10-2-3B of this chapter and any relevant termination terms of the pertinent
agreement. During the hearing, the council may vote to take no action, cause modification of the agreement if the applicant is willing, or terminate the
agreement.
The two (2) year period of time for compliance of commitments may be extended by the city for just cause, and upon application for such by the
owner, after complying with the notice and hearing provisions of subsection 10-2-3B of this chapter.
In accordance with state law, the establishment of a development agreement and the written commitments contained therein shall provide written
consent for the city council to change the zoning of the subject property to its prior designation upon failure of an applicant to comply with the
conditions imposed by their agreement. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-2-6: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. Authority: In any case where any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained or any building, structure
or land is used in violation of this title, as determined by the planning director, his/her designee or a code enforcement officer or otherwise other proper
legal authorities of the city, that authority may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy or use of said building,
structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such building, structure or land. In exercising enforcement authority,
the city representative shall follow any specific remedial/enforcement sections listed in relevant chapters of this title (e.g., as listed for signs and
temporary uses) or, in their absence, adhere to the provisions of this section specifically.
Upon the awareness of any violation of any of the provisions of this title the planning director, his/her designee, or, a code enforcement officer shall
serve notice of such violation on the person committing or permitting the same, and if such violation has not ceased within such reasonable length of
time as the planning director, or his/her designee, or, a code enforcement officer may determine, he/she will take action as may be necessary to
terminate the violation as specified below.
B. Compliance Notice: Upon the awareness of any violation of any of the provisions of this title, before abating any unlawful activity the planning director,
or his/her designee, or, a code enforcement officer shall first serve notice of such violation on the person committing or permitting the same.
C. Corrective Action: If such violation has not ceased within such reasonable length of time as the planning director, or, his/her designee, or a code
enforcement officer may determine, then the planning director, or, his/her designee or a code enforcement officer shall take such action as may be
necessary to terminate the violation. This may infer initial issuance of a citation, solicitation of assistance from other local authorities, abatement of a
nuisance, posting of some type of cease and desist or stop work order, withholding a certificate of occupancy or building permit, etc., or pursuit of legal
remedies. (Ord. 4010, 3-19-2012)
10-2-7: ADOPTION, AMENDMENT AND REPEAL, OF THE NAMPA COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
A. The commission, prior to recommending any comprehensive plan amendment or repeal to the council, shall conduct at least one public hearing in which
interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the hearing, notice of the time and a summary of
the plan to be discussed shall be published in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation within the jurisdiction. The commission shall also
make available a notice to other papers, radio and television stations serving the jurisdiction for use as a public service announcement. Following the
commission hearing, if the commission recommends a material change to the proposed amendment to the plan which was considered at the hearing, it
shall give notice of its proposed recommendation and conduct another public hearing concerning the matter if the council will not conduct a subsequent
public hearing concerning the proposed amendment. If the council will conduct a subsequent public hearing, notice of the planning and zoning
commission's recommendation shall be included in the notice of public hearing concerning the public hearing before the council. A record of the
hearings, findings made, and actions taken shall be maintained by the city.
B. The council prior to the adoption, amendment or repeal of the comprehensive plan, may conduct at least one public hearing, in addition to the public
hearing(s) conducted by the commission, using the same notice hearing procedures as the commission. The council shall not hold a public hearing,
give notice of a proposed hearing, or take action upon the plan, amendments, or repeal until the commission's recommendation has been received.
Following consideration by the council, if the council makes a material change in the recommendation or alternative options contained in the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 255/410
recommendation by the commission concerning adoption, amendment or repeal of a plan, further notice and hearing shall be provided before the
council adopts, amends or repeals the plan.
C. No plan shall be effective unless adopted by resolution by the council. A resolution enacting or amending the plan or a part of the plan may be adopted,
amended, or repealed by definitive reference to the specific plan document. A copy of the adopted or amended plan shall accompany each adopting
resolution and shall be kept on file with the city clerk.
D. Any person may petition the commission or, in the absence of a commission, the council, for a plan amendment at any time. The commission may
recommend amendments to the land use component of the Nampa comprehensive plan, to the council not more frequently than once every six (6)
months. The commission may recommend amendments to the text of the comprehensive plan and to other chapters of this title to the council at any
time.
E. Any person seeking an amendment to the comprehensive plan text or map shall submit to the planning director an application form as prescribed by the
planning director, designating the change desired, the reasons therefor, and how the proposed amendment would be in the public interests.
Amendment fees are established by council resolution and are nonrefundable. The planning director shall transmit the requested amendment to the
commission. If the requested amendment is for a map change, it may be concurrently reviewed with an application for amendment of the zoning map
or an application for annexation, provided procedural requirements for each application are met. (Ord. 3182, 12-9-2002)
10-2-8: PUBLIC HEARINGS:
The public hearing process exists to provide an opportunity for citizens to present their views on an issue that may affect them, define the issue upon
which a decision is to be made, and obtain essential evidence upon which a decision can be made.
A. Evidence: City staff reports shall be entered as a part of the public record. Comments from agencies appropriately involved in the review of a project
that will be reviewed in a hearing setting may be received and entered into the public record.
B. Ex Parte Communications And Conflicts Of Interest: All material contacts received by public officials outside of the public hearing shall be disclosed
prior to the commencement of the public hearing. ("Material contacts" shall be defined as those contacts received outside the public hearing process
that expectedly will have a significant effect on the opinion of a public official on a given issue.) If there is a question of conflict of interest, as defined by
Idaho Code 67-6506 for council member or commissioner (public official), it shall be disclosed prior to the commencement of the hearing. That official
shall not participate in voting or deliberating as an official on any matter with which they have a conflict, but they may testify as a member of the public
in the same manner and under the same restrictions as any other citizen.
A city council member, planning commissioner or mayor shall avoid all "ex parte" contact(s) with an applicant or the public once an application for a
zoning or other land use request has been filed with the planning and zoning office. If already engaged in a conversation and discussion concerning a
zoning or land use application ensues, then that council member, commissioner or the mayor shall thereafter disclose before the acting governing
body, for the record, and prior to a vote on the pertinent matter being taken/made the name if the person/people they talked with (contact) a summary
of the substance of their conversation, the relationship or affiliation of the contact with a business or organization with a stake in a/the matter. (Ord.
3182, 12-9-2002)
C. Hearing Procedures: The following sequence of events shall be followed/used during public zoning hearing(s):
1. Call To Order: The mayor, presiding council person, planning chairperson, or presiding commissioner (all hereinafter a.k.a. "presiding officer") shall
explain the meeting's hearing procedures thereby setting forth the rules under which the public meeting shall be conducted, and shall announce the
amount of time to be allotted to speakers.
2. Allotted Speaker Times:
a. Standard Hearing Item Speaking Times: At the commencement of the hearing, the presiding officer may establish and announce a time limit to be
observed by all speakers. If a specific time limit is not given to the attending audience, then initial presentation by the applicant or his
representative shall be limited to seven (7) minutes, persons from the audience shall be limited to three (3) minutes each, and closing applicant's
rebuttal or concluding comments shall be limited to five (5) minutes. Persons representing groups may be given more time than individuals
presenting their own views, if allowed by the meeting's chair. City staff shall be given sufficient time to present their report(s).
b. Items On Appeal Speaking Times: At the commencement of the hearing, the presiding officer may establish and announce a time limit to be
observed by all speakers. If a specific time limit is not given to the attending audience, then initial presentation by the appellant shall be limited to
seven (7) minutes, city staff shall be given time as they require, the appellee/respondent, if any, shall then have seven (7) minutes, persons from
the audience shall be limited to three (3) minutes each, closing appellant's concluding comments shall be limited to five (5) minutes and concluding
appellee's/respondent's concluding comments shall be limited to five (5) minutes. Persons representing groups may be given more time than
individuals presenting their own views if allowed by the meeting's chair providing that if more time is allotted to either the appellant or
appellee/respondent, then the opposing side shall be afforded equal time to rebut.
3. Hearing Protocol:
a. The applicant(s) or appellant(s) and/or their representative(s) may present their case. During such presentation or immediately following it, the
council or commission may ask their questions of the applicant(s) or appellant(s) and/or their representative(s). Applicants or appellants are
encouraged to be or have a representative present to convey their desires and justifications as related to their request and/or to answer questions.
b. City planning and zoning staff shall present their findings regarding the matter at hand.
c. Written correspondence shall be officially recognized and accepted as part of the hearing record for the matter at hand under review.
d. The council or commission shall then receive testimony from those persons supporting the application. No person shall be permitted to speak at a
public hearing until the presiding officer has recognized such person. Each person testifying shall be limited to three (3) minutes per person
(unless made more or less by the conducting officer following official announcement of the same at the start of the hearing).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 256/410
e. The council or commission shall then receive testimony from those persons uncommitted/neutral regarding the proposal/application.
f. The council or commission shall then receive testimony from those persons opposing the application.
g. The applicant(s) or appellant(s) and/or their representative(s) shall then be allowed to rebut statements previously made by any person who
testified.
h. The presiding officer shall then close the public hearing to further testimony and allow initiation of deliberations on the matter at hand. They may
also ask or receive any code interpretation or procedural questions of, or from, the city staff as deemed warranted.
If, however, the commission, or council, reopens the hearing by vote, then they may take further public testimony. In so doing, they shall provide
for rebuttal time by the public and the applicant(s) or appellant(s) and/or their representative equal to that expended by any that speak on the
record in support of, or opposition to, the application(s) under consideration.
i. The attending/governing board shall then vote on the item once deliberations have ceased.
4. Continuance/Recess: If all sides of the issue cannot be heard in the time allotted, the hearing may be recessed to a later time during the same
meeting stated by the chairperson. Persons not having had an opportunity to be heard may sign a roster in order to secure their opportunity to speak
at the time stated.
5. Compliance Required: Any person not conforming to these procedures may be prohibited from speaking during a public meeting. Should any person
refuse to comply with such prohibition, they may be removed from the room by order of the presiding officer. (Ord. 4282, 9-19-2016)
D. Other Hearing Conduct Rules:
1. Public officials shall not bring up the pros and cons of the subject of the hearing prior to all testimony and evidence being submitted.
2. A transcribable, record of hearing shall be made and kept in accordance with Idaho Code 67-6536. In order to assure accuracy of the record, each
person shall speak before the microphone in an orderly and constructive fashion, giving their full name and address and stating their views as briefly
as possible.
3. The audience, public officials or city staff, shall not interrupt speakers until their time limit has expired or until they have completed their comments.
4. At the conclusion of a speaker's comments, public officials or planning staff when recognized, shall be allowed to question the speaker and the
speaker shall be limited to answer to the question asked. The question and answer period shall not be included in the speaker's time limit. (Ord.
3182, 12-9-2002)
10-2-9: APPLICATION APPROVAL OR DENIAL:
The approval or denial of any zoning related application shall be communicated to the applicant in writing by the planning director or his/her designee. The
written notice may be in a form prescribed by the planning director and shall contain a "reason statement" that explains the criteria and standards
considered relevant to the matter, the relevant facts regarding the matter relied upon by the commission or council or staff in making a decision and the
rationale for the decision. When an application is denied, the written notice shall contain a statement of the actions the applicant could take to obtain
approval, if any, and notice to the applicant regarding the applicant's right to request a regulatory taking analysis pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-8003.
As elsewhere noted in this chapter, rationale for a decision shall be based on applicable provisions of the comprehensive plan, relevant ordinances,
statutory provisions, pertinent constitutional principles and actual information contained within the record.
As required by Idaho Code section 67-6535(2)(b), any applicant or affected person who wishes to seek judicial review of compliance with the provisions of
Idaho Code section 67-6535, must first seek reconsideration of the final decision within fourteen (14) days. Such written request must be delivered to the
city clerk within that time frame and must identify specific deficiencies in the decision for which reconsideration is sought. Upon reconsideration, the
decision may be affirmed, reversed or modified after compliance with applicable procedural standards. A written decision shall be provided to the applicant
or affected person within sixty (60) days of receipt of the request for reconsideration or the request is deemed denied. A decision shall not be deemed final
for purposes of judicial review unless the process required in this subsection has been followed. The twenty eight (28) day time frame for seeking judicial
review is tolled until the date of the written decision regarding reconsideration or the expiration of the sixty (60) day reconsideration period, whichever
occurs first. (Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-2-10: REQUESTS FOR RECONSIDERATION:
A. On any application brought before the city council affecting the use, occupancy or development of real property, including, but not limited to, those
matters governed by the Idaho local land use planning act, found at Idaho Code 67-6501 et seq., or the Nampa comprehensive zoning ordinance,
found in this title, a party may request that the city council reconsider a decision pursuant to the terms of this section. Decisions and recommendations
of the planning and zoning commission are not subject to reconsideration, but may be appealed to the city council as provided in this title.
To make such a request for reconsideration, the following criteria must be met:
1. The requesting party must have been a party interested in the underlying action in one of the following ways: the property owner of the subject
property; the applicant for the project; or, any interested person who presented written or oral testimony at the public hearing on the application in
question; and
2. The request must be made in writing and presented to the city clerk no more than fourteen (14) calendar days after the adoption of written findings of
fact, conclusions of law, and/or an order of decision, or, if no such written decision is required or will be issued, within fourteen (14) days of the date
on which the decision was made; and
3. The request must state the basis for the request, including a brief statement of the issues and decision that the requesting party is asking to be
reconsidered; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 257/410
4. The request must demonstrate either: a) the party requesting reconsideration has relevant information, the relevant information was not previously
presented and is in response to something brought up at the previous hearing, and the information was not previously available; or b) the request for
reconsideration is made pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6535(2)(b), as amended.
B. The city council will consider the request at the next regularly scheduled meeting. No testimony or evidence will be submitted in connection with the
request, and the city council shall grant or deny the request at its discretion solely on the basis of the written request for reconsideration.
C. If the city council denies the request, it may proceed immediately thereafter, or as soon as is practicable, to adopt any required written findings of facts,
conclusions of law, decision, and order for the application in question.
D. If the city council grants the request, the requesting party must pay the fee for a new public hearing within ten (10) calendar days of the city council's
decision to grant reconsideration. If the payment is not made to the city clerk within the specified time frame the request for reconsideration shall be
automatically rescinded.
E. All noticing for the hearing at which the city council will reconsider a prior decision shall be completed in the same manner as was required for the
original application. The new hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as all public hearings and shall be considered a de novo hearing.
F. Upon payment of fees, the planning director will schedule a new public hearing for the application as allowed by this code. The new public hearing and
ultimate decision shall be the final action of the city council.
G. Once the council has reconsidered any of its decisions relating to a given application, as set forth hereinabove, it may not entertain any additional or
subsequent request for reconsideration, whether by the same or any other interested party. (Ord. 4189, 7-20-2015)
Chapter 3
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND PROVISIONS FOR NONCONFORMING USES
10-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND DESIGNATION OF USE DISTRICTS:
The following use districts are established and shall apply to and govern the use, maintenance or development of any land in the city:
Use Districts
GB1, GB2, GBE Gateway business
U University
AG Agricultural
RA Suburban residential
RS Single-family residential
HC Healthcare
RD Two-family (duplex) residential
RML Limited multiple-family residential
RMH Multiple-family residential
RP Residential professional
BN Neighborhood business
DB, DV, DH Downtown
BC Community business
BF Freeway business
IP Industrial park
IL Light industrial
IH Heavy industrial
(Ord. 4281, 9-19-2016)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-3-2: SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT/ZONE LAND USE CONTROLS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 258/410
District land use controls shall be as set forth in the succeeding schedule.
A. Determining Where Uses Are Allowed: To determine in which district a specific use is allowed:
1. Find the use in one of the groups.
2. Read across the schedule until either a P or C appears.
3. If a P appears, the use is a permitted use; if a C appears the use is only allowed upon the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with
the provisions of chapter 25 of this title.
4. If a P or C does not appear under a district that use is not allowed in that district.
5. Review notes to determine exceptions, requirements and conditions for various uses.
B. Unlisted Land Uses: The director or his/her designee shall interpret the appropriate district for land uses not specifically listed by determining the district
in which similar uses are permitted. Such other similar uses shall not be inconsistent with the purpose of the district, shall not impair the present or
potential use of properties in the surrounding areas and shall not have any different or more detrimental effect upon the adjoining neighborhood areas
or districts than the specifically listed buildings and uses. When several combined uses exist, or are proposed, the most intensive shall be considered
as the primary activity.
Where a use is proposed and ambiguity exists concerning the appropriate district or procedure for the establishment of that particularly proposed use,
said use may be established by obtainment of a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of chapter 25 of this title until such time as this
section is amended to specifically include such use. (Ord. 4088, 12-16-2013)
SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT/ZONE LAND USE CONTROLS
NAMPA ZONING ORDINANCE
(blank) = Not allowed P = Permitted use C = Conditional use permit required
Agricultural Land Use/
Building Occupancy Type
U
AG
RA
RS
HC
RD
RML
RMH
RP
BN
DB
DV
DH
BC
BF
GB1
GB2
GBE
IP
IL
IH
Accessory use or building1 P
P P P P P P P P
P
P
Agricultural, general (no
slaughterhouses in GB, IL or IP
zone)
P P P P P
P
P
Berry and bush crop P P P P P
P
P
Feedlot or dairy (no
slaughterhouses in GB, IL or IP
zone)
C C C
C
Fish farm C C C
C
Flower gardening P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P
Gardening (for home
consumption)
P P P P P P P P P P
Gardening, truck P P P
P
P
Livestock sales C C
P
Mineral resources, natural
(subject to state law provisions)
C C
C
Orchards, tree crops P P P P C
P
P
Plant nurseries P P C C C P P P P P
P
P
Plant or tree farm C
P P C P
P
P
Roadside stands2 P C
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 259/410
Agricultural land use/building occupancy type notes:
1. Any enterprise customarily carried on in the field of general agriculture, which is not obnoxious or detrimental to the public welfare. No
commercial slaughterhouse or feedlot operation is allowed.
2. For the display and sale of only those products raised upon the premises, provided it does not exceed an area of 200 square feet and 4 off
street parking spaces are provided.
(blank) = Not allowed P = Permitted use C = Conditional use permit required
Residential Land Use/
Building Occupancy Type
U
AG
RA
RS
HC
RD
RML
RMH
RP
BN
DB
DV
DH
BC
BF
GB1
GB2
GBE
IP
IL
IH
Accessory dwelling, attached1 P P P P P P P P P
Accessory dwelling, detached1 P P P P P P P P P
Accessory use or building
(nonhabitable)
P
P P P P P P P P P
Bed and breakfast C C C C C P C
Dwelling, as place of occupancy
for no more than 2 registered
sex offenders living therein
P P P P P P P P P
Dwelling, caretaker3 P
P
P
Dwelling (combined with a
business)2
P P P P P P C C C P
Dwelling, condominium P P P P P P P P P
Dwelling, congregate residence P P P P P
Dwelling, duplex (two-family) C P P P P P P
Dwelling, fourplex (four-family) P P P P P P P
Dwelling, multiple-family P
P P C C P P C C
Dwelling, single-family attached,
multi-unit, zero lot line5
P P P C P P P
Dwelling, single-family attached,
2 unit, zero lot line5
C P P P P P
Dwelling, single-family attached,
3 - 4 unit, zero lot line5
P P P P C P P P
Dwelling, single-family including
legal "group residences" as
defined by this title and Idaho
Code (1 per lot/parcel)4
P P P P P P P P P
Dwelling, single-family (move-on
house)4
P P P P P P P
Dwelling, triplex (three-family) P P P P C P P
Fraternity, sorority, dormitory,
residence hall
P
P P P C P
Home occupation daycare (1 - 6
children)8
P
P P P P P P P P
Home occupation daycare
(7 - 12 children)7,8
P
C C C C C P P P
Home occupation (subject to
chapter 1 of this title)6
P P P P P P P P P
Manufactured home (subject to
chapter 29 of this title)
P P P P P P P
Manufactured/mobile home park
(subject to chapters 28 and 29 of
this title)
C C C C C C P P P P
C
Mobile home (subject to chapter
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 260/410
28 of this title)
Nursing home, assisted living
center/home, retirement home,
convalescent, geriatrics,
Alzheimer's care, hospice, group
care home (9+ beds) or rest
home
C C C C C C C C C C C C
Planned unit development
(residential as subject to chapter
26 of this title)
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P
Shelter or temporary home for
care or lodging
C C C C C P P C P
Transition home/dwelling, being
a group residence consisting of 2
or more persons under the
supervision of the state
department of corrections or
other licensed agency such as
state health and welfare (these
uses are often called halfway
houses or transitions homes)
C C C
Residential land use/building occupancy type notes:
1. Uses normal and incidental to the uses permitted in each respective zoning district. Specific regulations governing certain accessory uses in
residential zones are as follows:
a. As pertaining to residential living quarters built or intended for construction as independent suites/wings/additions for use as "father-/mother-inlaw
quarters" or the equivalent thereof, they are, and shall be limited to, having 1 bedroom, 1 bathroom, a kitchenette (with no 220 volt power
source wired to or for the use of the kitchenette), and no "split" electrical panel. They also shall not have: a separate and exclusive laundry
facility/room, separate address, separate mailbox, or their only access to the suite from the outside of the structure. (Note that a building permit
and/or occupancy permit to sanction such improvement, and the use thereof, may be required by the city.)
b. Detached accessory residential "guesthouses" (intended for temporary use/stay by friends or relatives) as separate structures are allowed on
the same lot/parcel as a house provided they contain but 1 bedroom, no 220 volt power source, no separate address or separate parking facility
for their use. They may be combined with or be part of another detached structure such as a detached garage.
c. In all residential (R) zones, detached accessory (residential) structures built after April 4, 2011, may and shall, not be larger (in square footage)
than the area of the footprint of the principal structure (i.e., a house) on the same lot/parcel as the proposed accessory structure.
d. Height and quantity regulations pertaining to accessory structures shall be as per requirements listed under each zone's regulations in this title
except that accessory structures in AG zoned areas shall have no area size limitations.
2. Density limitation will be created in de facto form by virtue of available space/land after imposition of any applicable height limits, setbacks and
parking/service drive provision to a development. Parking shall be provided in private, assigned parking areas or garages on the basis of 1 space
per dwelling being required and must meet parking requirements of section 10-1-18, figure 1 and chapter 22 of this title.
3. 1 per business or property, as most restrictive. To be allowed, there must already be some kind of related business structure or complex on the
same property.
4. "Move-on" houses allowed subject to compliance with regulations in section 10-1-21 of this title.
5. With each dwelling and/or a portion of the original lot independently owned having lot lines along common walls provided respective zoning
district requirements are satisfied.
6. Certain types of home occupations require application for and issuance of a conditional use permit prior to establishment; see section 10-1-10
of this title.
7. Operations in existence before September 1, 1986, providing care for 7 plus children do not require a CUP in RS districts.
8. A caregiver's children under age 6 count against the number of daycare children allowed.
(blank) = Not allowed P = Permitted use C = Conditional use permit required
Civic And Cultural Land Use/
Building Occupancy Type
U
AG
RA
RS
HC
RD
RML
RMH
RP
BN
DB
DV
DH
BC
BF
GB1
GB2
GBE
IP
IL
IH
Accessory use or building1 P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P
Aquarium P
P P P P P P P P
P
Arboretum P
P P C C C C P P P P P P P P P P
P
C
Art gallery P
C C P P P P P P P P P P P
P
Auditorium P
C C C C P P P P P C C P P
C
Botanical garden P
P P C C C C P P P P P P P P P P P
P
C
Cemetery or mausoleum C C C P P P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 261/410
Civic, social and fraternal
organization
P
C P P P C C C P P C P
Community center (subject to
chapter 1 of this title)
C C C C C C P P P P P C C P
C
Crematorium C C C C C C C
C
P
Exhibition hall P
C C P P P P P P C P P
Historic site or monument P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P
Library P
C C C C C C P P P P P P P P
P
Meeting hall P
C C C C C C P P P P P P C P P
Museum or planetarium P
P C C C C C P P P P P P P P
Tourist information center P C P P P P P P P P P P C P P
P
Zoo C C C C C C C C C P
C
Civic and cultural land use/building occupancy type note:
1. Uses normal and incidental to the uses permitted in each respective zoning district.
(blank) = Not allowed P = Permitted use C = Conditional use permit required
Communication, Utility And
Transportation Land Use/
Building Occupancy Type
U
AG
RA
RS
HC
RD
RML
RMH
RP
BN
DB
DV
DH
BC
BF
GB1
GB2
GBE
IP
IL
IH
Accessory use or building1 P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P
Airport, heliports, landing fields,
etc.
C C C
C
C
Ambulance service P C C C C P
P
P
Automobile parking lot/garage,
private2
P C C P P P C C C P P C C P
P
P
Freight transfer point P P C P
P
P
Railroad buildings and
equipment
P
C C
P
P
Taxicab office P P P P P P P
P
P
Telephone/telegraph center or
station/call center
P
P P P P P P P P
P
P
Travel agency C P P P P P P P P
P
P
Truck and bus parking lot C C P C C P
P
P
Trucking yard or terminal C
P
P
Utility owned building, structure
or use
P
C C C P C C C C C C C C C C C C C
P
P
Communication, utility and transportation land use/building occupancy type notes:
1. Uses normal and incidental to the uses permitted in each respective zoning district.
2. No vehicle or storage areas in BN or IP zones.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 262/410
(blank) = Not allowed P = Permitted use C = Conditional use permit required
Sporting, Recreation
And Amusement Land
Use/Building Occupancy Type
U
AG
RA
RS
HC
RD
RML
RMH
RP
BN
DB
DV
DH
BC
BF
GB1
GB2
GBE
IP
IL
IH
Accessory use or building1 P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P
Carnivals, circuses, amusement
parks (over 2 weeks long)
C C C C C C C
C
Concession C C C C C P C
C
Dance hall C C P C
Entertainment and amusement,
indoor
C P P P P P P P P
Equestrian facility P C C P P
Fairground C C C C
C
C
Game room P
P P P P C P P P
Go-cart track C C C
C
C
Golf course and country club P P P P P P P P P C C P
P
P
Golf driving range P C C C C C C
C
C
Golf, miniature C C C C C
C
Health club P
P P P P P P
Ice or roller skating, indoor public
P P P P P P P P
P
Ice or roller skating, outdoor
public
C P P P P P P P C
P
Park, playground or open space
(subject to chapter 1 of this title)
P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P
Racetrack or drag strip C C
C
Recreation facility, indoor P
P C C P P P P P P P
P
Recreational vehicle park C C C C C C C C C
C
Riding academy C C C C
Riding stable, commercial2 C C C C P
P
Sports arena P P P C P P
P
Swimming pool, indoor or
outdoor public
C C C C C C P C P P P P P
P
Tennis court, indoor or outdoor
public
C C C C C C P C P P P P P
P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 263/410
Sporting, recreation and amusement land use/building occupancy type notes:
1. Uses normal and incidental to the uses permitted in each respective zoning district.
2. Provided the lot area shall be no less than 10 acres.
(blank) = Not allowed P = Permitted use C = Conditional use permit required
Commercial Land Use/
Building Occupancy Type
U
AG
RA
RS
HC
RD
RML
RMH
RP
BN
DB
DV
DH
BC
BF
GB1
GB2
GBE
IP
IL
IH
Accessory use or building1 P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P
Antique store P P P P P P C
C
Auction sales (no livestock in
BC)
C C P
P
Automobile or truck sales, new C P P P P P
P
Automobile or truck sales, used C P P P
P
Automobile parts and
accessories
C P C C
P
Bakery P C P P C P C
P
P
Bar, nightclub or cocktail lounge
(associated with and accessory
to a restaurant)
P P P P P P P P
Bar, nightclub, tavern or cocktail
lounge (stand alone, no
restaurant)2
C C C C P C
C
Bicycle shop P P P P P P P C
C
Bookstore P
P P P P P P P C
C
Bowling alley P
P P P P P C
C
Building material C C C P P C C
P
P
Cabinet shop P
C C C P P C P
P
P
Camera and supplies P
P P P P P P C
C
Clothing P
P P P P P P P C
C
Commercial planned unit
development (subject to chapter
26 of this title)
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P
Confectionery P P P P P P P P C
C
Convenience store P C P C C C P P P C
C
C
Craft store P P P P P P P C
C
Curio and novelty P P P P P P P C
C
Delicatessen P
P P P P P P P P P P P
Department store C P P P P P C
C
Drapery store C P P P P P C P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 264/410
Dress and millinery P P P P P P C
C
Drug paraphernalia store/head
shop3
Drugstore or pharmacy P P P P P P P P P C
C
Electrical and electronic supply P
P P P P C C
P
Fabric P P P P P P C
C
Farm and garden supply C P P P C C
C
Florist P P P P P P P C
C
Fuel sales or service station C P P C C P
P
P
Furniture C P P P P P C
C
Gift shop P
P P P P P P P P C
C
Greenhouse P
C P P P P P P C
P
Grocery C P P P P P P P P C
C
Hardware P P P P P P P C
C
Hobby, toy, teaching aides,
games, etc.
P P P P P P C
C
Home furnishing and equipment
C P P P P P C
C
Hotel C P P P P P P P P C
C
Ice cream P P P P P P P P P C
C
Import P P P P P P C
C
Jewelry P P P P P P C
C
Leather goods P P P P P P C
C
Liquor store, package P C
C
Meat market P P P P P P P C
C
Mobile home, manufactured
home and RV sales
P P C P
P
P
Pet shop P P P P P P C
C
Pharmaceutical supply business
P P P P P P P P P P C
P
P
Restaurant (not drive-in, drivethrough
or walk-up)
P
P C P P P P P P P P P P
P
P
Restaurant (with drive-in, drivethrough,
or walk-up)
P P P P P P P P
P
P
Secondhand (if conducted within
a wholly enclosed building)
P P P P P C
C
Sewing machine sales and P P P P P P C C
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 265/410
service
Shoe store P P P P P P C
C
Shopping center, community P P C C C
C
Shopping center, neighborhood P C C C P C C C
C
Sporting goods P C P P P P P C
C
Surgical, medical and dental
supplies and equipment
P P P P P P P C
C
Swap meet facility/yard
(including parking lot areas no
longer in regular use as such)
C C C
Telephone, computer store, etc. P
P P P P P P P C
C
Theater, drive-in4 C P C
P
Theater, movie (indoor) P
P P P P C C
C
Tobacco shop P P C C C
C
Upholstery, automobile and
furniture
P P P P P
C
Variety store P P P P P P P C
C
Commercial land use/building occupancy type notes:
1. Uses normal and incidental to the uses permitted in each respective zoning district.
2. Bars, taverns and cocktail lounges are and shall be prohibited uses in or on any parcel or lot that fronts or is otherwise within 300 feet of Garrity
Boulevard.
3. Are prohibited in the city regardless of wherever they are proposed/operated as a "principal" use as accessory to another (e.g., in association
with a smoke shop).
4. Except at locations designated for future residential use or development on the comprehensive plan.
(blank) = Not allowed P = Permitted use C = Conditional use permit required
Service And Office Land Use/
Building Occupancy Type
U
AG
RA
RS
HC
RD
RML
RMH
RP
BN
DB
DV
DH
BC
BF
GB1
GB2
GBE
IP
IL
IH
Accessory use or building1 P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P
Advertising P P P P P P P P P
C
Animal shelter P C C C C C
P
P
Apparel, repair or alteration P C P P P P P C
Appliance repair P C C
P
Automobile or truck repair C C C C
P
P
Bank/credit union P P P P P P P P P C
C
Barber or beauty shop, day spa,
nail salon
P P P P P P P P P P
Blood bank P P P P C P
P
Blueprinting, duplicating, etc. P P P P P P P C C
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 266/410
Building maintenance P
P P P P C
P
P
Business association, office P P P P P P C
C
Car wash C P P C C C
P
P
Catering P P P P P P P P
P
Church or religious facility P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Clinic, small animal C C C C C C
P
P
Construction trade/sales office
(carpet, tile, fixtures, etc.)
P P P P P P P P
P
Data processing P P P P P P P P
P
Daycare/day nursery
(commercial)3
P
C C C C P P C P P P P C P C
C
Dry cleaner, coin operated,
custom and self-service
P P P P P C
C
Dry cleaner, coin operated, no
on site cleaning plant
P P P P P P C
C
Employment P P P P P P P P P C
Equipment rental P
C C P
P
Finance and investment P P P P P P P P P C
Furniture refinishing C P P
Governmental emergency
building (i.e., fire or police
stations, including combined
stations and satellite versions)
P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P
Governmental office building or
facility
P
C C C P C C C P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P
Governmental water, pressure
irrigation and/or sewer lift
stations (including combined
facilities and satellite versions
thereof)
P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P
Horticultural services P
P C P P P P P
P
Hospital C C P C C C C C C C C C C C C
Hospital, large animal C C C C
P
P
Hospital, small animal C C C C C
P
P
Insurance and related P P P P P P P P P C
Kennel, commercial C C C C
C
Kennel, noncommercial P
P C C C C C C C C C C C C
C
C
Labor union organization P P P P P P C
C
Laboratory, biochemical and Xray
P
P P C C C C C C
C
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 267/410
Laboratory, medical and dental P
P P C C C P P P C
C
Laundromat self-service cleaner
P
P P P P P P P C
Laundry, commercial plant P P P P P
P
P
Lockers, cold storage, retail use
only
P P P P P
P
Locksmith P
P P P P P P C
C
Medical clinic and related
services
P
P P P P P P P P P P
Mortuary and funeral C P P P
Motel and motor hotel C C P P P P C
P
Newspaper printing P
P P P P
P
P
Photography, camera, supplies,
developing
P
P P P P P P P C
C
Planned unit development
(subject to chapter 26 of this
title)
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P
Post office P
P P P P P P P P P
Printing and publishing P
P P P P P P P
P
P
Prison, jail, etc. C C C C
C
P
Professional office P
P P P P P P P P P P P C
Radiator repair and service C C C C C
P
P
Real estate, title and related P P P P P P P P P C
School, academic/vocational,
commercial (subject to chapter 1
of this title)
P
C P C C C P C C P
School, public/nonprofit (subject
to chapter 1 of this title)
P
P P P C P P P P C C C P P P P
Shoe repair P C P P P P P C
Storage (including for RVs)
space rental (open to the general
public for business)
C4
C4
P P C C P
P
P
Storage (including for RVs)
space (used exclusively inside
an approved subdivision or PUD
for residents therein as an
amenity, not open to the general
public for business, and not
held/operated as a private
business enterprise by a
developer or other party)
C P P P P P P C
Studio (artist, interior decorator,
photographer, etc.)
P
C P P P P P P P P C
Taxidermy P P P P P C
Tire shop, including recapping C P P C C P
P
P
Treatment center - alcoholism/
chemical dependency2
C C C C C C C
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 268/410
Veterinary P
C C P P P P P P C C
Wedding chapel, etc. P P P P P
Welfare and charitable
distribution
C C P P C P P P P
Service and office land use/building occupancy type notes:
1. Uses normal and incidental to the uses permitted in each respective zoning district.
2. Conditional use permit required for residential and outpatient facilities.
3. Denotes a commercial daycare of 13 plus children and/or a "not at home" occupation or a purposeful commercial operation.
4. Public storage facilities shall require a conditional use permit as noted in the RP and BN zones and shall be further required to comply with
regulations found in section 10-1-19 of this title. Public mini-/self-storage facilities' units shall not be used for business operations (e.g., retail sales,
car repairs, etc.); nor shall they be used to store illegal, highly flammable or combustible materials/chemicals in quantities not allowed by the fire
code; nor shall they be used for residential dwelling purposes.
(blank) = Not allowed P = Permitted use C = Conditional use permit required
Industrial Land Use/
Building Occupancy Type
U
AG
RA
RS
HC
RD
RML
RMH
RP
BN
DB
DV
DH
BC
BF
GB1
GB2
GBE
IP
IL
IH
Accessory use or building1 P
P P P P P
P
P
Administrative and sales offices
related to industrial uses
C C P
P
P
Agricultural supply P
P
Asphalt plant C
C
Automobile body, paint shop C C P
P
Concrete batching and mixing C
C
Dairy products processing P
P
P
Equipment or implement sales,
large or heavy equipment
C
P
P
Grain/feed and seed processing
and sales
P
P
Hatchery P
P
Impound/storage yard, vehicle P
C
P
Incineration/reduction of
garbage, dead animals, offal or
refuse
C
Laboratory P
P C C P
P
P
Lumberyard, retail C C C P P
P
P
Machine shop P
C C C C
P
P
Manufacture, assembly or
packaging of products from
previously prepared materials
P
C C C P
P
P
Manufacture, compounding,
bottling, processing, packaging,
or treatment of food and
beverage products
P
P
P
P
Manufacturing, compounding,
processing, assembling,
packaging, treatment or
P
C C P
P
P
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 269/410
fabrication of the following
products: textile, apparel and
related items, building materials,
furniture and fixtures, paper,
chemicals and chemical
products, petroleum, electronic,
concrete, rubber, plastic, metal,
professional and scientific, or
any combination thereof of
items, materials or goods
Meat, poultry and fish processing
and packing
C
C
C
Monument works, stone P P
P
P
Petroleum storage P P
P
P
Plumbing supplies and services C P
P
P
Research facility C C C P P P
P
P
Retail sales/services related to
industrial uses
P C
P
P
Salvage or wrecking yard,
recycling yard and/or business
C
Slaughterhouse, enclosed within
a building
C
Warehouse, distribution and
wholesale2
C P
P
P
Industrial land use/building occupancy type notes:
1. Uses normal and incidental to the uses permitted in each respective zoning district.
2. In IP zones all items shall be enclosed in buildings. In IL and GB zones all items shall be enclosed within sight obscuring walls or fences.
(blank) = Not allowed P = Permitted use C = Conditional use permit required AC = Administrative conditional use permit required
Animals, Care And Keeping1
U
AG
RA
RS
HC
RD
RML
RMH
RP
BN
DB
DV
DH
BC
BF
GB1
GB2
GBE
IP
IL
IH
Animals, agricultural, including
apiaries4
P P P
P
P
Animals, agricultural kept as
pets2,4
n/a
P P P P P P
Animals, defined as pets P
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
P
P
Animals, exotic3
Animals, care and keeping notes:
1. Accessory enclosures housing pets or their supplies shall comply with regulations in subsection 10-1-12A12 of this title, unless specifically
allowed otherwise according to chapter regulations concerning a zone. Accessory enclosures housing agricultural animals or "AG" animals as
pets, including apiaries but excluding swine (unless permitted by planning as potbellied pigs), shall comply with regulations in subsection 10-21-2B
or section 10-21-3 of this title as appropriate.
2. Potbellied pigs are only allowed when kept as "pets" as outlined in section 10-21-3 of this title.
3. Exotic animals shall be dealt with according to regulations in section 10-21-5 of this title.
4. Refer to chapter 21 of this title for regulations governing keeping certain agricultural animals as pets.
(Ord. 4207, 10-19-2015; amd. Ord. 4281, 9-19-2016; Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
10-3-3: PUD SUBDISTRICTS:
A subdistrict of any district may be created within planned unit development boundaries provided a PUD permit has been issued for said development
pursuant to chapter 26 of this title. The subdistrict shall be designated by the suffix "PUD" added to the symbol of the parent district. (Ord. 2140)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 270/410
10-3-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS BY MAP AND ADOPTION OF MAP:
The geographical boundaries of various districts shall be shown on a zoning map, which map shall be designated as "map of the zoning regulations of the
City of Nampa, Idaho". The map sets forth the district classifications applicable to the City. The map is adopted as a part of this title. If a conflict between
the map and the text of this title arises, the text shall prevail. (Ord. 2140)
10-3-5: SPLIT ZONING OF A LOT/PARCEL:
When a lot/parcel has one-half (1/2) or less of its area in a zone judged by the Planning Director or his/her designee to be more restrictive in nature (in
terms of uses that it allows and setback restrictions it imposes) than the zone which is in the remainder, the Planning Director or his/her designee may (but
shall not be required to) apply the regulations of the more restrictive zone to the entire lot/parcel when in the judgment of the Director or his/her designee
so doing would provide the best pattern for harmonious development of a property as viewed in conjunction with existing land uses on abutting/adjacent
properties. For example, a property split zoned partially BC and predominantly RP may be allowed the uses and standards applicable in the more
restrictive RP Zone. Rezoning shall be the means used to effectuate a change to that portion of a lot/parcel zoned differently from the balance of that
lot/parcel where this regulation is deemed undesirable. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-3-6: CHANGES IN BOUNDARIES:
Change in boundaries of districts shall be made by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of section 10-2-3, "Amendments To Zoning Ordinance And
Zoning Map (Rezones)", of this title. The amended maps shall become a part of this title. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-3-7: UNCERTAINTY OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
When uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district as shown on the zoning map the following shall apply:
A. Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street lines, alley lines or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries.
B. In the case of unsubdivided property where a zone boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundary, unless the division is indicated by dimensions,
shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the zoning map.
C. Where a public street or alley is officially vacated, the zoning regulations applicable to abutting property on each side of the centerline shall apply up to
the centerline of such vacated street or alley on each respective side thereof. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-3-8: ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS:
Prior to the annexation of an unincorporated area, the council shall receive a recommendation from the commission on the proposed zoning district
classification for the unincorporated area. A recommendation on any required comprehensive plan change shall also be provided. The commission and
council shall follow the notice and hearing procedures provided in chapter 2 of this title. Concurrently or immediately following the adoption of an ordinance
of annexation, the council shall amend the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-3-9: NONCONFORMING USES:
Legal, nonconforming (a.k.a. "grandfathered") uses or situations shall be considered those wherein a lawful use of land or the physical improvements (i.e.,
the "site situation") thereon existed on and before April 17, 1989, or prior to a rezone, annexation or zoning code change that occurred subsequent to that
date. Thus, although a use or site situation does not currently conform with regulations specified by this title for the district in which such land is presently
located, it may be continued subject to the provisions of this section.
A. Maintenance Or Expansion Of Structures Occupied By Nonconforming Uses: Nonconforming use(s) of structures may be maintained subject to the
following conditions (provided said structure is not abated or specifically regulated by this and other chapters of this code):
1. A nonconforming use of a structure shall not be expanded in any manner except as follows:
a. Additions or enlargements to a nonconforming structure may be made provided that they cause the structure to be made (more) code compliant
(in accordance with the city's adopted building code) and do not have the effect of further reducing zoning code compliance.
b. Additions or enlargements to existing dwellings, churches and schools if such buildings otherwise conform to the regulations then in effect for the
district in which located, including height, yard and area provisions.
(Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the repair or maintenance of any structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official
charged with protecting the public safety.)
B. Repair Or Replacement Of Structures Occupied By Or In Operation As, Nonconforming Uses:
1. Whenever, in any district, a structure being occupied as or by a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or
less of its replacement value by fire, explosion or other casualty, it may be restored and any lawful occupancy or use of such structure, or part
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 271/410
thereof, which existed at the time of such partial destruction may be continued, if such restoration is started within a period of twelve (12) months of
such damage or destruction and is diligently completed.
2. In the event such damage or destruction exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value of a structure, no repairs or reconstruction shall be
thereafter made unless every portion of such structure is made to conform to the height, yard, parking area and use regulations of the district within
which it is located.
a. The planning director or his/her designee, by issuing a rebuild letter or permit, may grant an exception to the foregoing use
reconstruction/replacement restriction standard in order to allow for the reconstruction or replacement of single-family residential structures in
nonresidential zones upon finding that apparent commercial or industrial development in the area surrounding the nonconforming location is slow
or nonexistent.
b. In the case of nonsingle-family residential structures, the planning director or his/her designee, by issuing a rebuild letter or permit, may grant an
exception to the above use reconstruction/replacement restriction standard in order to allow for the reconstruction or replacement of a nonsinglefamily
residential structure, provided that the city's council first issues a variance permit to authorize creation of the rebuild letter.
C. Nonconforming Use Of Land In Any District:
1. A nonconforming use of land shall not be expanded (i.e., in its area of effect or noncode compliant condition(s)).
2. In cases where the nonconforming use of the land is actually a situation where certain site improvements or conditions/situations are either lacking
or nonconforming to zoning code, then the property's condition/situation shall be considered eligible for legal nonconforming use status provided
extant or deficient improvements were determined to be absent prior to April 17, 1989, or, prior to the enactment of a zoning based law that made
them nonconforming, and, that no worsening of their noncompliance is contemplated.
D. Conversion Of One Nonconforming Use To A Different Category Of Nonconforming Land Use: Conversion of a nonconforming use of the land identified
in the table in section 10-3-2 of this chapter to another land use type in that same schedule shall not be allowed. This does not preclude, however, the
city's recognition of nonconforming aspects of a use (e.g., its past operations, site condition, etc.) being enjoyed by a successor party in interest to the
property.
E. Existing Uses; Occupancy Permit: An occupancy permit is granted hereby, so as to permit the continuation of the particular existing uses of any
structure, improvement or premises existing in the respective districts immediately prior to April 17, 1989.
F. Rezones: Whenever a zone change (i.e., rezone) occurs, any uses or situations that were allowed by conditional use permit in the original zone but
could not be applied for under conditional use allowances in the new zone shall be considered legally nonconforming uses or situations.
Notwithstanding, such permits shall remain valid for the length of time specified by the commission when they were originally considered or else shall
be considered approved indefinitely, unless the conditional use associated with them is revoked.
G. Abandonment/Vacancy: In accordance with state law, the city shall not enact any ordinance or resolution which deprives an owner of the right to use
improvements on private property for their designed purpose based solely on the nonuse of the improvements for their designed purpose for a period
of ten (10) years or less. Where an owner or his authorized agent permits or allows an approved or unlawful intervening primary use of an/the owner's
property, the protection provisions of this section shall be deemed/rendered nonapplicable.
1. If nonuse of a property or structure continues for a period of one year or longer, the city may, by written request, require that the owner declare their
intention with respect to the continued nonuse of the improvements in writing within twenty eight (28) days of receipt of the request. If the owner
elects to continue the nonuse, they shall notify the city in writing of their intention and shall post the property with notice of their intent to continue the
nonuse of the improvements. They shall also publish notice of their intent to continue the nonuse in a newspaper of general circulation in Canyon
County. If the property owner complies with those requirements, their right to use such improvements in the future for their designed purpose shall
continue, notwithstanding any change in the zoning of their property.
2. The property owner may voluntarily elect to withdraw the use by filing with the city clerk an "affidavit of withdrawn use". If the property is redesigned
for a different use, the property owner shall be deemed to have abandoned any legal nonconforming right to prior use of the property. The affidavit
may be forwarded to the city planning and zoning office for review and recordkeeping.
3. For purposes of this section, "designed purpose" means the use for which the improvements were originally intended, designed and approved
pursuant to any applicable planning and zoning ordinances.
4. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the city from passing or enforcing any other law or ordinance for the protection of the
public health, safety and welfare.
5. Action by the city to cause a nonconforming use or situation to be eliminated may be pursued when it is believed said use or site situation is/was
illegally commenced, operated or utilized. No statute of limitations shall apply to the city in such situations.
H. Acknowledgment Of Legal Nonconforming Use Rights: Applications to request the city to recognize/acknowledge legal nonconforming use rights shall
be made with the office of the planning and zoning department using a form prescribed by the planning director. The request shall be accompanied by
such information as may be required by the director to enable a determination together with a nonrefundable filing fee in an amount established by
resolution of the city council. (Ord. 4282, 9-19-2016)
Chapter 4
GB (GB1, GB2 AND GBE) GATEWAY BUSINESS DISTRICTS/ZONES
10-4-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 272/410
The GB (Gateway Business) District is established to allow for the consistent development of areas surrounding community gateways or entryways. It is
designed to ensure that uses developing in these areas are compatible in nature and appearance and are encouraged to feature high standards of
architecture, landscaping and site planning.
The GB District is further subdivided into the GB1, GB2 and GBE (Entertainment) Districts. The GB1 District is intended for mixed use, primarily
commercial, development allowing a variety of highest and best land use alternatives with flexible development standards. The GB2 District also allows for
a mixing of development types, but is further intended to allow medium to high density residential projects within a mixed use neighborhood with a limiting
of allowable industrial uses. The GBE District is designed to encourage a concentration of entertainment uses that complement the Ford Idaho Center. The
GBE District is established to strengthen the role of the Ford Idaho Center as a Regional Entertainment District, emphasizing establishments attracting a
regional patronage. (Ord. 4281, 9-19-2016)
10-4-2: PERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES:
Permitted buildings and uses in the GB1, GB2 and GBE Districts shall be as set forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of
this title, subject to the general provisions and exceptions set forth in this and other chapters of this title. (Ord. 4281, 9-19-2016)
10-4-3: BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED CONDITIONALLY:
The planning and zoning commission may grant a conditional use permit for any of the conditional uses listed for the GB districts as set forth in section 10-
3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title. (Ord. 3036)
10-4-4: DETACHED ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Detached accessory buildings shall not be taller than the height of the principal building on the property or twenty two feet (22'), whichever is greater.
Accessory buildings shall comply with required front and interior yard setbacks. (Ord. 3036)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-4-5: PROPERTY DIMENSIONAL AND BULK REQUIREMENTS:
Construction of on site parking or structures shall comply with the following minimum requirements, except where duly increased by the City in conjunction
with issuance of a conditional use permit, or decreased in accordance with granting of a variance or planned unit development permit:
Required parking and building setback for GB1 and GB2 Districts abutting a right-of-way designated as
an arterial or collector by the functional classification map adopted in the transportation master plan
35 feet
Required parking and building setback for the GBE District abutting a right-of-way designated as an
arterial or collector by the functional classification map adopted in the transportation master plan
20 feet
Required parking and building setback abutting a right-of-way designated as a local (public) right-ofway
by the functional classification map adopted in the transportation master plan
15 feet
Required parking/display area setback, from property line, for a new, franchise automobile dealership
when abutting a public right-of-way
15 feet
Required parking and building setback for any use or aspect thereof from property line when abutting
(or across a right of way 80 feet or less in width from) any residential use or district
15 feet
Required interior yard parking and building setbacks for GB1 and GB2 districts 5 feet
GBE district interior yard parking and building setbacks 0 feet
Minimum average lot width None specified
Minimum property depth None specified
Maximum principal building height None specified
Maximum property coverage - corner lot(s) None specified
Minimum property coverage - interior lot(s) None specified
Minimum property area per multi-residential unit 6,000 square feet for first 2 units and
1,350 square feet required per unit
thereafter
(Ord. 4281, 9-19-2016)
10-4-6: PARKING:
All uses in the GB1 and GB2 districts shall conform to the parking and loading area standards in chapter 22 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 273/410
The entire GBE district shall have a parking maximum of three thousand five hundred (3,500) surface parking spaces and all parking in the district shall be
shared. The GBE district parking maximum is intended to promote efficient use of land. (Ord. 4281, 9-19-2016)
10-4-7: SIGNS:
All uses shall conform to the GB sign provisions found in chapter 23 of this title. (Ord. 3036)
10-4-8: OTHER REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
The following additional conditions shall apply:
A. Outside Uses: All principal uses except private or public parking areas and service station pump islands shall be in an entirely closed building unless
otherwise specified by a conditional use permit. Restaurants are permitted to have outdoor dining areas. Temporary uses may be allowed subject to
regulations cited in subsection 10-1-12B of this title. (Ord. 4281, 9-19-2016)
Accessory exterior storage affiliated with principal uses shall not be allowed in any area in front of the principal building(s) on a property and shall be
otherwise screened from view with a sight obscuring fence, wall or hedge not to exceed eight feet (8') in height. Materials so stored shall be kept below
the top of the fence.
B. Nuisances: All operations conducted on the premises shall not be allowed to constitute a nuisance by reason of smoke, fumes, odor, steam, gases,
vibrations, noise, hazards or other causes, beyond the property boundary lines, and shall comply with the performance standards of chapter 1 of this
title.
C. Pedestrian Pathways: Pedestrian pathways shall be required within the GB district to provide connectivity of adjacent residential uses to schools, parks,
shopping areas, public lands, transportation or other community facilities.
D. Access Control: Where possible individual property access to arterial streets shall not be allowed. Property owners and developers of parcels within GB
districts shall coordinate access with adjoining parcels so as to jointly share public and/or private approaches in an attempt to reduce the number of
access points along the length of arterial streets. Specific access standards shall be as adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 3036)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-4-9: LANDSCAPING:
All landscaping shall be established in accordance with the requirements of chapters 22 and 33 of this title; in addition, the following standards shall apply:
A. Landscape Plan Required: A landscape plan is required for all developments in the GB district. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale (no smaller
than 1 inch equals 30 feet) and shall indicate the following:
1. Boundaries, property lines and dimensions.
2. Existing trees and vegetation identified by species and size.
3. The location(s) and design(s) of areas to be landscaped.
4. The location and labels for all proposed plants.
5. Plant lists or schedules with the botanical and common name, quantity, spacing and size of all proposed landscape material at the time of planting.
6. Location and description of other landscape improvements, such as earthen berms, walls, fences, screens, sculptures, fountains, street furniture,
lights and courts or paved areas.
7. Planting and installation details as necessary to ensure conformance with all required standards. (Ord. 3450, 5-23-2005)
B. Berming: Along all properties (excepting those in the GBE district or whereon a new automobile dealership is established as the lot's/parcel's primary
use) that front rights of way within a GB zone, there shall be provided a continuous, landscaped berm. Berms shall be located within the required
landscape strip which is itself contained within and fills the entire required setback area. The berm shall be built up so as to be adjacent to a lot's or
parcel's property line which abuts public right of way. See the example below: (Ord. 4281, 9-19-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 274/410
Berming shall be emplaced in accordance with the following standards:
1. A twenty foot (20') wide landscaped berm area (1 foot rise to 3 foot run for a 3.3 foot height) shall be provided adjacent to arterial streets.
2. A fifteen foot (15') wide landscaped berm area (1 foot rise to 3 foot run for a 2.5 foot height) shall be provided adjacent to collector streets.
3. A seven foot (7') wide landscaped berm area (1 foot rise to 3 foot run for a 1.17 foot height) shall be provided adjacent to local streets.
4. A landscaped street median berm shall be provided in the design and construction of arterial streets situated within GB2 zoned areas. Within
medians, one city approved low growing deciduous street tree at least 2.5 inches in caliper shall be placed, on average, at least every twenty five
feet (25') on center; ground cover shall be grass.
C. Landscaped Area: In addition to landscaping within setback and right of way areas, landscaping shall also cover a minimum percentage of sites being
developed in the GB zone:
1. Landscaping shall cover a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the property being developed for any multiple-family residential use.
2. Landscaping shall cover a minimum of five percent (5%) of the property on all other development sites.
3. Landscaping within parking areas shall be furnished by interior planters. Said landscaping shall constitute five percent (5%) of the parking lot(s).
Perimeter parking area landscaping may count toward the five percent (5%).
4. If only a portion of a property is being developed, and if the city does not require improvements on the entire property, landscaping improvements
shall continue a minimum of twenty five feet (25') beyond the area of the immediate development site.
5. The number and spacing of trees and shrubs within landscape areas on arterial and collector streets shall be as required under subsection 10-33-
4A2, "Landscape Buffer Development", of this title.
D. Landscape Standards: The following general standards shall also apply to all landscaped areas on or around properties in the GB zone:
1. No required landscaped areas shall include any plastic or artificial trees, plants, shrubs, or any other carpeting designed as a vegetative substitute.
2. All landscaped areas shall be provided with an underground irrigation system.
3. All landscaped areas shall provide a mix in color and variety of evergreen and deciduous vegetation and shall include trees with a minimum of two
and one-half inch (21/2") caliper.
4. Clear vision triangles shall be observed in regard to location and allowed growth of all vegetation. All shade trees planted within a vision triangle shall
be pruned to a minimum of seven feet (7') above the ground or sidewalk below. Trees in vision triangles shall be pruned to a minimum of fourteen
feet (14') above the adjacent roadway surface. Shrubs and ground covers planted within a vision triangle shall not be allowed to exceed thirty inches
(30") in height at maturity (achieved either by pruning or using proper plant species selection).
E. Landscaping Adjacent To Residential Uses: All nonresidential development sites having a common boundary line with a residentially used property shall
have erected and maintained a view obscuring wall, fence or coniferous hedge not less than five feet (5'), nor more than six feet (6') in height for
screening purposes and controlling access. This screening provision shall not eliminate the requirement to provide pedestrian pathways or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 275/410
neighborhood street connections within the GB District to provide access of residential areas to schools, parks, shopping areas, public lands,
transportation or other community facilities.
However, where the wall of a preexisting nonresidential building (i.e., already on site and incorporated into a new development plan and/or use for the
property) is on such common property line, no separate wall or fence need be installed along that portion of the boundary occupied by the building.
Public utility installations need only fence and screen with appropriate materials such as base planting of coniferous shrubs or trees and climbing
coniferous plant materials on the fences to minimize the industrial character of such installations, with the area surrounding the fenced and screened
enclosure landscaped and planted to create a parklike atmosphere.
F. Landscaping Adjacent To The Boise Main Line Of The Oregon Short Line Railroad: All properties within GB Districts having frontage on the Boise Main
Line of the Oregon Short Line Railroad are encouraged to obtain approval and license from the Union Pacific Railroad for the landscaping and
maintenance of that portion of the railroad right-of-way beyond twenty five feet (25') from centerline. Landscaping plans for these areas shall be
reviewed and approved by the City in conjunction with site plan approval for building permit issuance. (Ord. 3450, 5-23-2005)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-4-10: DESIGN STANDARDS:
Design review is required in certain instances for projects developed in the GB Zones; see chapter 34 of this title. (Ord. 4421, 3-4-2019)
Chapter 5
U UNIVERSITY DISTRICT/ZONE
10-5-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The U university district is established to allow for the consistent development of a university campus throughout its planned expansion area and to ensure
that uses developed within the campus area are compatible in terms of nature and design with its master campus plan. (Ord. 2909)
10-5-2: PERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES:
Permitted buildings and uses in the U district shall be as set forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, subject to
the general provisions and exceptions set forth in this and other chapters of this title. (Ord. 2909)
10-5-3: BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED CONDITIONALLY:
The planning and zoning commission may grant a conditional use permit, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title, for any of
the conditional uses listed for the U district as set forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title. (Ord. 2909; amd. Ord.
2978)
10-5-4: DETACHED ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Detached accessory buildings in the U district shall not exceed one story or twenty feet (20') in height (whichever is more restrictive), and shall not occupy
more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of a Boise State University lot/parcel, and shall not be closer than ten feet (10') to each other or to the closest
principal building. Accessory buildings shall comply with the front and interior yard setbacks required for the (a) principal building and shall maintain a five
foot (5') setback from any interior lot property line. (Ord. 2909)
10-5-5: DIMENSIONAL AND BULK REQUIREMENTS:
The following shall be observed, except where increased in conjunction with issuance of a conditional use permit, or decreased in accordance with
granting of a variance or planned unit development allowance(s):
Required setback abutting public right of way 20 feet
Required setback from any university exterior property boundary 20 feet
Required setback from any abutting or across a right of way residential use or district 15 feet
Required interior yard setbacks 5 feet
Minimum average lot width None applicable
Minimum lot depth None applicable
Maximum principal building height None applicable
Maximum lot coverage _ corner lot(s) None applicable
Minimum lot coverage _ interior lot(s) None applicable
Minimum lot area per residential unit 6,000 for first 2 units and
1,350 square feet required
per unit thereafter
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 276/410
(Ord. 2909)
10-5-6: PARKING:
All uses shall conform to the general provisions and loading area standards of number, area, surface, screening and maintenance as required in chapter
22 of this title, with the following exceptions:
A. Within the university district, parking lot standards shall follow nationally recognized dimensional criteria for parking stall and drive aisle widths for
employee and student populations1. The following shall be parking lot design standards for landscaping, parking stall and drive aisle dimensions:
1. Standard Parking Stall Dimension: Eight feet six inches by twenty feet (8'6" x 20') (the depth can be lowered to 18 feet if the stall fronts a landscaped
area, or a sidewalk, such a sidewalk shall be no less than 6 feet in width).
2. Compact Parking Stall Dimension: Eight feet six inches by seventeen feet nine inches (8'6" x 17'9") (this modified depth includes a 2 foot overhang
and all such stalls shall be located at landscape islands). The maximum number of compact stalls shall not exceed more than twenty percent (20%)
of the total required parking spaces in any lot.
3. Accessible Parking Spaces: The minimum required number of accessible parking spaces shall be determined by the Americans with disabilities act
"Accessibility Guidelines". All required accessible parking spaces shall occur in fully improved parking lots, as defined in section 10-22-9 of this title.
4. Drive Aisles: Drive aisles for lots with ninety degree (90°) parking stalls shall be no less than twenty four feet (24') in width for two-way traffic. This
dimension can be lowered to twenty two feet (22'), if angled parking is used.
5. Frequency Of Landscape Islands (Located Within Parking Aisles): Landscape islands shall be no less than forty five feet (45') apart, or such
frequency to ensure the landscape coverage and tree shade coverage percentages.
6. Dimensions Of Landscape Islands (Located Within Parking Aisles): Eight feet six inches by eight feet six inches (8'6" x 8'6") minimum, oriented in the
direction of the adjacent parking stalls.
7. Landscape Coverage: The total landscape coverage for any parking lot (excluding required perimeter or setback landscaping) shall be no less than
five percent (5%) of the total area of any parking lot.
8. Trees: A minimum of one tree shall be planted in each landscape island. Each tree shall be a minimum two inch (2") caliper at the time of planting.
9. Tree Shade Coverage: At the time of maturity, the trees planted in the required landscaping of any given parking lot shall provide fifty percent (50%)
shade coverage for each parking lot (assuming a 40 foot diameter canopy).
B. The minimum number of parking spaces shall be no less than five (5) stalls per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet of the subject facility. All
required parking shall occur within fully improved parking lots as defined in section 10-22-5 of this title.
C. Interim parking lots shall be allowed within the university district subject to the following criteria:
1. Interim parking lots shall provide for periodic general employee and public parking that is not required to meet the parking standards for any specific
existing facility. Interim parking lots may be used as a temporary replacement for required parking that is under construction.
2. The interim parking lot must be compatible with the land use designations, goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan.
3. The interim parking lot must be compatible with the surrounding land uses or conditions must be added to ensure compatibility.
4. Interim parking lots will be allowed only in areas that are identified as sites for future buildings or hardscape improvements on the campus, as
determined in the relevant campus master plan. This will allow for the eventual and automatic termination of any interim parking lot.
5. Interim parking lots must be constructed to the minimum standards as set below:
a. A gravel or paved surface is required on all access and parking areas. Gravel surfaces must be maintained to minimize airborne dust. A
maintenance plan must be submitted to the Nampa city public works department to address airborne dust mitigation.
b. Interim parking lots shall include concrete or equivalent wheel stops that clearly designate each parking space.
c. Wheel stops must be centered to provide for the minimum dimensional requirements for parking spaces and driveways as set forth in subsections
A1 and A4 of this section. (Ord. 3246, 8-4-2003)
10-5-7: SIGNS:
All uses shall conform to the sign provisions of chapter 23 of this title. (Ord. 2909)
10-5-8: OTHER REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
The following additional conditions shall apply:
A. Outside Uses: All uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except for approved temporary uses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 277/410
B. Landscaping: Within the university district the following landscaping standards shall apply:
1. Landscape Plan Required: A landscape plan is required for all developments in the U district. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale (no smaller
than 1 inch equals 30 feet) and shall indicate the following:
a. Boundaries, property lines and dimensions.
b. Existing trees and vegetation identified by species and size.
c. The location(s) and design(s) of areas to be landscaped.
d. The location and labels for all proposed plants.
e. Plant lists or schedules with the botanical and common name, quantity, spacing and size of all proposed landscape material at the time of planting.
f. Location and description of other landscape improvements, such as earthen berms, walls, fences, screens, sculptures, fountains, street furniture,
lights and courts or paved areas.
g. Planting and installation details as necessary to ensure conformance with all required standards.
C. New Landscape Requirements:
1. Along any/all public streets there must be provided a continuous, "bermed", landscaped area (measured from back of curb) in accordance with the
following standards:
a. A fifteen foot (15') wide landscaped berm area adjacent to arterial or collector streets shall be provided.
b. A seven foot (7') wide landscaped berm adjacent to local public streets shall be provided.
c. Shrubs, lawn, ground cover and trees shall be provided in all landscaped (setback) areas and shall require city approval before being emplaced.
d. Along Can-Ada Road the following berm requirements shall be enforced:
(1) From the railroad right of way north to the Birch Street intersection, the berm and landscape requirements shall be as set forth in subsection
C1a of this section.
(2) From the Birch Street intersection north to the Boise State University campus north property line, the landscape requirements shall be as set
forth in the BSU west campus master plan. Such improvements will exclude requirements for berming due to the immediately adjacent one
million one hundred sixty four thousand five hundred thirty seven (1,164,537) square foot (26.73 acre) landscaped activity park and main
campus formal quadrangle. Such waiver of landscape berm shall be contingent upon the perpetual open space preservation of said 26.73 acre
activity park and main campus formal quadrangle.
(3) Funding for landscape improvements within the Can-Ada Road right of way shall comply with the terms of the memorandum of understanding
between the city of Nampa and Boise State University.
2. In addition to landscaping within setback areas, landscaping shall also cover a minimum percentage of sites being developed in the U Zone:
a. Landscaping shall cover a minimum of five percent (5%) of the property being developed.
b. Landscaping, within parking areas shall be furnished by interior planters. Said landscaping shall constitute five percent (5%) of the parking lot(s).
c. If only a portion of a property is being developed, and if the City does not require improvements on the entire property, landscaping improvements
shall continue a minimum of twenty five feet (25') beyond the area of the immediate development on the site.
3. Certain general landscape standards shall also apply to all landscaped areas on or around properties:
a. Plants shall not include plastic or other artificial materials.
b. All landscaped areas shall be provided with an underground irrigation system. All landscaped areas shall provide a mix in color and variety of
evergreen and deciduous vegetation and shall include trees with a minimum of two inch (2") caliper. (Ord. 3246, 8-4-2003)
c. Trees in vision clearance areas shall be trimmed at least nine feet (9') above the curb and/or sidewalk, and, at least fourteen feet (14') above the
street to provide clear visibility up to that height. Shrubs and site obscuring fences or walls in vision clearance areas shall not exceed two and onehalf
feet (21/2') (i.e., 30 inches) in height above the curb line. (Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
D. Existing Vegetation:
1. Planting Within Right-Of-Way: Planting within public rights-of-way shall be allowed only by approval of the City.
2. Damage During Construction: Existing trees or shrubs that are retained shall be protected from damage to bark, branches, or roots during
construction. Construction or excavation occurring within the drip line of any public or private, retained tree or shrub may severely damage the tree or
shrub. Any severely damaged tree or shrub shall be replaced.
3. Grade Changes And Impervious Surfaces: Grade changes and impervious surfaces shall be allowed at a distance from the trunk of a retained tree
equal to the diameter of the tree trunk plus six feet (6'), or to the drip line, whichever is furthest from the trunk.
4. Minimum Landscaping: Existing vegetation which is to be retained may be used to satisfy the minimum required landscape standard.
5. Irrigation: All landscaping shall be provided with an irrigation system acceptable to the City Forester.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 278/410
E. Prohibited Materials And Landscaping:
1. No required landscape areas shall include artificial trees, plants, or any carpeting designed as a vegetative substitute. (Ord. 3246, 8-4-2003)
2. Trees in vision clearance areas shall be trimmed at least nine feet (9') above the curb and/or sidewalk, and, at least fourteen feet (14') above the
street to provide clear visibility up to that height. Shrubs and site obscuring fences or walls in vision clearance areas shall not exceed two and onehalf
feet (21/2') (i.e., 30 inches) in height above the curb line. (Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
Chapter 6
AG AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT/ZONE
10-6-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The AG agricultural district allows the establishment of agricultural operations within the city. Such agricultural district is deemed necessary to preserve the
economic and social values of agricultural lands and to provide a district, the boundary of which will provide the transition between "rural" and "urban".
(Ord. 2140)
10-6-2: PERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES:
Permitted buildings and uses in the AG district shall be as set forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, subject to
the general provisions and exceptions set forth in this and other chapters of this title.
Move-on houses may be permitted in accordance with compliance with regulations in section 10-1-21 of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2978)
10-6-3: BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED CONDITIONALLY:
The commission may grant a conditional use permit for any of the conditional uses listed for the AG district as set forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of
District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title. (Ord. 2140)
10-6-4: BUILDING HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed either two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty feet (30') in height. (Ord. 2140)
10-6-5: PROPERTY AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
A. Minimum property area required shall be five (5) acres.
B. Minimum property width required shall be three hundred feet (300').
C. Minimum property front yard setback required shall be fifty feet (50').
D. Minimum property interior (side/rear) yard setbacks shall be fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2978)
10-6-6: MAXIMUM PROPERTY COVERAGE:
None specified. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3006)
10-6-7: PARKING, PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING, PROPERTY LANDSCAPING AND SIGNS:
All uses shall conform to the parking, parking lot landscaping, property landscaping and sign provisions of chapters 22, 23 and 33 of this title. (Ord. 2140;
amd. Ord. 2978)
10-6-8: OTHER REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
Any building or enclosure in which animals or fowl, except domestic pets, not more than four (4), are contained shall be distant at least two hundred feet
(200') from any lot in any RS, RD, RML, RMH, BN or BC district, or from any school or institution for human care. (Ord. 3354, 6-7-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 279/410
Chapter 7
RA SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT/ZONE
10-7-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The RA suburban residential district is designed to create a semirural environment within which certain limited agricultural pursuits are carried on in
conjunction with, or in close proximity to, subdivisions containing nonfarm type dwellings. It is the further intent to have the full range of urban services
available within this district. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-7-2: PERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES:
Permitted buildings and uses in the RA district shall be as set forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, subject to
the general provisions and exceptions set forth in this and other chapters of this title.
Move-on houses may be permitted in accordance with compliance with regulations in section 10-1-21 of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2978)
10-7-3: BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED CONDITIONALLY:
The planning and zoning commission may grant a conditional use permit for any of the conditional uses listed for the RA district as set forth in section 10-
3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title. (Ord. 2140)
10-7-4: BUILDING HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No principal building shall exceed either two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty feet (30') in height. (Ord. 2140)
10-7-5: DETACHED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
Detached accessory structures shall not be taller than the height of the principal building on the property or twenty two feet (22'), whichever is greater.
Accessory buildings shall comply with required front and interior yard setbacks. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-7-6: PROPERTY AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be complied with:
A. Minimum property area required shall be thirty thousand (30,000) square feet.
B. Minimum front property line width required shall be one hundred fifty feet (150').
C. Minimum property front yard setback required shall be thirty five feet (35').
D. Minimum property interior (side/rear) yard setbacks required shall be not less than ten feet (10') wide/deep, except where a utility easement is recorded
adjacent to a side property line or rear property line in which case the interior yard setback shall then be either ten feet (10') or the width of the
easement, whichever is greater (more restrictive).
E. All single-family residential lots/parcels developed/built out, or proposed to be developed/built out with either attached or detached single-family
residential dwelling units (houses or townhouses) thereon, shall have legal access to a public street as noted in the definition of "property" in section
10-1-2 of this title, and, shall have at least twenty two feet (22') of public or approved private street lot frontage or approved common driveway frontage
(as iterated in subsection 10-1-7B1 of this title). (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-7-7: MAXIMUM PROPERTY COVERAGE:
None specified. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3006)
10-7-8: CORNER PROPERTIES:
Corner lots shall utilize the minimum front yard setback requirements on one street side. One-half (1/2) the minimum front yard setback requirement shall
be required on the second street side. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-7-9: PARKING, PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING, SIGNAGE AND PROPERTY LANDSCAPING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 280/410
All uses shall conform to the parking, parking lot landscaping, signage, and property landscaping requirements in chapters 22, 23 and 33 of this title. (Ord.
2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
Chapter 8
RS SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS/ZONES
10-8-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The RS single-family residential district is intended for low density, urban single-family residential and compatible uses. A stable and healthful
environment, together with the full range of urban services, makes this an important land use district within the community. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-8-2: PERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES:
Permitted buildings and uses in the RS district shall be as set forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, subject to
the general provisions and exceptions set forth in this and other chapters of this title.
Move-on houses may be permitted in accordance with compliance with regulations in section 10-1-21 of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2978)
10-8-3: BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED CONDITIONALLY:
The planning and zoning commission may grant a conditional use permit for any of the conditional uses listed for the RS district as set forth in section 10-
3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title.
A. Two-unit single-family attached zero lot line dwellings shall comply with the following requirements:
1. All applicable city, state and federal building regulations pertaining to common walls and/or zero lot line construction shall be complied with. Area
separation walls and roofs shall comply with the uniform building code.
2. Common walls shall be adequately soundproofed in accordance with the uniform building code.
3. Electrical, domestic water supply, sewer, heating and air conditioning systems, etc., shall be separately installed for each dwelling unit. In no case
shall such systems penetrate common walls.
4. Deeds or covenants pertaining to buildings shall contain appropriate provisions regarding harmonious maintenance of individually or commonly
owned indoor or outdoor walls and outdoor yard areas.
5. Maintenance or encroachment easements shall be recorded as necessary for individual owners to assure access to all privately owned yard areas
and outdoor walls.
6. Overall lot areas, lot width, and yard/setback requirements for two-dwelling unit style structures shall be the same as for single dwelling unit
structures excepting one standard. Side setbacks (minimum side yards) shall be required to be but five feet (5') on either side of a two-dwelling unit
structure regardless of whether an alley abuts the property whereupon a two-unit dwelling is proposed to be emplaced. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3077)
10-8-4: BUILDING HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No principal building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty feet (30') in height. (Ord. 2140)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-8-5: DETACHED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
Shall comply with standards in section 10-3-2 of this title and, in addition, the following regulations apply:
A. Detached accessory structures shall not be taller than the height of the principal building on the property or twenty two feet (22'), whichever is greater.
B. Detached accessory structures over two hundred (200) square feet (201+) in footprint area shall comply with required front and interior yard setbacks
that apply to principal buildings and require a building permit.
C. Detached accessory structures two hundred (200) square feet or under and twelve feet (12') or lower in height may be built to within five feet (5') of any
property line provided they are: at least three feet (3') from any primary structure wall (unless a building permit is obtained from the city to locate closer
to the house), do not interfere with provision of at least ten feet (10') of clear, uninterrupted access from the front yard to the back of a home.
D. In no case shall accessory structures be located closer to the front property line/street line than any covered part of the house to which they are
accessory. In other words, they shall not be placed or built in front of the home.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 281/410
E. As noted in subsection 10-1-7D3 of this title, only two (2) accessory structures per property are permitted in the RS zone. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-8-6: PROPERTY AREA, WIDTH, DEPTH, FRONTAGE AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
In order for a property to be eligible for development the following requirements shall be adhered to:
RS Zoning
District/Zone
Maximum
Number Dwelling
Units Per Acre
Required
Property Area1
Required
Property
Width
Required
Mean Property
Depth
Required
Street
Frontage2
RS 6 7.26 6,000 50 feet 60 feet 22 feet
RS 7 6.22 7,000 50 feet 70 feet 22 feet
RS 8.5 5.12 8,500 70 feet 80 feet 22 feet
RS 12 3.63 12,000 80 feet 80 feet 22 feet
RS 15 2.90 15,000 100 feet 80 feet 22 feet
RS 18 2.42 18,000 100 feet 80 feet 22 feet
RS 22 1.98 22,000 100 feet 80 feet 22 feet
Notes:
1. All single-family residential lots/parcels developed/built out (or proposed to be developed/built out) with either attached or detached single-family
residential dwelling units (i.e., houses or townhouses) thereon, shall have/maintain at least 22 feet of public street frontage.
Exception: Building lots established in accordance with subsection 10-27-4A of this title during the platting process may enjoy smaller than
normal minimum lot sizes as stated in that section. However, terms of a development agreement or entitlement instrument/permit may require
otherwise.
Note that RS 6 and RS 7 zoned single-family residential subdivision lot averaging requirements [may] artificially cap gross density yield in those
zones (see section 10-27-6 of this title).
2. Lots/parcels that abut a city approved private street, or, a city approved common driveway, shall have/maintain at least 22 feet of frontage
abutting that private street or common driveway. Such lots/parcels shall also be demonstrated to have legal access/connection, via a city approved
private street or common driveway, to a public street before the city may issue a building permit(s) or approve construction of any structure(s) on
said residential lot/parcel(s) (as iterated in the definition of "property" in section 10-1-2, "Definitions", and subsection 10-1-7B1 of this title).
(Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
A. Sizing Properties: Properties formed via survey split shall be sized according to city zoning or Southwest district health standards, whichever is more
restrictive. Properties formed by platting that are not or will not be served by city sewer and/or city water supply shall meet the minimum size standards
regulated by Southwest district health department.
B. Property Dimensions Maintained: When a single-family dwelling is located, or is to be located, on an interior property line, the required property
dimensions shall be maintained or required as appropriate. When a single-family dwelling is located, or is to be located, on a platted corner lot then lot
dimensions may be reduced in accordance with provisions in section 10-8-8 of this chapter.
C. Minimum Property Structure And Parking Front Yard (Setback): Shall be twenty feet (20') wide/deep. Single-family dwellings (houses) are allowed a
reduction to the required twenty foot (20') front setback under certain conditions:
1. When a new house is proposed to be built, or an existing house added onto and that house lies within a city subdivision platted with square three
hundred foot by three hundred foot (300' x 300') blocks, and the houses to either side of the house under consideration that lie in the same block, on
the same side of any alley and abutting the same street are, on average, closer to their front property lines than twenty feet (20'), then the new house
or addition may encroach into the twenty foot (20') setback to some degree.
Specifically, the house or addition may be as close as the average of the other homes' encroachment; provided it never sits closer than fifteen feet
(15') to the front property line. However, in no case shall any garage or carport affiliated with a new or expanding house be allowed to be closer than
twenty feet (20') to the front property line.
2. When a new house is proposed to be built, or an existing house added onto and that house lies within the city subdivision platted in other than
square three hundred foot by three hundred foot (300' x 300') blocks, and the houses to either side of the house under consideration, on average,
happen to be closer to their front property lines than twenty feet (20'), then the new house or addition may encroach into the twenty foot (20') setback
to some degree.
Specifically, the house or addition may be as close as the average of the other two (2) homes' encroachment; provided it never sits closer than fifteen
feet (15') to the front property line. However, in no case shall any garage or carport affiliated with a new or expanding house be allowed to be closer
than twenty feet (20') to the front property line. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 282/410
D. Minimum Property Structure And Parking Interior (Side/Rear) Yards: Shall be five feet (5') wide/deep, except where a utility easement is recorded
adjacent to a side property line, there shall be provided a side yard (setback) at least the width of the easement on the development site or five feet
(5'), whichever is greater. Where a utility easement is recorded adjacent to a rear lot line, the rear interior yard (setback) shall be the width of the
easement on the development site or five feet (5'), whichever is greater.
For a property abutting an alley the required rear yard setback shall be fifteen feet (15') from the centerline of that alley. (Ord. 4282, 9-19-2016)
10-8-7: MAXIMUM PROPERTY COVERAGE:
None specified. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3006)
10-8-8: PLATTED CORNER LOTS:
Platted corner lots (left undisturbed from 1947) shall observe the minimum front yard setback requirements on one street side. One-half (1/2) the minimum
setback requirements shall be observed on the second street side.
Regarding 1947 corner lot splits, the side yard of the lot at the corner and the front yard of the new lot (set away from the abutting intersection corner) shall
provide at least ten feet (10') for their street side and front yard setback areas respectively. Refer to illustration in this section:
Two-unit, zero lot line attached units or two (2) detached single-family dwellings or two (2) detached prefabricated homes may be permitted on platted
corner lots when the following criteria are met:
A. Location: On lots platted prior to 1947, and left in original configuration, that are at least fifty feet (50') wide by one hundred forty feet (140') deep.
B. Special Requirements: Requirement number 3 shall have no effect on corner lots containing two (2) existing single-family homes prior to June 16, 1975.
Other listed requirements shall have no effect on corner lots containing two (2) existing single-family homes prior to April 16, 1979, provided no
conditional use permit has been granted containing any of the requirements. In instances where a conditional use permit has been granted, conditions
of the permit shall be adhered to.
1. Two (2) off street parking spaces shall be provided for each lot in accordance with requirements noted in section 10-8-11 of this chapter.
2. Curb, gutter and sidewalk shall be provided along entire depth of the original lot.
3. The smallest parcel shall have two (2) property lines at least sixty five feet (65') in length.
4. Utility services shall be located in recorded easements on private property. Utility easements and utility lines placed within the same shall be
arranged such that no building construction will occur over utility lines.
5. Property survey pins for each lot shall be placed prior to the issuance of a building permit for the new home.
6. Construction shall comply with plans submitted, approved and on file with the building division.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 283/410
7. The building official shall not issue a certificate of occupancy until the engineering, planning and zoning and building divisions are satisfied that all of
the stated requirements have been complied with. In the event that any of the requirements are not satisfied, a bond shall be required in the amount
of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the value of those that are incomplete.
8. An application for a building permit shall include a plot plan showing existing conditions and proposed improvements at a scale of at least one inch to
twenty feet (1" = 20'). (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-8-9: AREA OF INTERIOR "FLAG" PROPERTIES:
The area within the strip of ground (flagpole) connecting a building property with a street (and thereby providing "frontage" for the property) shall not be
considered as part of the flag property's total area. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2978)
10-8-10: SIGNS:
Shall conform to the requirements set forth in chapter 23 of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3077)
10-8-11: PARKING AND PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING AND PROPERTY LANDSCAPING:
At least two (2) paved, off street parking spaces shall be provided per residential dwelling unit (e.g., house) in the RS zone. Such spaces shall be located
on the property whereupon lies the dwelling unit.
After the passage date hereof each new house or manufactured home shall have at time of construction, and shall maintain ever after, covered parking
entailing, as a minimum, at least one of the off street parking spaces sheltered within a single car garage, or, under a carport structure (which has an
accessory storage structure attached thereto) that, in either case, does not lie within a required setback.
Conversion of all or part of space within a garage that existed prior to the passage date hereof may be allowed provided that at least one covered and/or
enclosed parking space is created elsewhere on the same property within a new garage or under a new carport placed in conformance with setback
requirements. Further, legal access to a public right of way or approved common drive shall be required for any new garage or carport provided.
Other uses shall conform to the parking, parking lot landscaping, and property landscaping requirements in chapters 22, 23 and 33 of this title. (Ord. 4070,
10-7-2013)
Chapter 9
HC HEALTHCARE DISTRICT/ZONE
10-9-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The HC Healthcare District is established to allow for the consistent development of medical center campuses and to ensure that uses developed
adjoining any such campus area(s) are compatible in terms of nature and design to the hospital. A stable and healthful environment, together with the
range of human care services, makes this one of the most important land use settings of the community. (Ord. 4203, 10-19-2015)
10-9-2: PERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES:
Permitted buildings and uses in the HC District shall be as set forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, subject to
the general provisions and exceptions set forth in this and other chapters of this title. (Ord. 4203, 10-19-2015)
10-9-3: BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED CONDITIONALLY:
The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant a conditional use permit for any of the conditional uses listed for the HC District as set forth in section 10-
3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title. (Ord. 4203, 10-19-
2015)
10-9-4: PROPERTY DIMENSIONAL AND BULK REQUIREMENTS:
The following shall be observed, except where increased for conditional use, or decreased according to the planned unit development criteria:
Minimum required parking and building setback where abutting public right-of-way classified as a
"collector" or "arterial"
20 feet
Minimum required parking and building setback where abutting public right-of-way classified as a
"local"
5 feet
Minimum required parking and building setback from interstate right-of-way 5 feet
Minimum required parking and building setback from exterior zone boundary line 10 feet
Minimum required setback from any residentially zoned property 20 feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 284/410
Minimum required interior yard setback(s) 0 feet (none applicable)
Minimum average lot width None specified
Minimum property depth None specified
Maximum principal building height None specified
Maximum accessory building height No higher than principal building(s) on same
property
Maximum property coverage; corner lot(s) None specified
Minimum property coverage; interior lot(s) None specified
Minimum property area None specified
(Ord. 4203, 10-19-2015)
10-9-5: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
A. Shall comply with setback and height standards in section 10-9-4 of this chapter; and
B. Shall in no case be located closer to a/the front property line/street line than any principal building(s) on the same property to which they are accessory.
In other words, they shall not be placed or built in front of a principal building home; and
C. Shall be made to mimic, in use of colors and materials, the principal building(s) to which they are accessory; and
D. Shall not exceed in gross square footage the footprint square footage of any principal building on the same property. (Ord. 4203, 10-19-2015)
10-9-6: SIGNS:
All signs in the HC zone shall be regulated according to the sign regulations of the BC zone as listed in chapter 23 of this title. (Ord. 4203, 10-19-2015)
10-9-7: PARKING:
All parking spaces and lots shall conform to standards stated in chapter 22 of this title save as otherwise regulated hereafter.
A. Parking Lot Landscaping Standards: Internal parking lot landscaping shall conform to the following standards:
1. Parking lot landscape island planter interrupts as required by subsection 10-22-5J6 of this title are not required in interior parking lot banks. Rather,
landscape strips as detailed in figure X1 of this section are required between parking banks. Within such landscape strips, three inch (3") caliper
deciduous shade trees from the species listed in table X3 of this section shall be planted every forty feet (40') on center running laterally through the
strip.
TABLE X3
PARKING LOT LANDSCAPE ISLAND APPROVED TREES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 285/410
Norway maple (various cultivars)
Common hackberry
Turkish filbert
Ginkgo (various cultivars)
Thornless common honey locust ("imperial", "shademaster" or "skyline" cultivars only)
Goldenrain tree
American sweetgum (various cultivars)
Flowering pear ("Cleveland select" or "chanticleer" cultivars only)
Littleleaf linden (various cultivars)
Japanese zelkova (various cultivars)
Common hornbeam
American beech
Common beech
Green ash (various cultivars)
White ash (various cultivars)
English oak (various cultivars)
Chinese elm ("frontier" cultivar only)
Smoothleaf elm (various cultivars)
Or, as otherwise may be allowed by the city forester
2. Parking lot landscape island planter interrupts as required by subsection 10-22-5J6 of this title shall be emplaced in perimeter parking lot bank
locations. However, such planters shall only be required to be seven feet six inches (7'6") wide as depicted in figure X2 of this section.
A one foot (1') cutout (preferred) or six (6) to eight foot (8') culvert pipe (less preferred) may be used at the end of or within a perimeter parking planter's
abutment against a curb or other barrier in order to facilitate site drainage (e.g., stormwater flow across a parking lot into a drain) (see "Image (Example
#1)" of this section).
IMAGE (EXAMPLE #1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 286/410
B. Landscape Planter Spacing: Interior parking lot planters shall be located at intervals not to exceed ninety feet (90') within each parking bank except for
any parking bank/row located immediately fronting/against any principal commercial or industrial (termed commercial collectively) building on a site and
between the limits/span of its exterior side walls, for which such placement is optional.
If a parking bank that abuts the front entry area of such a building extends past the outside walls of the building, then planters shall be required where
any continuous ninety foot (90') parking space intervals are found past the building walls (refer to the illustration in subsection 10-22-5J6 of this title).
(Ord. 4203, 10-19-2015)
10-9-8: LANDSCAPING:
Within the Healthcare Zone the following landscaping standards shall apply:
A. Landscape Plan Required: A landscape plan is required for all developments in the HC District. The landscape plan shall be drawn to scale (no smaller
than 1 inch = 30 feet) and shall indicate the following:
1. Boundaries, property lines and dimensions.
2. Existing trees and vegetation identified by species and size.
3. The location(s) and design(s) of areas to be landscaped.
4. The location and labels for all proposed plants.
5. Plant lists or schedules with the botanical and common name, quantity, spacing and size of all proposed landscape material at the time of planting.
6. Location and description of other landscape improvements, such as earth berms, walls, fences, screens, sculptures, fountains, street furniture, lights
and courts or paved areas.
7. Planting and installation details as necessary to ensure conformance with all required standards.
B. Prohibited Landscaping Materials And Location(s):
1. No required landscape areas shall include artificial trees, plants, or any carpeting designed as a vegetative substitute. (Ord. 4203, 10-19-2015)
2. Trees in vision clearance areas shall be trimmed at least nine feet (9') above the curb and/or sidewalk, and, at least fourteen feet (14') above the
street to provide clear visibility up to that height. Shrubs and site obscuring fences or walls in vision clearance areas shall not exceed two and onehalf
feet (21/2') (i.e., 30 inches) in height above the curb line. (Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
C. Landscaping Irrigation: All landscape areas and landscape islands shall be irrigated.
D. Where Required: As required by chapter 33 of this title, all periphery parking lot and property setback yard areas shall be landscaped. (Landscaping
along any public right-of-way classified as a "collector" or as an "arterial" shall be landscaped in accordance with the specific corridor beautification
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 287/410
requirements listed in section 10-33-4 of this title.)
E. Sidewalks/Pathways Within Landscape Setbacks And Planter Strips: Internal property sidewalks (i.e., not within public right-of-way) connecting a
parking lot section to a building may be included in perimeter setback areas and parking lot planter landscape strips as accessory amenities to the
property; however, they shall not have the effect of substantially reducing the amount of parking lot landscaping (required to be) provided to the
property. (Ord. 4203, 10-19-2015)
10-9-9: FENCING/SCREENING:
Fencing/screening not designed to hide mechanical equipment or refuse containers/dumpsters shall conform to the fencing provisions as required in
chapter 1 of this title. Fencing designed to hide mechanical equipment or refuse containers/dumpsters shall be consistent in its construction with the
architectural aesthetics and characteristics of the main building. Fencing along Interstate 84 shall be set back at least one foot (1') from the street line
thereof. (Ord. 4203, 10-19-2015)
10-9-10: DESIGN STANDARDS:
Design review is required in certain instances for projects developed in the HC Zones; see chapter 34 of this title. (Ord. 4421, 3-4-2019)
Chapter 10
RD TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT/ZONE
10-10-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The RD two-family (duplex) residential district is intended to protect quiet residential areas now developed or developing, while at the same time allowing a
limited increase in population density by permitting two (2), three (3), or four (4) attached dwelling units on a minimum sized lot. The maintenance of a
desirable living environment is provided by means of the standards and requirements establishing minimum lot areas, yards and open spaces. A related
consideration is to make it possible to more efficiently and economically design and install all public service facilities in terms of size and capacity
adequately to meet the needs resulting from a defined intensity of land use. (Ord. 2140)
10-10-2: PERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES:
Permitted buildings and uses in the RD district shall be as set forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, subject to
the general provisions and exceptions set forth in this and other chapters of this title:
A. Move-on houses may be permitted in accordance with compliance with regulations in section 10-1-21 of this title.
B. Two-family, three-family or four-family zero property line dwellings shall comply with the following requirements:
1. All applicable city, state and federal building regulations pertaining to common wall and/or zero lot line construction shall be complied with. Area
separation walls and roofs shall comply with the uniform building code.
2. Common walls shall be adequately soundproofed in accordance with the uniform building code.
3. Electrical, domestic water supply, sewer, heating and air conditioning systems, etc., shall be separately installed for each dwelling unit. In no case
shall such systems penetrate common walls.
4. Deeds or covenants pertaining to buildings shall contain appropriate provisions regarding harmonious maintenance of individually or commonly
owned indoor or outdoor walls and outdoor yard areas.
5. Maintenance or encroachment easements shall be recorded as necessary for individual owners to assure access to all privately owned yard areas
and outdoor walls.
6. Overall property area, width, coverage and yard requirements for buildings shall be the same as for buildings under single ownership. (Ord. 2140;
amd. Ord. 2978)
10-10-3: BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED CONDITIONALLY:
The planning and zoning commission may grant a conditional use permit for any of the conditional uses listed for the RD district as set forth in section 10-
3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd.
Ord. 2909)
10-10-4: BUILDING HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No principal building shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty feet (30') in height. (Ord. 2140)
10-10-5: DETACHED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 288/410
Detached accessory structures shall not be taller than the height of the principal building on the property or twenty two feet (22'), whichever is greater.
Accessory structures shall comply with required front and interior yard setbacks that apply to principal buildings and shall not (except in the case of
detached garages or carports) be located closer to the front property line/street line than any building of one or more dwelling units (e.g., house, duplex,
triplex, fourplex) to which they are accessory. In other words, they shall not be placed or built in front of a principal building. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-10-6: PROPERTY AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
A. Minimum Property Area Required: When a single-family dwelling is located or is to be located on an interior platted lot, a minimum of seven thousand
(7,000) square feet of property lot area shall be maintained or required. When a single-family dwelling is located or to be located on a platted corner lot,
the lot area requirement may be reduced in accordance with section 10-10-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
B. Minimum Property Area Required Per Dwelling Unit(s): The first two (2) units require seven thousand (7,000) square feet and additional units require
three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of land each/per unit. (Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
C. Minimum Property Width: Minimum property width required shall be fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
D. Minimum Property Structure And Parking Front Yard (Setback): Shall be twenty feet (20') wide/deep. Single-family dwellings (houses) are allowed a
reduction to the required twenty foot (20') front setback under certain conditions:
1. When a new house is proposed to be built, or an existing house added onto and that house lies within a City subdivision platted with square three
hundred foot by three hundred foot (300' x 300') blocks, and the houses to either side of the house under consideration that lie in the same block, on
the same side of any alley and abutting the same street are, on average, closer to their front property lines than twenty feet (20'), then the new house
or addition may encroach into the twenty foot (20') setback to some degree.
Specifically, the house or addition may be as close as the average of the other homes' encroachment; provided it never sits closer than fifteen feet
(15') to the front property line. However, in no case shall any garage or carport affiliated with a new or expanding house be allowed to be closer than
twenty feet (20') to the front property line.
2. When a new house is proposed to be built, or an existing house added onto and that house lies within the City subdivision platted in other than
square three hundred foot by three hundred foot (300' x 300') blocks, and the houses to either side of the house under consideration, on average,
happen to be closer to their front property lines than twenty feet (20'), then the new house or addition may encroach into the twenty foot (20') setback
to some degree.
Specifically, the house or addition may be as close as the average of the other two (2) homes' encroachment; provided it never sits closer than fifteen
feet (15') to the front property line. However, in no case shall any garage or carport affiliated with a new or expanding house be allowed to be closer
than twenty feet (20') to the front property line. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
E. Minimum Interior Yard Setback: Minimum property interior (side/rear) yard setbacks shall be not less than five feet (5') wide/deep. Where a utility
easement is recorded adjacent to a side property line, there shall be provided a side yard (setback) no less than the width of the easement or five feet
(5') whichever is greater. Where a utility easement is recorded adjacent to a rear property line, the rear interior yard (setback) shall be no less than the
width of the easement on the development site or five feet (5'), whichever is greater. (Ord. 4282, 9-19-2016)
F. Access: All lots/parcels developed/"built out", or proposed to be developed/"built out" with structures thereon shall have, or be demonstrated to have,
legal access to a public street, before the City may issue or approve construction of any structures on that lot/parcel (as iterated in the definition of
"property" in section 10-1-2, "Definitions", and subsection 10-1-7B1 of this title). Lots/parcels developed in this zone do not have to have direct
lot/parcel frontage on a public street however, only legal access to the same. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-10-7: LOTS ABUTTING AN ALLEY:
In a lot abutting an alley the required rear yard setback shall be fifteen feet (15') from the centerline of any alley. (Ord. 2140)
10-10-8: MAXIMUM PROPERTY COVERAGE:
None specified. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3006)
10-10-9: CORNER LOTS:
Platted corner lots shall observe the minimum front yard setback requirements on one street side. One-half (1/2) the minimum front yard setback
requirements shall be required on the second street side. Regarding corner lot splits, the side yard of the lot at the corner and the front yard of the new lot,
set away from the abutting intersection corner, shall provide at least ten feet (10') for their street side and front yard setback areas respectively.
Two (2) single-family dwellings may be permitted on corner lots when the following criteria are met:
A. Location: On lots platted prior to 1947 that are at least fifty feet (50') wide by one hundred forty feet (140') deep.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 289/410
B. Special Requirements: Requirement number 3 shall have no effect on corner lots containing two (2) existing single-family homes prior to June 16, 1975.
Other listed requirements shall have no effect on corner lots containing two (2) existing single-family homes prior to April 16, 1979, provided no
conditional use permit has been granted containing any of the requirements. In instances where a conditional use permit has been granted, conditions
of the permit shall be adhered to.
1. Two (2) off street parking spaces shall be provided for each lot.
2. Curb, gutter and sidewalk shall be provided along entire depth of the original lot.
3. The smallest parcel shall be at least sixty five feet (65') long.
4. Utility services shall be located in recorded easements on private property.
5. Property survey pins for each lot shall be placed prior to the issuance of a building permit.
6. Construction shall comply with plans submitted, approved and on file with the building division.
7. The building official shall not issue a certificate of occupancy until the engineering, planning and zoning and building divisions are satisfied that all
the stated requirements have been complied with. In the event that any of the requirements are not satisfied, a bond shall be required in the amount
of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the value of those that are incomplete.
8. An application for a building permit shall include a plot plan showing existing conditions and proposed improvements at a scale of at least one inch to
twenty feet (1" = 20'). (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-10-10: AREA OF INTERIOR "FLAG" PROPERTIES:
As noted in the definitions section of chapter 1 of this title, the area within the strip of ground (flagpole) connecting a building property with a street (and
thereby providing "frontage" for the property) shall not be considered as part of the flag property's total area for purposes of assessing adequate property
area in conjunction with application for a building permit. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-10-11: PARKING, PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING, SIGNAGE AND PROPERTY LANDSCAPING:
All uses shall conform to the parking, parking lot landscaping, signage and property landscaping requirements in chapters 22, 23 and 33 of this title. (Ord.
2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
Chapter 11
RML LIMITED MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT/ZONE
10-11-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The RML limited multiple-family residential district is to encourage a flexible use of the land and promote and maintain stable single-family residential
areas. It is also the purpose of this classification to develop residential areas within the city that are characterized by higher residential densities and higher
volumes of vehicular traffic than are characteristic in the RS and RD districts. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-11-2: PERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES:
Permitted buildings and uses in the RML district shall be as set forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, subject
to the general provisions and exceptions set forth in this and other chapters of this title:
A. Move-on houses may be permitted in accordance with compliance with regulations in section 10-1-21 of this title.
B. Two-family or multiple-family zero property line dwellings shall comply with the following requirements:
1. All applicable city, state and federal building regulations pertaining to common wall and/or zero lot line construction shall be complied with. Area
separation walls and roofs shall comply with the uniform building code.
2. Common walls shall be adequately soundproofed in accordance with the uniform building code.
3. Electrical, domestic water supply, sewer, heating and air conditioning systems, etc., shall be separately installed for each dwelling unit. In no case
shall such systems penetrate common walls.
4. Deeds or covenants pertaining to buildings shall contain appropriate provisions regarding harmonious maintenance of individually or commonly
owned indoor or outdoor walls and outdoor yard areas.
5. Maintenance or encroachment easements shall be recorded as necessary for individual owners to assure access to all privately owned yard areas
and outdoor walls.
6. Overall property area, width, coverage and yard requirements for buildings shall be the same as for buildings under single ownership. (Ord. 2140;
amd. Ord. 2978)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 290/410
10-11-3: BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED CONDITIONALLY:
The planning and zoning commission may grant a conditional use permit for any of the conditional uses listed for the RML district as set forth in section 10-
3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd.
Ord. 2909)
10-11-4: STRUCTURAL HEIGHT AND ACCESSORY STRUCTURE SETBACK REGULATIONS:
A. No principal building shall exceed either three (3) stories or thirty feet (30') in height.
B. When abutting a single-family district, new or expanded building height shall not exceed more than two (2) stories.
C. Where the land rises steeply and where there is a marked topographic division between the land and adjoining property, a building may be two (2)
stories but shall not exceed the height (elevation) of an existing building on adjoining property.
D. Detached accessory structures shall not be taller than the height of the principal building on the property or twenty two feet (22'), whichever is greater.
Accessory structures shall comply with required front and interior yard setbacks that apply to principal buildings and shall not (except in the case of
detached garages or carports) be located closer to the front property line/street line than any building of one or more dwelling units (e.g., house,
duplex, triplex, fourplex) to which they are accessory. In other words, they shall not be placed or built in front of a principal building. (Ord. 2140; amd.
Ord. 3151)
10-11-5: PROPERTY AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
A. Minimum Property Area Required: When a single-family dwelling is located or to be located on a property a six thousand (6,000) square foot minimum
property area shall be maintained or required. When a single-family dwelling is located or is to be located on a corner lot, the lot area requirement may
be reduced in accordance with section 10-11-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
B. Minimum Property Area Required Per Dwelling Unit(s): The first two (2) units require six thousand (6,000) square feet and additional units require one
thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) square feet of land each/per unit. (Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
C. Minimum Property Width: Minimum property width required shall be fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
D. Minimum Property Structure And Parking Front Yard (Setback): Shall be twenty feet (20') wide/deep. Single-family dwellings (houses) are allowed a
reduction to the required twenty foot (20') front setback under certain conditions:
1. When a new house is proposed to be built, or an existing house added onto and that house lies within a City subdivision platted with square three
hundred foot by three hundred foot (300' x 300') blocks, and the houses to either side of the house under consideration that lie in the same block, on
the same side of any alley and abutting the same street are, on average, closer to their front property lines than twenty feet (20'), then the new house
or addition may encroach into the twenty foot (20') setback to some degree.
Specifically, the house or addition may be as close as the average of the other homes' encroachment; provided it never sits closer than fifteen feet
(15') to the front property line. However, in no case shall any garage or carport affiliated with a new or expanding house be allowed to be closer than
twenty feet (20') to the front property line.
2. When a new house is proposed to be built, or an existing house added onto and that house lies within the City subdivision platted in other than
square three hundred foot by three hundred foot (300' x 300') blocks, and the houses to either side of the house under consideration, on average,
happen to be closer to their front property lines than twenty feet (20'), then the new house or addition may encroach into the twenty foot (20') setback
to some degree.
Specifically, the house or addition may be as close as the average of the other two (2) homes' encroachment; provided it never sits closer than fifteen
feet (15') to the front property line. However, in no case shall any garage or carport affiliated with a new or expanding house be allowed to be closer
than twenty feet (20') to the front property line. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
E. Minimum Interior Yard Setback: Minimum property interior (side/rear) yard setbacks shall be not less than five feet (5') wide/deep. Where a utility
easement is recorded adjacent to a side property line, there shall be provided a side yard (setback) no less than the width of the easement or five feet
(5') whichever is greater. Where a utility easement is recorded adjacent to a rear property line, the rear interior yard (setback) shall be no less than the
width of the easement on the development site or five feet (5'), whichever is greater.
For a lot abutting an alley the required rear yard space shall be fifteen feet (15') from the centerline of that alley. (Ord. 4282, 9-19-2016)
F. Access: All lots/parcels developed/"built out", or proposed to be developed/"built out" with structures thereon shall have, or be demonstrated to have,
legal access to a public street, before the City may issue or approve construction of any structures on that lot/parcel (as iterated in the definition of
"property" in section 10-1-2, "Definitions", and subsection 10-1-7B1 of this title). Lots/parcels developed in this zone do not have to have direct
lot/parcel frontage on a public street however, only legal access to the same. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-11-6: MAXIMUM PROPERTY COVERAGE BY BUILDINGS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 291/410
None specified. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3006)
10-11-7: CORNER LOTS:
Platted corner lots shall observe the minimum front yard setback requirements on one street side. One-half (1/2) the minimum front yard setback
requirements shall be required on the second street side. Regarding corner lot splits, the side yard of the lot at the corner and the front yard of the new lot,
set away from the abutting intersection corner, shall provide at least ten feet (10') for their street side and front yard setback areas respectively.
Two (2) single-family dwellings may be permitted on platted corner lots when the following criteria are met:
A. Location: On lots platted prior to 1947 that are at least fifty feet (50') wide by one hundred forty feet (140') deep.
B. Special Requirements: Requirement number 3 shall have no effect on corner lots containing two (2) existing single-family homes prior to June 16, 1975.
Other listed requirements shall have no effect on corner lots containing two (2) existing single-family homes prior to April 16, 1979, provided no
conditional use permit has been granted containing any of the requirements. In instances where a conditional use permit has been granted, conditions
of the permit shall be adhered to.
1. Two (2) off street parking spaces shall be provided for each lot.
2. Curb, gutter and sidewalk shall be provided along entire depth of the original lot.
3. The smallest parcel shall be at least sixty five feet (65') long.
4. Utility services shall be located in recorded easements on private property.
5. Property survey pins for each lot shall be placed prior to the issuance of a building permit for the new home.
6. Construction shall comply with plans submitted, approved and on file with the building department.
7. The building official shall not issue a certificate of occupancy until the engineering, planning and zoning and building departments are satisfied that
all of the stated requirements have been complied with. In the event that any of the requirements are not satisfied, a bond shall be required in the
amount of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the value of those that are incomplete.
8. An application for a building permit shall include a plot plan showing existing conditions and proposed improvements at a scale of at least one inch to
twenty feet (1" = 20'). (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-11-8: PARKING, PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING, SIGNAGE AND PROPERTY LANDSCAPING:
All uses shall conform to the parking, parking lot landscaping, signage and property landscaping requirements in chapters 22, 23 and 33 of this title. (Ord.
2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
Chapter 12
RMH MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT/ZONE
10-12-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The RMH multiple-family residential district provides for high density, multiple-family housing. It is intended to be situated in close proximity to major
commerce areas, campus location, and major thoroughfare intersections and around the downtown districts. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3077; Ord. 3459, 6-6-
2005)
10-12-2: PERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES:
Permitted buildings and uses in the RMH district shall be as set forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, subject
to the general provisions and exceptions set forth in this and other chapters of this title.
A. Move-on houses may be permitted in accordance with compliance with regulations in section 10-1-21 of this title.
B. Two-family or multiple-family zero lot line dwellings shall comply with the following requirements:
1. All applicable city, state and federal building regulations pertaining to common wall and/or zero lot line construction shall be complied with. Area
separation walls and roofs shall comply with the uniform building code.
2. Common walls shall be adequately soundproofed in accordance with the uniform building code.
3. Electrical, domestic water supply, sewer, heating and air conditioning systems, etc., shall be separately installed for each dwelling unit. In no case
shall such systems penetrate common walls.
4. Deeds or covenants pertaining to buildings shall contain appropriate provisions regarding harmonious maintenance of individually or commonly
owned indoor or outdoor walls and outdoor yard areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 292/410
5. Maintenance or encroachment easements shall be recorded as necessary for individual owners to assure access to all privately owned yard areas
and outdoor walls.
6. Overall lot area, lot width and yard setback requirements for buildings shall be the same as for buildings under single ownership. (Ord. 2140; amd.
Ord. 3151)
10-12-3: BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED CONDITIONALLY:
The planning and zoning commission may grant a conditional use permit for any of the conditional uses listed for the RMH district as set forth in section
10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd.
Ord. 2909)
10-12-4: STRUCTURAL HEIGHT AND ACCESSORY STRUCTURE SETBACK REGULATIONS:
A. Sixty five foot (65') maximum without approval of the council.
B. When an RMH district abuts upon an AG, RA, RD or RS district, the maximum permitted building height shall be limited to three (3) stories or thirty feet
(30'), whichever is the lesser, for a distance of fifty feet (50') into the RMH property from the abutting boundary (intervening property line) of any of the
aforementioned districts.
C. Detached accessory structures shall not be taller than the height of the principal building on the property or twenty two feet (22'), whichever is greater.
Accessory structures shall comply with required front and interior yard setbacks that apply to principal buildings and shall not (except in the case of
detached garages or carports) be located closer to the front property line/street line than any building of one or more dwelling units (e.g., house,
duplex, triplex, fourplex) to which they are accessory. In other words, they shall not be placed or built in front of the principal residential building(s).
(Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-12-5: PROPERTY AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
A. Minimum Property Area Required: When a single-family dwelling is located or is to be located on a property a six thousand (6,000) square foot
minimum property area shall be maintained or required. When a single-family dwelling is located or is to be located on a corner lot, the lot area
requirement may be reduced in accordance with section 10-12-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
B. Minimum Property Area Required Per Dwelling Unit(s): The first two (2) units require six thousand (6,000) square feet and additional units require five
hundred (500) square feet of land each/per unit. (Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
C. Minimum Property Width: Minimum property width required shall be fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
D. Minimum Property Structure And Parking Front Yard (Setback): Shall be twenty feet (20') wide/deep. Single-family dwellings (houses) are allowed a
reduction to the required twenty foot (20') front setback under certain conditions:
1. When a new house is proposed to be built, or an existing house added onto and that house lies within a City subdivision platted with square three
hundred foot by three hundred foot (300' x 300') blocks, and the houses to either side of the house under consideration that lie in the same block, on
the same side of any alley and abutting the same street are, on average, closer to their front property lines than twenty feet (20'), then the new house
or addition may encroach into the twenty foot (20') setback to some degree.
Specifically, the house or addition may be as close as the average of the other homes' encroachment; provided it never sits closer than fifteen feet
(15') to the front property line. However, in no case shall any garage or carport affiliated with a new or expanding house be allowed to be closer than
twenty feet (20') to the front property line.
2. When a new house is proposed to be built, or an existing house added onto and that house lies within the City subdivision platted in other than
square three hundred foot by three hundred foot (300' x 300') blocks, and the houses to either side of the house under consideration, on average,
happen to be closer to their front property lines than twenty feet (20'), then the new house or addition may encroach into the twenty foot (20') setback
to some degree.
Specifically, the house or addition may be as close as the average of the other two (2) homes' encroachment; provided it never sits closer than fifteen
feet (15') to the front property line. However, in no case shall any garage or carport affiliated with a new or expanding house be allowed to be closer
than twenty feet (20') to the front property line. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
E. Minimum Property Interior Yards Required: All properties in the RMH District shall have interior yards of not less than eight feet (8') wide/deep, for
structures not higher than three (3) stories or thirty feet (30'). For every ten feet (10') in height over which a building exceeds three (3) stories or thirty
feet (30'), the building shall be set back an additional five feet (5') from side lot lines. In no case shall the distance between the rear lot line and the
building be less than half the height of the building for structures higher than three (3) stories or thirty feet (30') tall.
For a lot abutting an alley, the required rear yard setback shall be fifteen feet (15') from the centerline of that alley.
In any situation where there are easements along and parallel to a particular property line that partially defines a property that are wider/deeper than
the aforenoted required yards/setbacks, then the required setback(s) will become the width of the pertinent easement section in lieu of the above stated
setbacks. It is understood that the normal setback would thus be located within the scope of the easement's dimensions/area. For example, if there is a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 293/410
twelve foot (12') easement along the rear of a property in the RMH Zone, and the rear setback is eight feet (8') then the required rear yard setback
would become twelve feet (12') instead of eight (8). (Ord. 4282, 9-19-2016)
F. Access: All lots/parcels developed/"built out", or proposed to be developed/"built out" with structures thereon shall have, or be demonstrated to have,
legal access to a public street, before the city may issue or approve construction of any structures on that lot/parcel (as iterated in the definition of
"property" in section 10-1-2, "Definitions", and subsection 10-1-7B1 of this title). Lots/parcels developed in this zone do not have to have direct
lot/parcel frontage on a public street however, only legal access to the same. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-12-6: MAXIMUM PROPERTY COVERAGE:
None specified. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3006)
10-12-7: CORNER LOTS:
Platted corner lots shall observe the minimum front yard setback requirements on one street side. One-half (1/2) the minimum front yard setback
requirement shall be utilized on the second street side. Regarding corner lot splits, the side yard of the lot at the corner and the front yard of the new lot,
set away from the abutting intersection corner, shall provide at least ten feet (10') for their street side and front yard setback areas respectively.
Two (2) single-family dwellings may be permitted on platted corner lots when the following criteria are met:
A. Location: On lots platted prior to 1947 that are at least fifty feet (50') wide by one hundred forty feet (140') deep.
B. Special Requirements: Requirement number 3 shall have no effect on corner lots containing two (2) existing single-family homes prior to June 16, 1975.
Other listed requirements shall have no effect on corner lots containing two (2) existing single-family homes prior to April 16, 1979, provided no
conditional use permit has been granted containing any of the requirements. In instances where a conditional use permit has been granted, conditions
of the permit shall be adhered to.
1. Two (2) off street parking spaces shall be provided for each lot.
2. Curb, gutter and sidewalk shall be provided along entire depth of the original lot.
3. The smallest parcel shall be at least sixty five feet (65') long.
4. Utility services shall be located in recorded easements on private property.
5. Property survey pins for each lot shall be placed prior to the issuance of a building permit for the new home.
6. Construction shall comply with plans submitted, approved and on file with the building division.
7. The building official shall not issue a certificate of occupancy until the engineering, planning and zoning and building division are satisfied that all of
the stated requirements have been complied with. In the event that any of the requirements are not satisfied, a bond shall be required in the amount
of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the value of those which are incomplete.
8. An application for a building permit shall include a plot plan showing existing conditions and proposed improvements at a scale of at least one inch to
twenty feet (1" = 20'). (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-12-8: PARKING, PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING, SIGNAGE AND PROPERTY LANDSCAPING:
All uses shall conform to the parking, parking lot landscaping, signage and property landscaping requirements in chapters 22, 23 and 33 of this title. (Ord.
2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
Chapter 13
RP RESIDENTIAL PROFESSIONAL DISTRICT/ZONE
10-13-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The RP residential professional district provides for a medium density multiple-family area and a desirable mixing of residential land uses with light
commercial land uses in possible close proximity to adjacent single-family districts. The light commercial uses allowed in this district are selected for their
compatibility with residential uses. Such a district is typically appropriate along thoroughfares. (Ord. 2140)
10-13-2: PERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES:
Permitted buildings and uses in the RP district shall be as set forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, subject to
the general provisions and exceptions set forth by this and other chapters of this title.
A. Move-on houses may be permitted in accordance with compliance with regulations in section 10-1-21 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 294/410
B. Two-family or multiple-family zero lot line dwellings shall comply with the following requirements:
1. All applicable city, state and federal building regulations pertaining to common wall and/or zero lot line construction shall be complied with. Area
separation walls and roofs shall comply with the uniform building code.
2. Common walls shall be adequately soundproofed in accordance with the uniform building code.
3. Electrical, domestic water supply, sewer, heating and air conditioning systems, etc., shall be separately installed for each dwelling unit. In no case
shall such systems penetrate common walls.
4. Deeds or covenants pertaining to buildings shall contain appropriate provisions regarding harmonious maintenance of individually or commonly
owned indoor or outdoor walls and outdoor yard areas.
5. Maintenance or encroachment easements shall be recorded as necessary for individual owners to assure access to all privately owned yard areas
and outdoor walls.
6. Overall property area, width, and yard setback requirements for such buildings shall be the same as for buildings under single ownership. (Ord.
2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-13-3: BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED CONDITIONALLY:
The planning and zoning commission may grant a conditional use permit for any of the conditional uses listed for the RP district as set forth in section 10-
3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title.
Convenience stores shall comply with the required performance standards adopted by resolution of the council and such other conditions the commission
deems necessary. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2909)
10-13-4: BUILDING HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Detached accessory structures shall not be taller than the height of the principal building on the property or twenty two feet (22'), whichever is greater.
Accessory structures shall comply with required front and interior yard setbacks. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3006)
10-13-5: PROPERTY AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed: (Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
A. Minimum Property Area Required: When a single-family dwelling is located or is to be located on an interior property the six thousand (6,000) square
foot minimum property area shall be maintained or required. When a single-family dwelling is located or is to be located on a corner property, the area
requirement may be reduced in accordance with section 10-13-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 3852, 2-17-2009)
B. Minimum Property Area Required Per Dwelling Unit(s): The first two (2) units require six thousand (6,000) square feet and additional units require one
thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) square feet of land each/per unit. (Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
C. Minimum Property Width: Minimum property width required shall be fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 3852, 2-17-2009)
D. Minimum Property Structure And Parking Front Yard (Setback): Shall be twenty feet (20') wide/deep. Single-family dwellings (houses) are allowed a
reduction to the required twenty foot (20') front setback under certain conditions:
1. When a new house is proposed to be built, or an existing house added onto and that house lies within a City subdivision platted with square three
hundred foot by three hundred foot (300' x 300') blocks, and the houses to either side of the house under consideration that lie in the same block, on
the same side of any alley and abutting the same street are, on average, closer to their front property lines than twenty feet (20'), then the new house
or addition may encroach into the twenty foot (20') setback to some degree.
Specifically, the house or addition may be as close as the average of the other homes' encroachment; provided it never sits closer than fifteen feet
(15') to the front property line. However, in no case shall any garage or carport affiliated with a new or expanding house be allowed to be closer than
twenty feet (20') to the front property line.
2. When a new house is proposed to be built, or an existing house added onto and that house lies within the City subdivision platted in other than
square three hundred foot by three hundred foot (300' x 300') blocks, and the houses to either side of the house under consideration, on average,
happen to be closer to their front property lines than twenty feet (20'), then the new house or addition may encroach into the twenty foot (20') setback
to some degree.
Specifically, the house or addition may be as close as the average of the other two (2) homes' encroachment; provided it never sits closer than fifteen
feet (15') to the front property line. However, in no case shall any garage or carport affiliated with a new or expanding house be allowed to be closer
than twenty feet (20') to the front property line.
3. All single-family residential properties fronting a local subdivision street may utilize a fifteen foot (15') front yard setback to the nearest portion of
living (nongarage/carport) space of a house. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
E. Interior Yard And Parking: All properties in the RP District shall have interior yard structure and parking setbacks of not less than eight feet (8')
wide/deep.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 295/410
On a property abutting an alley, the required rear yard (setback) shall be fifteen feet (15') wide/deep as measured from the centerline of the alley. (Ord.
4282, 9-19-2016)
F. Access: All lots/parcels developed/"built out", or proposed to be developed/"built out" with structures thereon shall have, or be demonstrated to have,
legal access to a public street, before the City may issue or approve construction of any structures on that lot/parcel (as iterated in the definition of
"property" in section 10-1-2, "Definitions", and subsection 10-1-7B1 of this title). Lots/parcels developed in this zone do not have to have direct
lot/parcel frontage on a public street however, only legal access to the same. (Ord. 3852, 2-17-2009)
10-13-6: MAXIMUM PROPERTY COVERAGE:
None specified. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3006)
10-13-7: CORNER LOTS:
Platted corner lots shall observe the minimum front yard setback requirements on one street side. One-half (1/2) the minimum setback requirements shall
be observed on the second street side. Regarding corner lot splits, the side yard of the lot at the corner and the front yard of the new lot, set away from the
abutting intersection corner, shall provide at least ten feet (10') for their street side and front setback areas respectively.
Two (2) single-family dwellings may be permitted on corner lots when the following criteria are met:
A. Location: On lots platted prior to 1947 that are at least fifty feet (50') wide by one hundred forty feet (140') deep.
B. Special Requirements: Requirement number 3 shall have no effect on corner lots containing two (2) existing single-family homes prior to June 16, 1975.
Other listed requirements shall have no effect on corner lots containing two (2) existing single-family homes prior to April 16, 1979, provided no
conditional use permit has been granted containing any of the requirements. In instances where a conditional use permit has been granted, conditions
of the permit shall be adhered to.
1. Two (2) off street parking spaces shall be provided for each lot.
2. Curb, gutter and sidewalk shall be provided along entire depth of the original lot.
3. The smallest parcel shall be at least sixty five feet (65') long.
4. Utility services shall be located in recorded easements on private property.
5. Property survey pins for each lot shall be placed prior to the issuance of a building permit for the new home.
6. The allowed shadow pattern height for future structures and modifications or additions to structures constructed after June 1, 1987, and for
nonexempt vegetation at the northern lot line under the provisions of the solar setback standard shall be the same for the two (2) newly created lots
as for the original lot.
7. Construction shall comply with plans submitted, approved and on file with the building department.
8. The building official shall not issue a certificate of occupancy until the engineering, planning and zoning and building divisions are satisfied that all
the stated requirements have been complied with.
In the event that any of the requirements are not satisfied, a bond shall be required in the amount of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the value of
those which are incomplete.
9. An application for a building permit shall include a plot plan showing existing conditions and proposed improvements at a scale of at least one inch to
twenty feet (1" = 20'). (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-13-8: PARKING, PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING, SIGNAGE AND PROPERTY LANDSCAPING:
All uses shall conform to the parking, parking lot landscaping, signage and property landscaping regulations in chapters 22, 23 and 33 of this title. (Ord.
2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
Chapter 14
BN NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT/ZONE
10-14-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
A BN neighborhood business district is intended to create, preserve and enhance areas of retail establishments serving frequently recurring needs in
convenient locations, and is typically appropriate to small shopping clusters or integrated shopping centers located within residential neighborhoods. (Ord.
2140)
10-14-2: PERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 296/410
Permitted buildings and uses in the BN district shall be as set forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, subject to
the general provisions and exceptions set forth in this and other chapters of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2909)
10-14-3: BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED CONDITIONALLY:
The planning and zoning commission may grant a conditional use permit for any of the conditional uses listed for the BN district as set forth in section 10-
3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd.
Ord. 2909)
10-14-4: BUILDING HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No principal building shall exceed either three (3) stories or thirty feet (30') in height, and no accessory building shall exceed either one and one-half (11/2)
stories or fifteen feet (15') in height. (Ord. 2140)
10-14-5: PROPERTY AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
A. Property Area: No minimum is/shall be required.
B. Property Width: No minimum is/shall be required.
C. Front Yard (Setback): A minimum width/depth of twenty feet (20') for structures and for parking areas is/shall be required. Correspondingly, buildings
situated on corner properties shall observe a minimum setback of twenty feet (20') from and along both streets for structures and parking areas.
D. Interior Yards: Properties within the BN district are not/shall not be required to provide interior yard setbacks if said lots or development sites abut
property lines of commercially or industrially zoned property. When interior lot lines of a property zoned BN abut property zoned residentially, interior
yards (setback) not less than fifteen feet (15') wide/deep shall be required opposite the residential district.
E. Access: All lots/parcels developed/"built out", or proposed to be developed/"built out" with structures thereon shall have, or be demonstrated to have,
legal access to a public street, before the city may issue or approve construction of any structures on that lot/parcel (as iterated in the definition of
"property" in section 10-1-2, "Definitions" and subsection 10-1-7B1 of this title). Lots/parcels developed in this zone do not have to have direct lot/parcel
frontage on a public street however, only legal access to the same. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-14-6: MAXIMUM PROPERTY COVERAGE:
None specified. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2978)
10-14-7: PARKING:
All uses shall conform to the general provisions and loading area standards of number, area, surface, screening and maintenance as required in chapter
22 of this title. All uses shall also conform to the parking lot landscaping provisions of chapter 33 of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2919)
10-14-8: SIGNS:
All uses shall conform to the sign provisions of chapter 23 of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2978)
10-14-9: OTHER REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
The following additional conditions shall apply:
A. Outside Uses: All principal uses except private or public parking areas and service station pump islands shall be in an entirely enclosed building unless
otherwise specified by a conditional use permit. Temporary uses may be allowed subject to regulations cited in subsection 10-1-12B of this title.
Accessory exterior storage affiliated with principal uses shall not be allowed in any area in front of the principal building(s) on a property and shall be
otherwise screened from view with a site obscuring fence, wall or hedge not to exceed eight feet (8') in height. Materials so stored shall be kept below
the top of the fence.
B. Setback From Residential Districts: In any BN district directly across the street from any residential district or any agricultural district, the parking and
loading facilities shall be distant at least twenty feet (20') from the street and the buildings and structures at least thirty five feet (35') from the street;
provided, the foregoing requirements of this subsection shall not apply where such residential district or agricultural district is separated from the BN
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 297/410
district by a street planned to have a right of way eighty feet (80') or more, and that a screen wall and/or landscaping is established and maintained on
the BN property.
C. Fabrication Repair: Not more than three (3) persons shall be engaged in the fabrication, repair and other processing of goods in an establishment, and
not more than three (3) aggregate horsepower shall be employed in the operation of all machines employed for the aforesaid purposes.
D. Nuisances: All operations conducted on the premises shall not be allowed to constitute a nuisance by reason of smoke, fumes, odor, steam, gases,
vibrations, noise, hazards or other causes, beyond the property boundary lines, and shall comply with the performance standards of chapter 1 of this
title. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2978)
10-14-10: LANDSCAPING:
All property/development site landscaping shall be established in accordance with the requirements of chapters 22 and 33 of this title, additionally:
A. Shopping Centers: All shopping centers shall require groupings and/or strips of landscape materials along the length of any street bordering the center.
B. Landscaping Adjacent To Residential Districts: All sites having a common boundary line with a residential classified property shall have erected and
maintained a view obscuring wall, fence or coniferous hedge not less than five feet (5') nor more than six feet (6') in height for screening purposes and
controlling access. Public utility installations need only fence and screen with appropriate materials such as base planting of coniferous shrubs or trees
and climbing coniferous plant materials on the fences to minimize the industrial character of such installations with the area surrounding the fenced and
screened enclosure landscaped and planted to create a park like atmosphere. (Ord. 2140)
Chapter 15
D DOWNTOWN SUBDISTRICTS (DB, DV, DH)/ZONES
10-15-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
A. Description: The downtown (D) district areas are intended to provide a location where mixing of office, specialty retail, residential, park area, arts and
entertainment, dining, tourism, and specialty educational uses may exist and interreact within a campuslike and historical setting. This area
incorporates the original, core commercial area of the downtown and those areas linked to the same that are functionally a part of the traditional
downtown. Preservation of various existing uses is expected.
The downtown district is actually composed of three (3) subdistricts (zones) properly identified as the downtown business (DB), the downtown village
(DV), and the downtown historic (DH) zones. The downtown historic subdistrict includes in its confines the old Nampa CB (central business)
district/zone and replaces its standards.
B. Purpose: The purpose of the downtown subdistricts is to promote economic development and investment, revitalize and enhance the appearance of
buildings and public spaces, and, to improve the overall "livability" of the area as it develops and matures. Correspondingly, the standards in this
chapter are established to affect Nampa's commercial center and in so doing, create an environment for work, living and play that has prominence and
a feeling of prestige. (Ord. 3787, 5-5-2008)
10-15-2: PERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES:
Permitted buildings and uses in the DB, DV and DH subdistricts shall be as set forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of
this title, subject to the general provisions and exceptions set forth in this and other chapters of this title. (Ord. 3787, 5-5-2008)
10-15-3: BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED CONDITIONALLY:
The planning and zoning commission may grant a conditional use permit for any of the conditional uses listed for the DB, DV or DH zones as set forth in
section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title. (Ord.
3787, 5-5-2008)
10-15-4: DB DOWNTOWN BUSINESS SUBDISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: The DB subdistrict is intended to provide an area that invites professional service businesses, government offices, arts and cultural
facilities, educational institutes, ancillary retail services and some residential units combined with other uses into its confines.
Its main features therefore will be a campus character, large professional offices, greenbelt, pathways, a campus setting, water features, parklike
landscaping, ground floor retail services and offices, aboveground residential and a preclusion of strip commercial development.
B. Building And Site Design Regulations: The facades and site development of a new, or "expanded" (as defined by section 10-1-6 of this title) business
building or complex shall be reviewed and regulated by the following standards:
1. Facades:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 298/410
a. Architectural treatments shall be consistent on all public street facades of the project;
b. Facade shall consist of a repeating pattern that includes color and/or texture at intervals (either horizontally or vertically);
c. A minimum of thirty three percent (33%) of each primary wall facade shall be in glazing;
d. Buildings shall include changes in relief such as cornices, bases, fenestration, fluted masonry, for at least forty percent (40%) of the exterior wall
area;
e. Building frontages greater than one hundred feet (100') in length shall have offsets, jogs or have other distinctive changes in the building facade;
f. Public entrances shall be easily identified and made distinct from the remainder of the building, either through architectural form or use of color,
material, and texture of the facade.
2. Exterior Finish Materials: Exterior finish materials shall be nonreflective and shall include at least three (3) colors, textures and/or materials.
a. External building materials shall be comprised of either masonry (e.g., brick, stone, concrete with paint or texture-coat finish, concrete masonry
units, etc.) or exterior stucco products with allowances for accents utilizing alternative materials. Use of alternate materials other than as accents
may be submitted for approval on a case by case basis. Glazing and areas of pitched roof (3/12 pitch or steeper) may also be considered as a
solution to this requirement.
b. Colors shall be natural earth tones or subtle colors that complement earth tones.
Note that standards listed in subsection B1 of this section and this subsection B2 only apply to newly proposed buildings or those undergoing
expansion. Preexisting buildings on site shall not be obliged to be refaced in accordance with these requirements unless they themselves are to be
expanded by more than twenty five percent (25%).
3. Mechanical Units: Mechanical equipment and utilities shall be placed and installed in such a way as to have minimal impact on adjoining properties,
and shall be screened from public view with either proper landscaping or by being contained within an enclosure consistent with the architectural
aesthetics and characteristics of the main building. Furthermore:
a. Roof Mounted Mechanical Equipment: Mechanical vents protruding through the roof and similar features shall be painted so as to match the color
of the roof. Exposed metal flashing or trim shall be anodized or painted to blend with the exterior colors of the building. Roof mounted mechanical
equipment shall be screened from public view from any street abutting the property by a screen wall enclosure consistent in appearance with the
architectural treatment of the main building;
b. Ground Mounted Mechanical Equipment And Utilities: Ground mounted equipment and utilities shall be placed and installed in such a way to have
the least impact on adjoining properties, and shall be screened from public view with a combination of evergreen and deciduous bushes and trees,
with a minimum of five feet (5') depth continuous around utility. These shall be irrigated and have landscaping fabric and ground cover, or, to be
contained within an enclosure consistent with the architectural aesthetics and characteristics of the main building.
4. Overhead Doors: Where possible, overhead doors for service and/or repair activities and/or loading/unloading activities shall be located at the side
of a building which lies opposite to any arterial or collector street and any residential use/zone unless some form of screening such as a wall,
landscape berm or other barrier is used to separate the two.
C. Lighting Standards:
1. Buildings: All exterior structure lighting shall be consistent with the intent of the district and shall be shielded, screened, and/or shuttered with ninety
degree (90°) cutoff luminaires and shall be otherwise directed so as to prevent illumination of adjoining properties, particularly when located adjoining
or across the street from residentially used or zoned properties. Lights shall not be mounted any higher than twenty five feet (25') from ground level.
Furthermore:
a. The height of a freestanding light fixture (e.g., in a parking lot area) shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') or the height of the principal permitted
structure, whichever is less. Parking area lights shall use ninety degree (90°) cutoff luminaires ("downlighting"). Building mounted lights shall not
be higher than twenty five feet (25') from ground level;
b. Streetlights installed by the city of Nampa, the Nampa highway district or the Idaho division of transportation shall be exempt from these
standards;
c. Electrical feeds to outdoor light fixtures shall be placed underground, not overhead;
d. All lights on site shall be consistent in style, design, height, size and color;
e. Lighting to highlight or illuminate architecture and signs shall be attractive without significant spillage of light upward or downward;
f. Pedestrian circulation routes shall be illuminated;
g. Floodlights shall not be allowed therein;
h. Metal halide bulbs shall not be used;
i. The planning director or his/her designee, may approve an alternative lighting scheme when the overall design, as proposed by the applicant,
meets or exceeds the intent and requirements of this section and is not perceived to be detrimental to public health, safety or welfare.
D. Setbacks: Setback areas (i.e., required yard areas) shall be landscaped in accordance with chapter 33 of this title. Setbacks for the DB zone are as
follows:
1. Front yard setback for any structure shall be twenty feet (20') from any public right of way whether local or arterial/collector street;
2. Street side setback for any structure shall be ten feet (10') from any public right of way, whether local or arterial/collector street;
3. Side and rear yard setbacks for any structure shall be zero feet (0');
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 299/410
4. Setback for any parking lot area abutting a public right of way shall be fifteen feet (15'). For any parking area abutting a side or rear lot line the
required setback shall be zero feet (0') in that location. Parking areas abutting a residential use on a lot/parcel next door to the development site shall
be screened from view by a six foot (6') high solid, sight obscuring fence, except where a vision triangle requires a shorter fence.
E. Building Orientation:
1. Buildings shall be oriented with primary consideration being given to the visual impact from the perspective of the driver or pedestrian on 2nd and
3rd Streets. The view from these avenues and/or any other primary arterial should be dominated by a green front yard and the view of the primary or
front building facade. External views of large expanses of parking lots are strongly discouraged.
2. Buildings shall be oriented to face the most primary, adjacent road to the property upon which they are proposed to be constructed.
3. Loading docks shall not face the front of the property. Also, when possible, loading docks shall not face the front of any adjacent principal building.
F. Building Height: No maximum height is specified.
G. Fencing/Screening: Fencing of anything other than mechanical or maintenance related equipment or stored inventory or trash receptacles is prohibited.
Trash receptacles shall be screened with durable materials as found on the related building's facade.
H. Trash Receptacles: Trash receptacles shall be located in service areas at side or rear yards and not visible from streets abutting a property.
Receptacles shall be screened as noted in subsection G of this section.
I. Outdoor Storage: Outdoor (i.e., noncompletely, structurally enclosed) storage in the DB zone is not allowed.
J. Signage: Sign allowances for the DB zone shall be the same as listed in chapter 23 of this title for the neighborhood business (BN) district, except as
follows:
1. Only signs for building/business identification, public safety, and wayfinding shall be permitted;
2. Business signs shall be attractively illuminated without excessive spillage of light upward or outward;
3. Signs that are wholly or in part electronic message center displays shall be allowed;
4. Signs that contain exposed neon lighting or neon lighting as a primary lighting source (i.e., as "backlighting") shall be allowed;
5. Freestanding signs shall be allowed in accordance with section 10-23-20, table 10-23-20(C) of this title;
6. The color and materials used for the signs shall complement the materials, color, and texture of the building.
K. Landscaping: The following landscape standards (in addition to those listed in chapters 22 and 33 of this title) shall apply to new construction or
expanded construction (as defined by section 10-1-6 of this title) within the DB zone:
1. Location(s) And Quantity Of Landscaping Required:
a. General Location Requirement: Landscaping (including plazas and fountains as noted hereafter) shall be emplaced on a site wherever a structure,
pedestrian pathway or parking lot is not located;
b. Arrangement: Landscaping shall be arranged in a natural pattern designed by a landscape architect and shall serve to highlight buildings'
entrances and pedestrian plazas without encroaching into public right of way so as to impede pedestrian and vehicular views or intrude into
required vision triangles;
c. Around Building Exteriors: Shrubs and flowerbeds shall be required around any new building's exterior. They are also required in the front yard of
the development to enhance the appearance of a building when viewed from a right of way that abuts the development site;
d. Screening: Needled evergreens may be used to help screen mechanical equipment and service areas;
e. Growth Coverage: Plants used in landscaping around a building or on a development site shall be selected to complement the scale of the
development area and any building(s) thereon.
2. Landscaping Component Requirements:
a. Composition of plants selected (aside from what is required by chapter 33 of this title for a landscape strip along an arterial or collector street) shall
be comprised of at least twenty percent (20%) flowering trees and at least twenty percent (20%) deciduous trees;
b. Any needled evergreens used shall be at least six feet (6') tall at time of planting. Flowering and deciduous trees shall be a minimum of 1.5 inches
in caliper at time of planting;
c. Landscaping shall be designed so that fifty percent (50%) coverage of the site occurs after the first year and ninety percent (90%) coverage occurs
after five (5) years.
3. Landscape Plazas And Fountains: Landscape plazas shall be required on each new development site and shall comply with the following
regulations:
a. One hundred (100) square feet of pedestrian plaza area shall be provided for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of new building footprint
area proposed to be constructed on a development site;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 300/410
b. Either some form of public art, or one or more park benches, or one or more ponds, or one or more flower gardens shall be included in or touching
any landscape plaza.
4. Stormwater Retention: Planter areas may be used to absorb on site stormwater in accordance with city stormwater regulations.
L. Parking: Site development and uses shall conform to parking provisions set forth in section 10-1-18, figure 1 and chapters 1 and 22 of this title and ANSI
accessibility codes. In addition to said standards, the following additional requirements shall apply to new (not expanded) development:
1. Additional Parking Lot Standards:
a. Parking lots should be located to the side or rear of the primary or front building facade with the number of spaces in the front yard being
minimized. Where geographic conflicts with this intent occur, landscaping should be used to buffer the visual impact of the parking area;
b. A maximum of ten percent (10%) of parking spaces required shall be allowed in front of the building, maximum eighty percent (80%) to the side of
the building and minimum twenty percent (20%) to the rear of the building;
c. Large expanses of parking are highly discouraged and should instead be designed as smaller modules, separated by vegetation;
d. No single parking lot shall contain over seventy (70) parking spaces without at least a ten foot (10') wide vegetated break separating the parking
area into two (2) lots being emplaced;
e. Newly constructed parking lots with thirty (30) or more parking spaces therein shall have perimeter vegetation designed to screen the lot from the
view from adjacent streets and buildings.
M. Pedestrian Pathways: Pedestrian paths throughout the DB zone shall be established to enhance a site's character and connections. Developments of
one acre or more shall provide a pedestrian and bicycle circulation plan for the site. Approval of the plan shall be made the responsibility of the city
zoning office commercial plans examiner(s).
1. All on site circulation systems shall incorporate a streetscape which includes sidewalks, pedestrian scale light standards and street trees visible from
public right of way;
2. A required pedestrian pathway shall make provision for connection to the pedestrian plaza area required on the same development site.
N. Access: All lots/parcels developed/"built out", or proposed to be developed/"built out" with structures thereon shall have, or be demonstrated to have,
legal access to a public street, before the city may issue or approve construction of any structures on that lot/parcel (as iterated in the definition of
"property" in section 10-1-2, "Definitions", and subsection 10-1-7B1 of this title). Lots/parcels developed in this zone do not have to have direct
lot/parcel frontage on a public street however, only legal access to the same. (Ord. 4123, 7-7-2014)
10-15-5: DV DOWNTOWN VILLAGE SUBDISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: The DV subdistrict is intended to serve as a transitional district between the downtown business (DB) and the downtown historic
(DH) districts. It is intended to provide a mixed use area of retail, office and multi-family residential services, with a presence of motels and food service
establishments, and entertainment within its confines and preserve a variety of extant uses.
However, since this is a transitional zone, site design and development will necessarily be reviewed in the context of development in either the
business or the historic district, whichever is closer. Those developments bordering the historic district should be compatible with the early and mid
twentieth century architectural style of the adjoining district and conversely developments bordering the civic campus should be compatible with the
parklike corporate development of that district.
B. Building And Site Design Regulations: The facades and site development of a new, or "expanded" (as defined by section 10-1-6 of this title) business
building or complex shall be reviewed and regulated by the following standards:
1. Structure Placement: The "buildable" portions of properties shall accommodate a nonstrip development design. A designer shall make every effort to
design a project which uses the least number of vehicular access points, includes landscaping, pedestrian benefits, and minimizes the negative
impact on adjoining properties. Detached sidewalks are strongly encouraged. Existing and adjacent pedestrian and vehicular traffic circulation shall
be an integral part of any design.
2. Building Exteriors: Facades shall be reviewed for the inclusion of architectural characteristics which shall be compatible with the adjoining district and
shall be consistent on each building face that is exposed to view from the public right of way and/or adjacent to residential use or zone.
a. Buildings shall include changes in relief such as cornices, bases, fenestration, fluted masonry, for at least forty percent (40%) of the exterior wall
area;
b. Building frontages greater than one hundred feet (100') in length shall have offsets, jogs or have other distinctive changes in the building facade;
c. Public entrances shall be easily identified and distinct from the remainder of the building, either through architectural form or use of color, material,
and texture of the facade.
3. Exterior Finish Materials: Exterior finish materials shall be nonreflective and shall include at least three (3) colors, textures and/or materials.
a. External building materials shall be comprised of either masonry (e.g., brick, stone, concrete with paint or texture-coat finish, concrete masonry
units, etc.) or exterior stucco products with allowances for accents utilizing alternative materials. Use of alternate materials other than as accents
may be submitted for approval on a case by case basis. Glazing and areas of pitched roof (3/12 pitch or steeper) may also be considered as a
solution to this requirement.
b. Black and/or bright colors are discouraged and are allowed to only cover twenty five percent (25%) of the overall wall square footage.
Note that standards listed in subsection B2 of this section and this subsection B3 only apply to newly proposed buildings or those undergoing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 301/410
expansion. Preexisting buildings on site shall not be obliged to be refaced in accordance with these requirements unless they themselves are to be
expanded by more than twenty five percent (25%).
4. Mechanical Units: Mechanical equipment and utilities shall be placed and installed in such a way as to have minimal impact on adjoining properties,
and shall be screened from public view with either proper landscaping or by being contained within an enclosure consistent with the architectural
aesthetics and characteristics of the main building. Furthermore:
a. Roof Mounted Mechanical Equipment: Mechanical vents protruding through the roof and similar features shall be painted so as to match the color
of the roof. Exposed metal flashing or trim shall be anodized or painted to blend with the exterior colors of the building. Roof mounted mechanical
equipment shall be screened from public view from any street abutting the property by a screen wall enclosure consistent in appearance with the
architectural treatment of the main building;
b. Ground Mounted Mechanical Equipment And Utilities: Ground mounted equipment and utilities shall be placed and installed in such a way to have
the least impact on adjoining properties, and shall be screened from public view with a combination of evergreen and deciduous bushes and trees,
with a minimum of five foot (5') depth continuous around utility, these shall be irrigated and have landscaping fabric and ground cover, or, to be
contained within an enclosure consistent with the architectural aesthetics and characteristics of the main building.
5. Overhead Doors: Where possible, overhead doors for service and/or repair activities and/or loading/unloading activities shall be located at the side
of a building which lies opposite to any residential use/zone unless some form of screening such as a wall, landscape berm or other barrier is used to
separate the two.
C. Lighting Standards:
1. Buildings: All exterior structure lighting shall be consistent with the intent of the district and shall be shielded, screened, and/or shuttered with ninety
degree (90°) cutoff luminaires and shall be otherwise directed so as to prevent illumination of adjoining properties, particularly when located adjoining
or across the street from residentially used or zoned properties. Lights shall not be mounted any higher than twenty five feet (25') from ground level.
Furthermore:
a. The height of a freestanding light fixture (e.g., in a parking lot area) shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') or the height of the principal permitted
structure, whichever is less. Parking area lights shall use ninety degree (90°) cutoff luminaires ("downlighting"). Building mounted lights shall not
be higher than twenty five feet (25') from ground level;
b. Streetlights installed by the city of Nampa, the Nampa highway district or the Idaho division of transportation shall be exempt from these
standards;
c. Electrical feeds to outdoor light fixtures shall be placed underground, not overhead;
d. All lights on site shall be consistent in style, design, height, size and color;
e. Lighting to highlight or illuminate architecture and signs shall be attractive without significant spillage of light upward or downward;
f. Pedestrian circulation routes shall be illuminated;
g. Floodlights shall not be allowed;
h. Metal halide bulbs shall not be used;
i. The planning director or his/her designee, may approve an alternative lighting scheme when the overall design, as proposed by the applicant,
meets or exceeds the intent and requirements of this section and is not perceived to be detrimental to public health, safety or welfare.
D. Setbacks: Setback areas (i.e., required yard areas) shall be landscaped in accordance with chapter 33 of this title. Setbacks for the DV zone are as
follows:
1. Front yard setback for any structure shall be twenty feet (20') from any public right of way whether local or arterial/collector street;
2. Street side setback for any structure shall be zero feet (0');
3. Side and rear yard setbacks for any structure shall be zero feet (0');
4. Setback for any parking lot area abutting a public right of way shall be fifteen feet (15'). For any parking area abutting a side or rear lot line the
required setback shall be zero feet (0') in that location. Parking areas abutting a residential use on a lot/parcel next door to the development site shall
be screened from view by a six foot (6') high solid, sight obscuring fence, except where a vision triangle requires a shorter fence.
E. Building Orientation:
1. Buildings shall be oriented with primary consideration being given to the visual impact from the perspective of the driver or pedestrian on 2nd and
3rd Streets. The view from these avenues and/or any other primary arterial should be dominated by the view of the primary or front building facade.
External views of large expanses of parking lots are strongly discouraged;
2. Buildings shall be oriented to face the most primary, adjacent road to the property upon which they are proposed to be constructed;
3. Loading docks shall not face the front of the property. Also, when possible, loading docks shall not face the front of any adjacent principal building.
F. Building Height: There shall be no maximum height restriction.
G. Fencing/Screening: Fencing of anything other than mechanical or maintenance related equipment or stored inventory or trash receptacles is prohibited.
Trash receptacles shall be screened with durable materials as found on the related building's facade.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 302/410
H. Trash Receptacles: Trash receptacles shall be located in service areas at side or rear yards and not visible from streets abutting a property.
Receptacles shall be screened as noted in subsection G of this section.
I. Outdoor Storage: Outdoor storage in the DV zone is not allowed.
J. Signage: Sign allowances for the downtown village subdistrict shall be the same as listed in chapter 23 of this title for the neighborhood business (BN)
district except as follows:
1. Only signs for building/business identification, public safety, and wayfinding shall be permitted;
2. Business signs shall be attractively illuminated without excessive spillage of light upward or outward;
3. Signs that are wholly or in part electronic message center displays shall be allowed;
4. Signs that contain exposed neon lighting or neon lighting as a primary lighting source (i.e., as "backlighting") shall be allowed;
5. Freestanding signs shall be allowed in accordance with section 10-23-20, table 10-23-20(C) of this title;
6. The color and materials used for the signs shall feature materials, color, and texture of the building for which they advertise.
K. Landscaping: The following landscape standards (in addition to those listed in chapters 22 and 33 of this title) shall apply to new construction or
expanded construction (as defined by section 10-1-6 of this title) within the DV zone:
1. Location(s) And Quantity Of Landscaping Required:
a. General Location Requirement: Landscaping shall be emplaced on a site wherever a structure, pedestrian pathway or parking lot is not located;
b. Arrangement: Landscaping shall be arranged in a natural pattern designed by a landscape architect and shall serve to highlight buildings'
entrances and pedestrian plazas without encroaching into public right of way so as to impede pedestrian and vehicular views or intrude into
required vision triangles;
c. Around Building Exteriors: Shrubs and flowerbeds shall be required around any new building's exterior. They are also required in the front yard of
the development to enhance the appearance of a building when viewed from a right of way that abuts the development site;
d. Screening: Needled evergreens may be used to help screen mechanical equipment and service areas;
e. Growth Coverage: Plants used in landscaping around a building or on a development site shall be selected to complement the scale of the
development area and any building(s) thereon.
2. Landscaping Component Requirements:
a. Composition of added plants selected (aside from what is required by chapter 33 of this title for a landscape strip along an arterial or collector
street) shall be comprised of at least fifty percent (50%) flowering trees;
b. Landscaping shall be designed so that fifty percent (50%) coverage of the site occurs after the first year and ninety percent (90%) coverage occurs
after five (5) years.
3. Stormwater Retention: Planter areas may be used to absorb on site stormwater in accordance with city stormwater regulations.
L. Parking: Site development and uses shall conform to parking provisions set forth in section 10-1-18, figure 1 and chapters 1 and 22 of this title and ANSI
accessibility codes. In addition to said standards, the following additional requirements shall apply to new (not expanded) development:
1. Additional Parking Lot Standards:
a. Parking lots should be located to the side or rear of the primary or front building facade. Where geographic conflicts with this intent occur,
landscaping should be used to buffer the visual impact of the parking area;
b. A maximum of ten percent (10%) of parking spaces required shall be allowed in front of the building, maximum eighty percent (80%) to the side of
the building and minimum twenty percent (20%) to the rear of the building;
c. Large expanses of parking are highly discouraged and should instead be designed as smaller modules, separated by vegetation;
d. No single parking lot shall contain over seventy (70) parking spaces without at least a ten foot (10') wide vegetated break separating the parking
area into two (2) lots being emplaced;
e. Newly constructed parking lots with thirty (30) or more parking spaces therein shall have perimeter vegetation designed to screen the lot from the
view from adjacent streets and buildings.
M. Pedestrian Pathways: Pedestrian paths throughout the DV zone shall be established to enhance a site's character and connections. Developments of
one acre or more shall provide a pedestrian and bicycle circulation plan for the site. Approval of the plan shall be made the responsibility of the city
zoning office commercial plans examiner(s).
1. All on site circulation systems shall incorporate a streetscape which includes sidewalks, pedestrian scale light standards and street trees.
N. Access: All lots/parcels developed/"built out", or proposed to be developed/"built out" with structures thereon shall have, or be demonstrated to have,
legal access to a public street, before the city may issue or approve construction of any structures on that lot/parcel (as iterated in the definition of
"property" in section 10-1-2, "Definitions", and subsection 10-1-7B1 of this title). Lots/parcels developed in this zone do not have to have direct
lot/parcel frontage on a public street however, only legal access to the same. (Ord. 4123, 7-7-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 303/410
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-15-6: DH DOWNTOWN HISTORIC SUBDISTRICT:
A. Purpose And Intent: The DH subdistrict corresponds to the historic city center of Nampa. It is the purpose and intent of these zoning provisions:
1. To preserve and enhance the historical character and social, economic and cultural functions of the city center. Through historic preservation, these
provisions are intended to promote economic and business development, by allowing for ground floor retail, upper floor office, residential and mixed
uses;
2. To preserve what Nampa already has: a "main street" historic district with diverse individual buildings that collectively create an organized,
coordinated and ageless rhythm of buildings;
3. To provide opportunities for a variety of uses including continuing education, public spaces for arts and cultural activities, specialty retail, family
oriented entertainment, and food/beverage services;
4. To encourage higher density housing development;
5. To promote the identity of the DH subdistrict with improved gateways, internal circulation, buffered surface parking, and "way finding";
6. To enhance the pedestrian environment through the implementation of planned streetscape improvements;
7. To preserve the continuity of the "main street" historic area which has a diversity of architectural styles from the early twentieth century;
8. To set a high priority on the enhancement of high quality building facades;
9. To ensure that new construction and rehabilitation of existing structures are sensitive to the historic architectural styles;
10. To preserve various existing structures of significance.
B. Applicability:
1. The provisions of this section shall apply to all forms of building and site improvements within the DH subdistrict including building expansion, facade
improvements, new construction, rehabilitation, remodel, exterior site improvements, and signs. The specific provisions that apply to the various
categories of development activities are as follows:
Type Of Project Applicable Code Sections
Expansion over 25 percent 10-1-6 and 10-15-6
Exterior site improvements 10-1-6, 10-1-18, 10-15-6, and 10-22
Facade improvements; includes painting or repainting 10-15-6 and definitions as found in 10-15-9
New construction 10-1-6 and 10-15-6
Rehabilitation 10-1-6 and 10-15-6
Remodel 10-1-6 and 10-15-6
Signs 10-15-6 and 10-23
2. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to preexisting buildings that are expanded less than twenty five percent (25%) unless a change of
occupancy is determined as defined in section 10-1-6 of this title.
C. Dimensional Standards:
1. Structure Height:
a. The maximum building height shall be determined by compliance with the building and design standards set forth in this subsection.
b. Buildings that are adjacent to existing one- or two-story buildings shall be stepped back a minimum of ten feet (10') above forty feet (40') in height
at the street (street wall).
c. Outbuildings and landscape structures shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height.
2. Setbacks:
a. Primary building elevations, building sides, street sides or rears shall maintain a zero foot (0') setback from property lines at the ground level,
except for alcoves, storefront entryways, and pedestrian amenities.
b. The setback may be increased when a public space is provided with a minimum dimension of five hundred (500) square feet.
c. A step back of ten feet (10') minimum shall be provided at street walls over a maximum height of forty feet (40').
d. Front walls of building shall be placed in the same plane as the facades of the adjacent buildings (an average is allowed) except for projections as
allowed under this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 304/410
e. Surface parking lots must contain streetscape landscaping and internal planter interrupts as defined in subsection H of this section and chapter 22
of this title. Parking structures must meet building requirements as defined in this section.
D. Building And Site Design Standards:
1. Guidelines: The current secretary of interior's standards and "Guidelines For Rehabilitating Historic Buildings" shall provide the basic direction for
review of improvements in this subdistrict.
2. Booklet: "Design Guidelines Booklet For The Nampa Historic Downtown District", as adopted, shall be a primary source for the interpretation of
provisions of this subsection. The booklet provides examples of the manner in which the standards set forth in this subsection may be implemented.
3. Architectural Form:
a. Consistency: Architectural treatments shall be consistent on all street facing and pedestrian facing facades of the building and all mechanical/utility
screening requires similar treatment;
b. Horizontal Rhythm: A clear visual division shall be maintained between a ground level floor and any upper floor;
c. Bases: In order to convey a sense of "strength" and pedestrian interest, buildings shall provide a base, typically from ground to the bottom of the
second story lower windowsills, with changes in plane or material;
d. Facade: Facade shapes shall relate to other historic structures in the same area, including facing and adjacent facades.
4. Structure Width:
a. The width of a building at the ground floor shall extend from side property line to side property line.
b. Any new or expanded building proposed to be eighty feet (80') or greater in width shall divide the facade into subordinate planes that are similar to
the traditional width of the buildings in the DH subdistrict.
5. Roof(s):
a. For building additions, roof pitches shall be the same as the original as built roof.
b. Roof shapes, pitches and materials shall relate to other buildings in the same area, including facing and adjacent facades.
6. Walls:
a. Facades shall be reviewed for the elimination of blank walls and in relationship to facing and adjacent structures.
b. New, blank walls adjacent to a public sidewalk shall not be allowed.
c. Structures shall contain early twentieth century style architectural characteristics (as listed in the definitions contained within this chapter) on each
wall facade that is exposed to public view or directly faces residential use.
7. Projecting Spaces:
a. Projecting balconies, verandas or other usable space above the ground level on existing and new buildings shall contribute to the design pattern of
the building.
b. Such projections shall not intrude into the public right of way without first obtaining an encroachment agreement.
8. Awnings, Marquees Or Similar Pedestrian Shelters:
a. The dimensions of awnings, marquees or similar pedestrian shelters shall be proportional to the buildings to which they are attached.
b. The location of awnings, marquees or similar pedestrian shelters shall not obscure the building's architectural details.
(1) Allowances may be considered when awning clearance height requirements mandate the covering of these features.
c. Awnings should be made of fabric, not plastic or metal, while marquees should be made of substantial materials and designed in keeping with the
style of the building.
9. Windows And Openings:
a. Windows and other features of interest to pedestrians shall be provided adjacent to any sidewalk;
b. A consistency in the proportion of the transparency compatible with the pattern found in the historic district shall be maintained;
c. The size and relationship of new windows, doors, entrances, columns shall be visually compatible with the original architectural character of the
building and surrounding buildings;
d. Modern window replacements or additions shall depict early twentieth century style windows in appearance where possible and duplicate original
windows in a remodel, rehabilitation or expansion project;
e. Except for transom windows and bay windows, windows shall not break the front plane of the building above the first floor headers (from bottom to
top);
f. Upper floor window proportion shall be vertical (height greater than width).
10. Building Entrances:
a. Building entrances shall create a sense of entry and replicate the historical character. Ground level entries of buildings are encouraged to be
recessed from the public right of way;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 305/410
b. The historic pattern of storefront entryways in terms of footprint, doors and window elements shall be respected so as to avoid introducing
incompatible patterns that upset the rhythm of openings as established by surrounding structures;
c. Ground level entry doors and adjacent storefront shall be transparent or very lightly tinted;
d. Traditional building design in materials, finish and footprint shall be reflected in the first floor storefront entries.
11. Overhead Doors: Overhead doors for service, repair and deliveries shall be located facing local streets and alleys and not facing arterial, collector
streets or public spaces.
12. Exterior Finish/Materials:
a. Quality finish materials shall be utilized, including, but not limited to, brick; masonry; stone; integrally tinted, textured masonry block; stucco, wood
or concrete siding.
b. Metal siding, corrugated fiberglass, aluminum siding, mirror or metalized reflective glass, plywood, chipboard siding, vinyl, cinderblock, plastic tiltup
concrete, concrete block, highly tinted or mirrored glass, and all types of imitation building materials shall not be used as the primary building
material.
c. Materials used only on one face of a structure, which give the impression of "thinness" and artificiality, are prohibited.
d. Piecemeal embellishment and frequent changes in material are prohibited.
e. Remodel, rehabilitation or expansion projects shall match the original superior finishes.
13. Coloring:
a. Buildings shall be finished in "appropriate historic hues" (as defined in the definitions section of this chapter): subtle, neutral or earth tone color.
b. Finishes that reflect light and glare; or bright, heavily saturated and/or reflective shades of primary colors are not allowed.
E. Exterior Site Components:
1. Mechanical Equipment And Utilities:
a. Installation: Mechanical equipment and utilities shall be placed and installed in such a way as to have minimal visual impact. The visual impact of
the equipment shall be minimized by screening from public view with either landscaping or by being contained within an enclosure that is
consistent with the architectural aesthetic, materials, and characteristics of the main building.
b. Roof Mounted Mechanical Equipment: Mechanical vents protruding through the roof and similar features shall be painted so as to match the color
of the roof. Exposed metal flashing or trim shall be anodized or painted to blend with the exterior colors of the building. Roof mounted mechanical
equipment shall be screened from public view by a screen wall enclosure consistent in appearance with the architectural treatment of the main
building.
2. Lighting: All exterior lighting shall be consistent with early twentieth century architecture of this DH subdistrict and shall be shielded, screened, and/or
shuttered, and/or directed so as to prevent illumination on adjoining properties, particularly when located adjoining or across the street or alley from
residentially used or zoned properties.
a. The height of a freestanding light fixture shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') or the height of the principal permitted structure, whichever is less.
The effective zone of light (as documented by a photometric test report) shall not trespass on any abutting residential properties;
b. Streetlights installed by the city of Nampa or the Idaho division of transportation shall be exempt from these standards;
c. Floodlights shall not be allowed;
d. Electrical feeds to outdoor light fixtures shall be placed underground, not overhead;
e. The design standards committee, may approve an alternative lighting scheme when the overall design, as proposed by the applicant, meets or
exceeds the intent and requirements of this section and is not perceived to be detrimental to public health, safety or welfare;
f. Lighting to highlight or illuminate architecture and signs shall be attractive without significant spillage of light upward or downward;
g. Warm lighting sources are required; no blue based lighting is permitted.
F. Signs: All uses shall conform to the DH sign provisions of chapter 23 of this title and, in addition, shall comply with the following standards:
1. All new signs shall be architecturally compatible with the design of any existing building(s) on the same site or newly proposed building(s);
2. Colors, materials and lighting shall be visually restrained and be a minimal feature in the overall appearance of the building and district;
3. Wall signs shall fit within the existing features of a building's facade. Such locations would include the lintel band above the transom windows,
entryways, display windows or within decorative moldings which create natural frames for signs;
4. Signs shall be located so as not to conceal or disfigure significant architectural features or details;
5. Where possible, signs shall align with other signs in the same horizontal plane as signs on adjacent buildings, provided that they do not violate the
sign blanketing provisions of section 10-23-6 of this title;
6. Exposed single tube neon lighting or signage shall be allowed. No other neon lighting shall be allowed;
7. No internally illuminated projecting cabinet signs are allowed;
8. One ground (monument) sign per building shall be permitted when the color and materials used for the sign base match the building;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 306/410
9. Signs that are wholly or in part electronic message center displays shall not be allowed notwithstanding any other provision of this code that makes
allowances for electronic reader board signs;
10. Manual reader boards are permitted at twenty five percent (25%) of the overall allowed sign area;
11. Externally illuminated projecting pedestrian signs are encouraged;
12. Portable pedestrian signs or "sandwich boards" are encouraged with coloring which meets the criteria of the color section within this code
(fluorescent, black or bright colors are not permitted) and has a maximum square footage of nine feet (9') per side, with a thirty six inch (36")
maximum height.
a. Each portable pedestrian sign must be removed during nonbusiness hours.
b. Only one portable sign per business is permitted.
c. The portable sign must also be placed within fifty feet (50') of the business for which they are advertising;
13. Rotating, moving or flashing signs are not permitted;
14. Temporary signs must meet the temporary sign criteria in chapter 23 of this title;
15. Flags and/or banners are not permitted unless used for district area definition.
G. Parking:
1. Off street parking requirements regulating number of spaces required are not and shall not be applicable to uses in this subdistrict.
2. Parking areas shall maintain the same setbacks as the primary building; or parking areas shall be behind the building.
3. Surface parking lots of more than thirty (30) spaces shall maintain a landscaping buffer at all public street frontages and public spaces. Landscaping
shall visually screen parked vehicles, but not completely obstruct views into and out of the parking lot for the purpose of supporting pedestrian safety
and security.
H. Landscaping And Street Amenities:
1. Landscaping and street amenities (refer to definitions within this chapter) shall be required to be installed in accordance with new construction,
additions, or remodels as detailed in section 10-1-6 of this title.
2. Landscaping and street amenities installed in the DH zone shall include bollards, bulb outs, trees, tree grates, planters, street lighting, brick pavers,
trash and recycling containers, bike racks, benches, etc. (refer to definitions within this chapter) in compliance with any adopted streetscape plan for
the subdistrict.
I. Access: All lots/parcels developed/"built out", or proposed to be developed/"built out" with structures thereon shall have, or be demonstrated to have,
legal access to a public street, before the city may issue or approve construction of any structures on that lot/parcel (as iterated in the definition of
"property" in section 10-1-2, "Definitions" and subsection 10-1-7B1 of this title). Lots/parcels developed in this zone do not have to have direct lot/parcel
frontage on a public street however, only legal access to the same. (Ord. 3861, 4-20-2009)
10-15-7: DESIGN STANDARDS APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
A. Design Committee Review: The following applications shall be assigned to the design committee for review:
1. New commercial buildings proposed for construction.
2. New multiple-family (3+ units) residential buildings proposed for construction.
3. Expansions over twenty five percent (25%) of the area of an existing, nonsingle-family building.
4. Repaint or exterior materials alteration of a building when such will affect more than fifty percent (50%) of any facade's area thereof that fronts a
public right of way.
B. Application For Design Review: Every person required to submit a building to design review, including an addition or alteration of a building, shall submit
an application to the planning and zoning director for evaluation prior to or in conjunction with an application for a building permit.
C. Application Review For Type Of Review: Upon receipt of an application for design review, the director, or his/her designee, shall examine the application
and determine whether the application shall be reviewed administratively at staff level, or whether the application shall be referred to the design
committee for review.
D. Administrative Review: All other applications not designated for assignment to the design committee shall be submitted for an administrative review by
staff, unless the director, or his/her designee, determines the application must be submitted to the design committee.
E. Administrative Review Procedures: Upon receipt of an application for administrative design review, the director shall assign the application to a staff
member, or members, for review. The review of the application and the decision by staff shall be completed not later than thirty (30) days after
assignment by the director. The administrative decision shall be in writing and shall set forth any design elements of the building which do not comply
with design criteria.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 307/410
F. Scheduling Design Committee Review: Upon receipt of an application for design committee review, or upon the determination of the director, or his/her
designee, that an application should be referred directly to the design committee, the director shall schedule the application to be considered at the
next design committee meeting following the cutoff date prior to which the application was submitted. The director may extend the review time for
applications that are unusually large or complicated.
G. Building And Site Design Standards Submittal Requirements: The following information must be submitted for decision on aesthetic standards review
prior to submitting an application for a building permit:
1. A detailed letter of explanation which describes the aesthetic solutions for the project and the corresponding design elements, including a statement
of the scope of work of the project, and information about the structures, the building uses, and site work.
2. A detailed site and landscape plan drawn to scale. The site plan must include the following:
a. North arrow, scale of drawing, property lines.
b. Existing and proposed structures, site amenities, and signage location.
c. Adjoining streets, alleys and private drives.
d. Parking layouts, including dimensioned spaces, drives, circulation patterns, and pedestrian connectivity and walkway.
e. Existing and proposed utility service locations, locations and widths of rights of way, easements, canals, ditches, etc.
f. Locations and sizes of any loading areas, docks, and ramps.
g. Trash storage areas and exterior mechanical equipment with proposed screening methods detailed.
h. Concept for exterior lighting including pedestrian, vehicle, security and decorative solutions.
i. Type and location of all plant materials and other ground covers, including existing plantings.
j. Method of irrigation.
k. Details on special features such as berming or retaining walls, etc.
3. A complete set of floor plans and building elevations drawn to scale, including a colored rendering. Colored photos may be submitted for colored
elevation drawings when an existing structure is to undergo minor exterior alterations or the photo depicts the design, colors, and materials of the
new building. All proposed building materials must be defined, examples shall also be presented. The method of screening and treatment of
mechanical equipment, both roof mounted and at grade shall be presented.
H. Staff Report: At least one week prior to the review before the design committee, staff shall prepare and submit a staff report to the design committee
and the applicant. The staff report shall summarize the application and set forth which elements of the building meet design criteria, and which
elements do not.
I. Conduct Of Review: The chair of the design committee shall ask staff to summarize the application and staff's findings. After the presentation by staff,
the chair shall ask the applicant to present the application, respond to the staff report, and answer questions from the design committee. Following the
review the design committee shall deliberate the application. Before or during the course of deliberation, the design committee may ask the applicant to
address specific issues, including the applicant's response to any design issues raised by the design committee. At the conclusion of its deliberations,
the design committee shall render its decision. The committee shall be empowered to interpret design standards and to make exceptions to standards
provided such exceptions do not allow variance to other, nondesign standards based zoning code regulations, and, that the exception(s) still maintain
overall project compliance with the design objectives and goals of the city and its policies/guidelines. (Ord. 4070, 10-7-2013)
10-15-8: DESIGN STANDARDS APPEALS:
Any administrative decision by staff may be appealed to the design committee by filing a written notice of appeal with the director within fifteen (15) days
after staff decision. All appeals of administrative decisions shall be treated the same as an original submission to design committee and shall follow all
design committee procedures.
Any design committee decision may be appealed to the planning and zoning commission by filing a written notice of appeal with the director within fifteen
(15) days after the decision by the design committee. Within fifteen (15) days after an appeal is received, the director shall fix a date for the public hearing
of the appeal before the commission and notify the appealing party and the applicant with no further notice required. The following are grounds for an
appeal:
A. Inconsistency with the purpose and objectives of this chapter;
B. Unreasonable economic hardship;
C. Undue interference with the design integrity of the proposal;
D. Discriminatory prevention of allowed land use;
E. Consideration by the design review committee of improper motive or irrelevant information such as the race, ethnic origin, incomes, or other attributes of
the proposed occupants or owners;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 308/410
F. Prohibition or unwarranted restriction of building type, material, or method. (Ord. 3787, 5-5-2008)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-15-9: DEFINITIONS:
APPROPRIATE HISTORIC HUES: Muted and a limited number of colors, usually not more than two (2) accent colors used in any one building. See
guidelines for specific color pallet.
AS BUILT ROOF: The roof pitch and style constructed when the structure was originally constructed.
BUILDING EXPANSION: See section 10-1-6 of this title.
EARLY TWENTIETH CENTURY ARCHITECTURE: Architectural styles used in downtown Nampa between 1900 and 1941 - pre-World War II. See
guidelines for further definition.
FACADE IMPROVEMENTS: Any alteration of an existing building facade including repainting, etc.
HISTORIC STOREFRONT PATTERN: A storefront which exhibits proportion and regular patterns in the relationship of windows, walls and doors, and is
characterized by recessed entries, vertical and horizontal elements, and transparency.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is: a) listed individually in the national register of historic places or preliminarily determined by the secretary of
the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; b) certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district; c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places that have been approved by the secretary of interior; or d) individually listed on
the city's inventory of historic places.
ORIGINAL ARCHITECTURAL CHARACTER: The architectural style or elements of an architectural style that existed when the building was originally
constructed.
ORIGINAL BUILDING: The building that was located on a site prior to any major remodel, rehabilitation or expansion.
PEDESTRIAN AMENITIES: Brick sidewalk pavers, benches, landscaping planters, landscaping walls, trash and recycling receptacles, bollards, pedestrian
scale lighting, fountains, bike racks, public art, kiosks, way finding, interactive public art, seat walls, etc.
PHOTOMETRIC TEST REPORT: A report that analyzes the intensity, location, and distance that a light source emits.
REHABILITATION: The process of returning a structure to a state of utility through repair or alteration which renders the possibility of an efficient
contemporary use while preserving those portions or features which are significant to its architectural, historic, or cultural value.
REMODEL: Any change to the exterior surfaces or external appearances of a building including, but not limited to, renovation, rehabilitation,
reconstruction, restoration, replacement, or rearrangement of structural parts or elements; or any change that affects the plan configuration of walls,
spaces, or bulk of a building.
STRUCTURE, CONTRIBUTING: A building, site or structure that adds to the historic architectural qualities, historic association, or cultural values of the
district through location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, or association.
STRUCTURE, NONCONTRIBUTING: A building, site or structure that does not add to the historic architectural qualities, historic association, or cultural
values of the area because: a) it was not present during the period of significance; or b) it does not relate to the documented significance of the property
due to alterations, disturbances, additions, or other changes; or c) because it no longer possesses historic integrity nor is capable of yielding important
information about the period.
TRADITIONAL BUILDING MATERIALS: Brick, masonry, stucco, wood, accents of metal, ceramic, etc.
TRADITIONAL BUILDING WIDTH: Buildings in the subdistrict were originally built on lots twenty five feet (25') to fifty feet (50') in width.
TRANSPARENCY: The amount of visibility allowed through a building plane as provided by windows and other openings. (Ord. 3862, 4-20-2009)
Chapter 16
BC COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT/ZONE
10-16-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The BC Community Business District is intended to create, preserve and enhance areas with a wide range of retail sales and service establishments
serving both long and short term needs in compact locations typically appropriate to commercial clusters near intersections of major thoroughfares. This
district also includes some development that does not strictly fit the description of this chapter but also does not merit a zoning district. (Ord. 3761, 12-17-
2007)
10-16-2: PERMITTED AND NONPERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES:
Permitted and nonpermitted buildings and uses in the BC District shall be as set forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of
this title, subject to the general provisions and exceptions set forth in this and other chapters of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 309/410
All principal property uses except newsstands, private or public parking areas, nurseries and service station pump islands shall be in an entirely enclosed
building unless otherwise specified by a conditional use permit. Temporary uses may be allowed subject to regulations cited in section 10-1-12 of this title.
Accessory exterior storage affiliated with principal uses shall not be allowed in any area in front of the principal building(s) on a property and shall be
otherwise screened from view with a sight obscuring fence, wall or hedge not to exceed eight feet (8') in height. Materials so stored shall be kept below the
top of the fence.
Bars, taverns, and cocktail lounges are not and shall not be allowed within the BC Zone in or on any property having frontage on or within three hundred
feet (300') of Garrity Boulevard. Existing bars, taverns, cocktail lounges fronting that boulevard are considered legally nonconforming in accordance with
the provisions of chapter 3 of this title but may not be expanded as also stated in that chapter. (Ord. 3761, 12-17-2007)
10-16-3: BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED CONDITIONALLY:
The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant a conditional use permit for any of the conditional uses listed for the BC District as set forth in section 10-
3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title. (Ord. 3761, 12-17-
2007)
10-16-4: BUILDING HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
In the BC District there is no building height limitation, except when said district abuts upon a Residential District, in which case the maximum permitted
building height allowed on a BC property shall not exceed the maximum building height permitted in that Residential District for a distance, into the
commercial property, fifty feet (50') from the abutting boundary. (Ord. 3761, 12-17-2007)
10-16-5: PROPERTY AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
A. Property Area: No minimum is/shall be required.
B. Property Width: No minimum is/shall be required. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
C. Front Yard/Street Side (Setback): None required (0') when property abuts a local public street, a private street, or a service drive. Twenty feet (20')
is/shall be required on/for all properties that abut front streets classified or identified as collectors or arterials on the most currently utilized Nampa
urban boundary and functional classification system map. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
D. Interior Yards: Properties within the BC District are not/shall not be required to provide interior yards (setbacks) if said properties abut property lines of
commercially or industrially zoned property. When property lines of a property zoned BC abut property zoned single- or two-family residential, interior
yards (setbacks) not less than ten feet (10') wide/deep shall be required against the Residential District.
Exception: When an intervening sight obscuring fence at least six feet (6') tall that obscures visibility of a parking lot is placed between that
commercially zoned property and an adjoining single- or two-family residential zoned property, then a zero foot (0') setback may be allowed in order to
separate/screen the commercial property's parking lot from the residentially zoned property. (Ord. 4282, 9-19-2016)
E. Access: All lots/parcels developed/"built out", or proposed to be developed/"built out" with structures thereon shall have, or be demonstrated to have,
legal access to a public street, before the City may issue or approve construction of any structures on that lot/parcel (as iterated in the definition of
"property" in section 10-1-2, "Definitions", and subsection 10-1-7B1 of this title). Lots/parcels developed in this zone do not have to have direct
lot/parcel frontage on a public street however, only legal access to the same. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-16-6: MAXIMUM PROPERTY COVERAGE:
None specified. (Ord. 3761, 12-17-2007)
10-16-7: PARKING:
All uses shall conform to the general provisions and loading area standards of number, area, surface, landscaping, screening and maintenance as
required in chapter 22 of this title. All properties/uses shall also conform to the corridor landscape buffering provisions of chapter 33 of this title as
appropriate. (Ord. 3761, 12-17-2007)
10-16-8: SIGNS:
All signs shall conform to relevant requirements in chapter 23 of this title. (Ord. 3761, 12-17-2007)
10-16-9: OTHER REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 310/410
The following additional conditions shall apply:
A. Setback From Residential Districts: In any BC District directly across the street from any Residential District or an Agricultural District designated for
residential use on the comprehensive plan, the commercial property's parking and loading facilities shall be distant at least twenty feet (20') from the
intervening street's edge upon the commercial property. The requirements of this subsection shall not, however, apply where such Residential District
or Agricultural District is separated from the BC District by a street planned to have a right-of-way of eighty feet (80') or more. (Ord. 3761, 12-17-2007)
10-16-10: LANDSCAPING:
All site parking area and perimeter setback and landscaping shall be designed and emplaced in accordance with the requirements of chapters 22 and 33
of this title respectively and the following:
A. Landscaping: The following landscape standards (in addition to those listed in chapters 22 and 33 of this title) shall apply to new construction or
expanded construction (as defined by section 10-1-6 of this title) within the BC Zone:
1. Location(s) And Quantity Of Landscaping Required:
a. General Location Requirement: Landscaping shall be emplaced on a site wherever a structure, pedestrian pathway or parking lot is not located.
b. Arrangement: Landscaping shall be arranged in a natural pattern designed by a landscape designer and shall serve to highlight the building
entrances and pedestrian plazas without encroaching into public right-of-way or impede pedestrian and vehicular views or intrude into required
vision triangles.
c. Around Building Exteriors: Shrubs and flowerbeds shall be required around any new building's exterior. Landscaping is also required in all yard
areas of the development to enhance the appearance of a building when viewed from a right-of-way that abuts the development site.
d. Screening: Needled evergreens may be used to help screen mechanical equipment and service areas (refer to mechanical unit screening,
subsection 10-34-10A1e of this title).
e. Growth Coverage: Plants used in landscaping around a building or on a development site shall be selected to complement the scale of the
development area and any building(s) thereon.
2. Landscaping Components Requirements:
a. Composition of added plants selected (aside from what is required by chapter 33 of this title for a landscape strip along an arterial or collector
street) shall be comprised of at least fifty percent (50%) flowering trees.
b. Landscaping shall be designed so that fifty percent (50%) coverage of the site occurs after the first year and ninety percent (90%) coverage occurs
after five (5) years.
3. Stormwater Retention: Planter areas may be used to absorb on site stormwater in accordance with City stormwater regulations. (Ord. 3761, 12-17-
2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-16-11: DESIGN STANDARDS:
Design review is required in certain instances for projects developed in the BC Zones; see chapter 34 of this title. (Ord. 4421, 3-4-2019)
Chapter 17
BF FREEWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT/ZONE
10-17-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The BF freeway business district is intended to permit the location of needed freeway commercial facilities in the vicinity of on and off ramp frontage and
access roads of limited access highways with a minimum of traffic congestion in the vicinity of the ramp. Permitted uses are therefore limited to
commercial establishments required by highway users, and certain performance standards, subject to planning and zoning commission review, are
included to protect the freeway design.
The freeway business district is to be established only upon land abutting a frontage or access road of a limited access highway. (Ord. 2140)
10-17-2: PERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES:
Permitted buildings and uses in the BF district shall be as set forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, subject to
the general provisions and exceptions set forth in this and other chapters of this title.
All principal uses except private or public parking areas and service station pump islands shall be in an entirely enclosed building unless otherwise
specified by a conditional use permit. Temporary uses may be allowed subject to regulations cited in subsection 10-1-12B of this title.
Accessory exterior storage affiliated with principal uses shall not be allowed in any area in front of the principal building(s) on a property and shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 311/410
otherwise screened from view with a sight obscuring fence, wall or hedge not to exceed eight feet (8') in height. Materials so stored shall be kept below the
top of the fence. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2978)
10-17-3: BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED CONDITIONALLY:
The planning and zoning commission may grant a conditional use permit for any of the conditional uses listed for the BF district as set forth in section 10-
3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd.
Ord. 2909)
10-17-4: BUILDING HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No principal building shall exceed three (3) stories or thirty feet (30') in height, and no accessory building shall exceed either one and one-half (11/2)
stories or fifteen feet (15') in height. (Ord. 2140)
10-17-5: PROPERTY AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
A. Property Area: No minimum is/shall be required.
B. Property Width: No minimum is/shall be required.
C. Front Yard (Setback): No minimum is/shall be required.
D. Interior Yards: Properties within the BF district are not/shall not be required to provide interior yard setbacks if said lots or developed sites abut property
lines of commercially or industrially zoned property. When interior lot lines of a property zoned BF abut property residentially zoned, interior yards of not
less than twenty five feet (25') wide/deep shall be required opposite the residential district.
E. Access: All lots/parcels developed/"built out", or proposed to be developed/"built out" with structures thereon shall have, or be demonstrated to have,
legal access to a public street, before the city may issue or approve construction of any structures on that lot/parcel (as iterated in the definition of
"property" in section 10-1-2, "Definitions" and subsection 10-1-7B1 of this title). Lots/parcels developed in this zone do not have to have direct lot/parcel
frontage on a public street however, only legal access to the same. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-17-6: MAXIMUM PROPERTY COVERAGE:
None specified. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2978)
10-17-7: PARKING:
All uses shall conform to the general provisions and loading area standards of number, area, surface, screening and maintenance as required in chapter
22 of this title. All uses shall also conform to the parking lot landscaping provisions of chapter 33 of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2919)
10-17-8: SIGNS:
All uses shall conform to the sign provisions of chapter 23 of this title. (Ord. 2140)
10-17-9: LANDSCAPING:
All landscaping shall be established in accordance with the requirements of chapters 22 and 33 of this title, additionally;
A. Screening: Each development shall be permanently screened from adjoining and contiguous residential areas or districts by a wall, fence, greenbelt or
other enclosure approved by the commission of minimum height of four feet (4') and maximum height of seven feet (7'). No signs shall be permitted on
any part of a screening enclosure unless equivalent screening is provided by existing parks, parkways, recreational areas or by topography or other
natural conditions. No screening shall be required when abutting existing parks, parkways, recreation areas or when natural screening is provided by
topography or other natural conditions.
B. Shopping Centers: All shopping centers shall require groupings and/or strips of landscape materials along the length of any street bordering the center.
(Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2978)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 312/410
Chapter 18
IP INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICT/ZONE
10-18-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The IP industrial park district is intended to create, preserve and enhance areas containing manufacturing and related establishments with limited external
impact with an open and attractive setting, typically appropriate to locations near major thoroughfares, freeways and nonmanufacturing areas. (Ord. 2140)
10-18-2: PERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES:
Permitted buildings and uses in the IP district shall be as set forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, subject to
the general provisions and exceptions set forth in this and other chapters of this title.
If, however, any permitted building or use would be hazardous, obnoxious, offensive or unsightly by reason of emission of odor, sound vibration,
radioactivity, electrical interference, glare, liquid or solid wastes, smoke or other air pollutants, said building or use shall be treated as a conditional use,
subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2909)
10-18-3: BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED CONDITIONALLY:
The planning and zoning commission may grant a conditional use permit for any of the conditional uses listed for the IP district as set forth in section 10-3-
2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title.
A. Special Hazardous Uses Requiring Conditional Use Permits: Regardless of whether a conditional use permit would otherwise be required for a
particular use, due to potential hazards involved, any use involving the manufacture, processing and/or aboveground storage of one or more of the
following items shall require a conditional use permit, issued in accordance with the procedures of chapter 25 of this title:
Two thousand (2,000) or more water gallons of flammable liquids, class I and class II;
Fifty (50) gallons or more of unstable liquids;
Fifty (50) pounds or more of fireworks;
Fifty (50) pounds or more of blasting agents;
Fifty (50) pounds or more of explosives;
Magazines, class II (class I magazines are not permitted);
Five hundred (500) pounds or more or two hundred (200) gallons or more of hazardous chemicals, including corrosive liquids, flammable solids, high
toxic materials, oxidizing materials, poisonous gases and any amount of radioactive materials;
Unstable (reactive) chemicals, including organic peroxides and nitromethane;
Fifty (50) pounds or more of ammonium nitrate;
Two thousand (2,000) or more water gallons of liquefied petroleum gases. (Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
10-18-4: PROHIBITED USES:
Any activities which utilize fissionable or radioactive materials if their use results at any time in the release or emission of any fissionable or radioactive
material into the atmosphere, the ground or sewage systems, which said materials are deemed detrimental to public health;
Any use constituting or resulting in public or private nuisance because of emission of any smoke, dust, gas, odor, fumes, noise, vibration, radioactive or
fissionable material, refuse material or any other reason;
Junk, auto wrecking or salvage yards;
Manufacturing or producing of cement, lime, asphalt, gypsum, fireworks, wood pulp or the like;
Processing of sugar beets;
Refining of petroleum;
Saw or planing mills;
Smelting of zinc, copper, tin, iron ores or other metals;
Stockyards or abattoirs;
The production of fish products, sauerkraut or the like, or the rendering or refining of fats and oils. (Ord. 2140)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 313/410
10-18-5: BUILDING HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
None specified. (Ord. 2140)
10-18-6: PROPERTY AREA, COVERAGE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
A. Property Area: No minimum is/shall be required.
B. Property Coverage: Buildings may occupy not more than fifty percent (50%) of any property adjacent to a freeway or a frontage road contiguous to a
freeway, and not more than sixty percent (60%) of any other properties.
C. Front Yard Setbacks: In addition to the definition set forth in chapter 1 of this title, "front yard areas" are defined to include, but not be limited to, yard
areas adjoining a freeway or a frontage road contiguous to a freeway. A minimum of twenty five feet (25') is required for structures and fifteen feet (15')
for parking areas.
D. Interior Yards: Properties within the IP district are not/shall not be required to provide interior yard setbacks if said lots or development sites abut
property lines of commercially or industrially zoned property. When side or rear property lines of property zoned IP abut property residentially zoned,
interior yard (setbacks) not less than thirty feet (30') wide/deep shall be required opposite the abutting residential district.
E. Access: All lots/parcels developed/"built out", or proposed to be developed/"built out" with structures thereon shall have, or be demonstrated to have,
legal access to a public street, before the city may issue or approve construction of any structures on that lot/parcel (as iterated in the definition of
"property" in section 10-1-2, "Definitions", and subsection 10-1-7B1 of this title). Lots/parcels developed in this zone do not have to have direct
lot/parcel frontage on a public street however, only legal access to the same. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-18-7: EXTERIOR STORAGE:
Exterior storage shall not be allowed in any area in front of the principal building(s) on a property and shall be otherwise screened from view with a
site/sight obscuring fence, wall or hedge not less than six feet (6') in height and not to exceed eight feet (8') in height. Materials screened from view by
being stored behind or within the area enclosed by the fencing shall be kept below the top of the fence. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-18-8: SITE SCREENING:
All fences(ing) shall conform to provisions of section 10-1-8 of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-18-9: PARKING AND LANDSCAPING:
Parking areas shall comply with design and landscaping standards iterated in chapters 22 and 33 of this title. Parking areas shall also conform to the
specifications depicted in section 10-1-18, figure 1, "Minimum Parking Lot Requirements", of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-18-10: SIGNS:
All signs shall conform to relevant requirements in chapter 23 of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-18-11: INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All uses shall conform to the general provisions concerning performance standards as required by section 10-1-9 of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-18-12: OTHER REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
The following additional conditions shall apply in an IP district:
A. Outdoor Operation(s): All aspects of property uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except for off street parking,
loading, and aspects of a use allowed via issuance of a conditional use permit that are specifically allowed by the commission to be conducted outside
the building(s) located on the property.
B. Setback From Residential Districts: In any IP district directly across a street from any residential district (or from any agricultural district designated for
future residential use in the comprehensive plan), structures in an IP zone shall be set at least fifty feet (50') away from that industrial property's front or
street side property line that abuts the intervening street line/edge. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 314/410
Chapter 19
IL LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT/ZONE
10-19-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The IL light industrial district is intended to create, preserve and enhance areas containing a wide range of manufacturing and related establishments, and
is typically appropriate to areas providing a wide variety of sites with good rail or highway access. (Ord. 2140)
10-19-2: PERMITTED AND NONPERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES:
Permitted and nonpermitted structures and uses in the IL district shall be as set forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of
this title, subject to the general provisions and exceptions set forth in this and other chapters of this title.
If, however, any permitted structure or use would be hazardous, obnoxious, offensive or unsightly by reason of emission of odor, sound, vibration,
radioactivity, electrical interference, glare, liquid or solid wastes, smoke or other air pollutants, said building or use shall be treated as a conditional use,
subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title.
Bars, taverns, and cocktail lounges are not and shall not be allowed within the IL zone in or on any property having frontage on or within three hundred
feet (300') of Garrity Boulevard. Existing bars, taverns, cocktail lounges fronting that boulevard are considered legally nonconforming in accordance with
the provisions of chapter 3 of this title but may not be expanded as also stated in that chapter. (Ord. 3444, 5-2-2005)
10-19-3: BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED CONDITIONALLY:
A. Conditional Uses: The planning and zoning commission may grant a conditional use permit for any of the conditional uses listed for the IL district as set
forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title.
(Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2909; Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
B. Special Hazardous Uses Requiring Conditional Use Permits: Regardless of whether a conditional use permit would otherwise be required for a
particular use, due to potential hazards involved, any use involving the manufacture, processing and/or aboveground storage of one or more of the
following items shall require a conditional use permit, issued in accordance with the procedures of chapter 25 of this title:
Two thousand (2,000) or more water gallons of flammable liquids, class I and class II;
Fifty (50) gallons or more of unstable liquids;
Fifty (50) pounds or more of fireworks;
Fifty (50) pounds or more of blasting agents;
Fifty (50) pounds or more of explosives;
Magazines, class II (class I magazines are not permitted);
Five hundred (500) pounds or more or two hundred (200) gallons or more of hazardous chemicals, including corrosive liquids, flammable solids, high
toxic materials, oxidizing materials, poisonous gases and any amount of radioactive materials;
Unstable (reactive) chemicals, including organic peroxides and nitromethane;
Fifty (50) pounds or more of ammonium nitrate;
Two thousand (2,000) or more water gallons of liquefied petroleum gases. (Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
10-19-4: BUILDING HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
None specified. (Ord. 2140)
10-19-5: PROPERTY AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
A. Property Area: No minimum is/shall be required.
B. Property Width: No minimum is/shall be required.
C. Front Yard Setback(s): Ten feet (10'); and required setbacks when building height exceeds thirty five feet (35') then one foot (1') for each one foot (1') of
building height.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 315/410
D. Interior Yard(s): Properties within the IL district are not/shall not be required to provide interior yard setbacks if they abut property lines of commercially
or industrially zoned property. When side or rear property lines of property zoned IL abut property residentially zoned, interior yards (setbacks) of not
less than thirty feet (30') wide/deep shall be required opposite the abutting residential district on the industrial property.
E. Street Frontage: None is required.
F. Access: All lots/parcels developed/"built out", or proposed to be developed/"built out" with structures thereon shall have, or be demonstrated to have,
legal access to a public street, before the city may issue or approve construction of any structures on that lot/parcel (as iterated in the definition of
"property" in section 10-1-2, "Definitions", and subsection 10-1-7B1 of this title). Lots/parcels developed in this zone do not have to have direct
lot/parcel frontage on a public street however, only legal access to the same. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-19-6: MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE PROPERTY COVERAGE:
None specified. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2978)
10-19-7: OTHER REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
A. Landscaping Established: All landscaping shall be established in accordance with the requirements of chapter 33 of this title, additionally:
1. Landscaping Adjacent To Residential Districts: All sites having a common boundary/property line with a residentially zoned property shall have either
or both a six (6) to eight foot (8') high sight/site obscuring fence or a view obscuring coniferous/evergreen greenbelt of shrubs, trees, and native
vegetation not less than six feet (6') in height nor less than ten feet (10') in width.
B. Setback From Residential Districts: In an IL district directly across a street or thoroughfare from a residential district or agricultural district in an area
designated for future residential use on the comprehensive plan land use map, the parking and loading facilities shall be set at least twenty feet (20')
back from the street line, and structures shall be set back at least fifty feet (50') from the street line.
C. Exterior Storage: Exterior storage of raw or primary materials, waste products and construction materials shall be prohibited in that area of the property
between the front of the principal building or buildings and the public street on which the principal building or buildings front. Any such exterior storage
elsewhere on the property shall be screened by fencing or landscaping treatment in such a manner that it shall not be visible from any public street.
(Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3077; Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-19-8: SIGNS:
All uses shall conform to the sign provisions of chapter 23 of this title. (Ord. 2140)
10-19-9: PARKING:
All uses shall conform to the general provisions and exceptions concerning off street parking and loading areas standards of number, area, surface,
screening and maintenance, as required by chapter 22 of this title. All uses shall also conform to the parking lot landscaping provisions of chapter 33 of
this title. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2919)
10-19-10: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All uses shall conform to the general provisions concerning performance standards as required by chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 2140)
Chapter 20
IH HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT/ZONE
10-20-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
The IH heavy industrial district is intended to create, preserve and enhance areas containing manufacturing or related establishments which are potentially
incompatible with most other establishments, and is typically appropriate to areas which are most distant from residential areas and which have extensive
rail or shipping facilities. (Ord. 2140)
10-20-2: PERMITTED AND NONPERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES:
Permitted and nonpermitted buildings and uses in the IH district shall be as set forth in section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of
this title, subject to the general provisions and exceptions set forth in this and other chapters of this title.
If, however, any permitted building or use would be hazardous, obnoxious, offensive or unsightly by reason of emission of odor, sound, vibration,
radioactivity, electrical interference, glare, liquid or solid wastes, smoke or other air pollutants, the building or use shall be treated as a conditional use,
subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 316/410
Bars, taverns, and cocktail lounges are not and shall not be allowed within the IH zone in or on any property having frontage on or within three hundred
feet (300') of Garrity Boulevard. Existing bars, taverns, cocktail lounges fronting that boulevard are considered legally nonconforming in accordance with
the provisions of chapter 3 of this title but may not be expanded as also stated in that chapter. (Ord. 3444, 5-2-2005)
10-20-3: SPECIAL HAZARDOUS USES REQUIRING CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
Due to the potential hazard, the manufacturing, processing and/or aboveground storage of the following items, as defined by the fire prevention code of
the city, are exceptions to the preceding section and shall first require a conditional use permit issued in accordance with the procedures of chapter 25 of
this title:
Two thousand (2,000) or more water gallons of flammable liquids, class 1 and class 11;
Fifty (50) gallons or more of unstable liquids;
Fifty (50) pounds or more of fireworks;
Fifty (50) pounds or more of blasting agents;
Fifty (50) pounds or more of explosives;
Magazines, class 11, class 1 magazines are not permitted;
Five hundred (500) pounds or more or two hundred (200) gallons or more of hazardous chemicals, including corrosive liquids, flammable solids, high toxic
materials, oxidizing materials, poisonous gases and any amount of radioactive materials;
Unstable (reactive) chemicals, including organic peroxides and nitromethane;
Fifty (50) pounds or more of ammonium nitrate;
Two thousand (2,000) or more water gallons of liquefied petroleum gases. (Ord. 2140)
10-20-4: BUILDINGS AND USES PERMITTED CONDITIONALLY:
The planning and zoning commission may grant a conditional use permit for any of the conditional uses listed for the IH district as set forth in section 10-3-
2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", of this title, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 25 of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord.
2909)
10-20-5: BUILDING HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
None specified. (Ord. 2140)
10-20-6: PROPERTY AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed:
A. Property Area: No minimum is/shall be required.
B. Property Width: No minimum is/shall be required.
C. Front Yard Setback(s): Minimum required setback shall be ten feet (10'); when building height exceeds thirty five feet (35'), plus one additional foot of
setback shall be required per each one foot (1') of building height above thirty five feet (35').
D. Interior Yards: Properties within the IH district are not/shall not be required to provide interior yard setbacks if said lots or development sites abut
property lines of commercially or industrially zoned property. When side or rear property lines of property zoned IH abut property residentially zoned,
interior yards (setbacks) not less than thirty feet (30') wide/deep shall be required opposite the abutting residential district.
E. Access: All lots/parcels developed/"built out", or proposed to be developed/"built out" with structures thereon shall have, or be demonstrated to have,
legal access to a public street, before the city may issue or approve construction of any structures on that lot/parcel (as iterated in the definition of
"property" in section 10-1-2, "Definitions" and subsection 10-1-7B1 of this title). Lots/parcels developed in this zone do not have to have direct lot/parcel
frontage on a public street however, only legal access to the same. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-20-7: MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE PROPERTY COVERAGE:
None specified. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2978)
10-20-8: OTHER REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 317/410
A. Landscaping Established: All landscaping shall be established in accordance with the requirements of chapters 22 and 33 of this title, additionally:
1. Landscaping Adjacent To Residential Districts: All sites having a common boundary line with a residentially classified property shall have planted and
maintained a view obscuring coniferous greenbelt of shrubs, trees and native vegetation not less than six feet (6') in height nor less than ten feet
(10') in width, for screening purposes and controlling access.
B. Setback From Residential Districts: In any IH district directly across a street or thoroughfare from a residential district or agricultural district designated
for future residential use in the comprehensive plan, the parking and loading facilities shall be distant at least twenty feet (20') from the street, and the
buildings and structures at least fifty feet (50') from the street; provided, this requirement shall not apply when the street or thoroughfare is provided on
one or both sides with a service road developed in accordance with the provisions of chapter 27 of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2978)
C. Exterior Storage: Exterior storage of raw or primary materials, waste products and construction materials shall be prohibited in that area of the property
between the front of the principal building(s) and the public street on which the principal building(s) fronts. Any such exterior storage elsewhere on the
property shall be screened by fencing or landscaping in such a manner that it is not visible from any public street. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
10-20-9: SIGNS:
All uses shall conform to the sign provisions of chapter 23 of this title. (Ord. 2140)
10-20-10: PARKING:
All uses shall conform to the general provisions and exceptions concerning off street parking and loading area standards of number, area, surface,
screening and maintenance, as required by chapter 22 of this title. All uses shall also conform to the parking lot landscaping provisions of chapter 33 of
this title. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2919)
10-20-11: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All uses shall conform to the general provisions concerning performance standards as required by chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 2140)
Chapter 21
ANIMAL ZONING REGULATIONS
10-21-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
To adequately address the keeping of exotic, or wild, animals in cooperation with the policies and procedures of the Idaho departments of agriculture and
fish and game, to redefine the care and keeping of agricultural animals and allowing the same as pets, and finally, to foster the uniform regulation and
proper management of honeybees in Nampa in a manner which promotes the public interest and safety (by minimizing any potential adverse impacts on
residential areas but recognizing that bees are essential for pollination of residential gardens as well as commercial crops, this is accomplished). The
following regulations and section 10-3-2, "Schedule Of District/Zone Land Use Controls", subsection 10-1-12A12, and section 10-1-20 of this title apply in
reviewing animal related issues and classification by size. (Ord. 2729)
10-21-2: AGRICULTURAL ANIMALS:
A. For agricultural animals to be kept on a lot, the lot shall have a minimum area of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. The number of animals allowed1
shall be limited to one "large" animal per ten thousand (10,000) square feet or two (2) "medium sized" animals per ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
This land area requirement of ten thousand (10,000) square feet per "large animal" or per two (2) "medium sized" animals shall refer to open pasture,
grazing or similar space and thus, shall exclude all structures except for barns, stables, and like structures or covered enclosures serving animal
husbandry, milking, or processing needs. Combinations of large or medium animals on a lot may be allowed based on equivalent animal density.
Variances to the foregoing standards shall be processed and evaluated according to subsections 10-24-2A1 through A5 of this title. The requirement
listed herein does not apply to agricultural animals as pets. See section 10-21-3 of this chapter for requirements related to agricultural animals as pets.
(Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
B. Buildings, runs, pens, enclosures, stables, and corrals (not perimeter fencing) housing agricultural animals or their tack, feed, or equipment shall be set
back at least thirty feet (30') from any property line(s) and shall be at least fifty feet (50') from any residential structures, and may not be located within
any required front yard setback. The requirement listed herein does not apply to agricultural animals as pets. See section 10-21-3 of this chapter for
requirements related to agricultural animals as pets.
C. Provision must be made for a viable method of twice monthly disposal of manure so as to prevent obnoxious odors and the accumulation of flies from
intruding into adjacent properties. (See regulation in subsection 10-1-9F of this title.) The requirement listed herein does not apply to agricultural
animals as pets. See section 10-21-3 of this chapter for requirements related to agricultural animals as pets.
D. Agricultural animals shall not be permitted in the required front yard area of a home. The requirement listed herein does not apply to agricultural animals
as pets. See section 10-21-3 of this chapter for requirements related to agricultural animals as pets. (Ord. 4070, 10-7-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 318/410
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-21-3: AGRICULTURAL ANIMALS AS PETS:
Certain animals normally defined/classified as "agricultural" per this title may be kept, in limited quantity, as pets on single-family residential properties
within the residential zones (RA, RS, RD, RML, RMH and RP) as specified in the table in section 10-3-2 of this title and also in accordance with the
following provisions:
A. Said animal(s) shall not include certain animal types identified/classified or otherwise defined as "agricultural" by virtue of this title including bees
(regulated separately under the apiary section), roosters, peacocks, horses (see miniature types as noted below), goats, sheep, donkeys, mules,
llamas, alpacas, emus, ostriches, rheas, or turkeys.
B. Regardless of lot size, the number of agricultural animals allowed as pets shall be in addition to the number of dogs (or potbellied pigs) allowed per lot.
C. Regardless of residentially zoned property (lot/parcel) size, the following agricultural animals shall be allowed as pets with the maximum number
allowable noted after the notation of type of animal (note that offspring under 9 months of age do not count as part of or against the maximum number
allowed):
Chickens (no roosters) 10
Ducks 2
Miniature horses/pygmy goats 1
Potbellied pigs See subsection D of this section
Rabbits or similar (e.g., chinchillas) 4
In no case, however, shall a property owner care and keep a combination of more than three (3) of the above animal types. In other words, a property
owner might have ten (10) chickens, four (4) rabbits, and one miniature horse - besides any pet dogs/potbellied pigs they might choose to keep.
D. In the case of potbellied pigs kept as pets, the number allowed (maximum of 2) shall be in lieu of and not in addition to the number of dogs allowed in
the city, two (2), and kept by an owner or claimant as pets. (Thus, if a person has a dog, they may only have 1 potbellied pig.) If they have two (2) pigs
they may not keep dogs unless a conditional use permit is first obtained to have a kennel.
E. Qualifying agricultural animal(s) kept as pets and their living environment(s) shall be kept/maintained in a healthy, nuisance free condition. The
animal(s) owner(s) shall be guilty of allowing an animal to become a nuisance if and when the animal(s) are allowed by them to make excessive,
continuous or untimely noise; or to molest passersby; or to chase vehicles; or to habitually attack other animals; or trespass upon public or private
property in such a manner as to damage the property or are kept in living conditions that are either not safe and/or unhealthy (e.g., where excessive
accumulation of animal feces is present, etc.).
F. Buildings, runs, pens, enclosures, stables, and corrals (not perimeter fencing) housing miniature horses or potbellied pigs or their tack, feed, or
equipment shall be set back at least thirty feet (30') from any property line(s) and shall be at least fifty feet (50') from any residential structures, and
may not be located within any required front yard setback.
G. Buildings, runs, pens, enclosures, stables, and corrals (not perimeter fencing) housing chickens, ducks, rabbits or similar (e.g., chinchillas) or their tack,
feed, or equipment shall be set back at least five feet (5') from any property line(s), and may not be located within any required front yard setback.
H. Provisions must be made for a viable method of disposal of manure so as to prevent obnoxious odors and the accumulation of flies from intruding into
adjacent properties. (See regulation in subsection 10-1-9F of this title.)
I. No person shall permit any agricultural animal to run at large within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 4070, 10-7-2013)
10-21-4: APIARIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep bees or maintain an apiary in the city except under the following conditions:
A. Conditions:
1. No more than two (2) hives to every parcel or lot of land under ten thousand (10,000) square feet or fraction thereof provided that for every ten
thousand feet (10,000') in excess of the initial ten thousand (10,000) there may be one additional hive;
2. No hive shall be kept or maintained within twenty five feet (25') of any property line of the lot or parcel upon which it is situated, except where:
a. There is a solid barrier through which bees cannot fly, at least six feet (6') in height, separating the beehives from adjoining properties;
3. Apiaries shall be managed and kept in a clean and orderly manner and appearance;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 319/410
4. Hive entrances shall not be oriented so as to direct bee flight in the vicinity of patios, decks, balconies or entrances to living spaces on adjoining
properties; and
5. The apiary use has been approved as an agricultural use in the zone.
B. Enforcement:
1. Enforcement actions involving apiaries may be conducted by a more appropriate regulatory agency (not necessarily by planning and zoning or its
associated code enforcement division) if so delegated by the director. (Ord. 2729)
10-21-5: EXOTIC OR WILD ANIMAL REGULATIONS:
The following standards shall apply to the keeping of certain animals in any city zoning use district:
A. Animals not listed in the agricultural, exotic, or pet animal definitions in section 10-1-2 of this title, and whose presence in an area may reasonably
constitute a nuisance or danger to humanity, property, or other protected wildlife, may be allowed only by issuance of a conditional use permit.
B. All "wild" animals are prohibited (unless classified as "domestic pets"), except when located in properly zoned land, and are registered and/or licensed
by Idaho fish and game (e.g., as a commercial game farm, rehabilitation person or center, birds of prey center, or zoo), or unless specifically approved
by a conditional use permit in accordance with subsection A of this section. This section shall not apply to a circus, carnival, fair, or similar exhibition as
licensed by the city clerk. Enforcement actions involving exotic animals may be conducted by a more appropriate regulatory agency (not necessarily by
planning and zoning or its associated code enforcement division) if so delegated or requested by the planning director.
1. The following criteria shall be used for evaluating the allowance of wild animals:
a. The keeping of the animal(s) does not pose a clear nuisance and/or present danger.
b. The animal(s) is/are not a threatened and/or endangered species or otherwise protected by federal, state, or local legislation.
c. The animal(s) is/are kept by a licensed/accredited organization or individual specifically trained in the keeping of said animal. The types of licenses
as meant by this section include, but are not limited to: a commercial wildlife farm license, a game park license, a rehabilitation license, or a
domestic cervidae license. (Ord. 2729)
Chapter 22
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
10-22-1: LOCATION:
A. Required Off Street Parking Spaces: Required off street parking spaces (in quantity per section 10-22-6 of this chapter) shall be provided for all zones
except DH and GBE (in the DH zone only residential dwelling units require parking; in the GBE zone, no additional off street parking is required
because parking throughout the zone is shared). Off street parking facilities shall be located on a respective development site(s) unless approved
otherwise through a shared parking agreement as may be approved by the planning director or his/her designee in conjunction with plan review of a
proposed project in accordance with section 10-22-4 of this chapter. Criteria in section 10-24-4 of this title shall be considered by the council when
reviewing any variance request to allow required parking spaces to be located "off site". All required parking and drive aisle areas located on site must
be under the same ownership as the development site served. (Ord. 4281, 9-19-2016)
B. Extra Parking Spaces: Extra (i.e., nonrequired) parking spaces for a development shall also be provided on site, unless otherwise provided by special
covenant agreements and/or cross access easements, which bind any off site/property parking and drive aisle area(s) to the development site, as may
be approved by the planning division in accordance with section 10-22-4 of this chapter.
C. Positioning Of Uncovered Residential Parking: If the required parking spaces for a single-family residence (that is not in an RS zone), or, a two-family
dwelling (duplex or 2 unit townhouse) are not located within a covered garage, then the proposed residential structure shall be so positioned and/or
constructed so/such that two (2) parking spaces per unit could be developed and covered with a future garage structure built and sited in accordance
with the provisions of this title and the city's currently adopted edition of the international building code.
D. Recreational And Hobby Vehicle Storage In Residential Zones: Recreational vehicles, pickups and automobiles, trailers, boat trailers, campers and all
other vehicles not in daily use, may be parked off driveways within the front yard setback area of residentially zoned properties for not more than forty
eight (48) hours. Such vehicles, not in daily use, may also be parked within required interior yards in residential zones with no time restriction provided
they are placed on a paved surface with a proper driveway, unless screened completely from view from off the property, as stipulated in subsection 10-
22-5D of this chapter. (Ord. 2730; amd. Ord. 3151; Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
E. Storage Of Certain Vehicles In Residential Districts: The storage of generic commercial vehicles and equipment shall not be permitted on any
residentially zoned property(ies), except as follows: 1) one such vehicle under fifteen thousand (15,000) GVWR may be allowed on a residential
property as allowed by subsection 10-1-10B4 of this title, or 2) "generic commercial vehicles" stored on a property during the period of actual
construction of improvements (e.g., a building) on that same property. (All such vehicles and equipment when involved with on site construction shall
not in any case, however, be kept or stored for more than 1 year on that property.) (Ord. 4190, 7-20-2015)
10-22-2: ENLARGEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 320/410
When a building is enlarged in height or in ground coverage, off street parking shall be provided for the enlargement in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter and chapter 1 of this title. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to require off street parking spaces for the portion of such building
existing prior to May 5, 1971. (Ord. 2730; amd. Ord. 2978)
10-22-3: PARKING AREA DESIGN:
All parking areas, whether public, private or in a parking garage structure, shall be designed, and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and section 10-1-18, figure 1, "Figure 1 - Minimum Parking Lot Requirements", of this title.
A. Residential Yard Intrusion(s), Common Driveways, And Required Drive Widths: In any residential district, public or private parking spaces and/or
associated back up/drive aisle/maneuvering areas shall not be permitted in any required yard (setback area), except as follows:
1. Required parking spaces and individual, private driveways associated with any detached single-family dwelling on a single property shall be
permitted in the required front yard setback area against a side property line in the required side yard setback, or allowed to abut an alley edge.
Private, individual residential driveways for detached houses, two-unit townhouses or duplexes shall be at least twelve feet (12') wide unless they
are/will be longer than one hundred fifty feet (150'), in which case they shall be twenty feet (20') wide unless they are common driveways.
2. Common driveways serving either three (3) or four (4) duplexes or two-unit attached (townhouses) or three (3) or more detached dwelling units shall
be at least twenty feet (20') wide. Common driveways shall otherwise comply with standards listed in chapter 27 of this title (including being set back
from the nearest side property line that parallels the drive). All driveways longer than one hundred fifty feet (150') shall provide for a turnaround
acceptable to the fire department at or near their terminus on the property, as appropriate.
3. Driveways serving residential apartment or condo buildings or groups of such buildings each containing three (3) or more dwelling units (i.e./a.k.a.,
triplexes, fourplexes, apartments) are hereinafter termed "service drives".
4. Service drives in and around any single building containing three (3) or more units, or any group/complex of buildings each containing three (3) or
more units (e.g., a sixplex), shall be allowed to cross required yard (setback) areas when they provide linkage between a parking area and a street or
alley.
5. Service drives or sections thereof lacking parking spaces to either side shall be at least twelve feet (12') wide when designed to move traffic in a oneway
direction.
6. Service drives or sections thereof lacking parking spaces to either side shall be at least twenty feet (20') wide when designed to move traffic in two
(2) ways.
7. Service drives or sections thereof that have parking spaces to either or both sides shall be as wide as required by section 10-1-18, figure 1, "Figure 1
- Minimum Parking Lot Requirements", column c, "Parking Bank Width", of this title.
8. Service drives or sections thereof lacking parking spaces to either side shall be at least twenty feet (20') wide if and when longer than one hundred
fifty feet (150').
9. Service drives shall be allowed in lieu of streets in commercial, industrial, or, non-AG, RA, and RS zoned residential subdivisions.
10. The city council issues a variance approving some amount of intrusion for a drive or parking area into a required yard/setback area. (Ord. 3835, 12-
1-2008)
B. Commercial/Office/University/Industrial Setback/Required Yard Intrusion: In any commercial, office, university or industrial district (or for a commercial,
office, university related or industrial development), public or private parking areas (i.e., back up/maneuvering/drive aisle areas) or parking spaces are
not and shall not be permitted in any required front yard setback. In any commercial, office, university or industrial district (or for a commercial, office,
university related or industrial development), public or private parking areas (i.e., back up/maneuvering/drive aisle areas) or parking spaces are not and
shall not be permitted in any required interior or rear yard (setback), except when: (Ord. 4070, 10-7-2013)
1. Two (2) or more properties are combined into one development site project in which case no intervening setback/landscaping areas shall be
required; or (Ord. 3835, 12-1-2008)
2. Those parking areas or spaces abut an alley, provided that said parking areas, structures or spaces shall comply with the parking diagram
respecting configuration (see section 10-1-18 of this title); or (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
3. Development of an off site, though perhaps abutting or adjoining, parking area is provided for a property. (As noted in subsection 10-22-1A of this
chapter, the planning director or his/her designee, as appropriate, may grant approval for a shared or mixed parking arrangement per section 10-22-4
of this chapter.) The permission of an adjoining property owner(s) to be on an adjoining property howbeit under different ownership, management or
control from the development site and a cross access easement approved by that property's owner must also be obtained. In such cases, connecting
drive aisles shall be allowed to cross any intervening property line.
Landscaping around the parking area/lot on the original development site itself shall still be required per standards in this chapter and chapter 33 of
this title. The off site parking area must also otherwise comply with zoning setbacks and landscaping requirements applicable to that particular
property.
4. Access, service or other driveways (required to provide access to parking areas from streets, alleys or other drives) shall be allowed to cross or
travel through interior yard setback areas. As noted above, required front yard setbacks shall not be otherwise intruded in by service drives, parking
spaces or parking space back up/maneuvering areas except by variance approval by the city council.
5. The Nampa city council issues a variance approving some amount of intrusion into a required setback area.
C. Further Service/Access Drive(s) Regulations:
1. Groups of three (3) or more parking spaces (except in conjunction with single-family on a single lot or parcel) using/sharing a service drive shall be
arranged such that no backing movement or other maneuvering of a vehicle within or onto an arterial or collector street, other than an alley, will be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 321/410
facilitated/required of vehicle drivers using those spaces.
2. No vehicle maneuvering/back up area shall be allowed within a required interior yard (setback) area.
3. Service/access drives including driveways may cross/run through interior yard setback areas.
4. Service drives shall be designated and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic, provide maximum safety in traffic access and egress and maximum
safety of pedestrians and vehicular traffic on the site.
5. In no case shall two-way and one-way service/access drives (those or those sections lacking parking to either side of them) be less than twenty feet
(20') and twelve feet (12') wide respectively. Service drives, or portions thereof, that also function as back up/maneuvering areas behind designated
parking spaces may be required to be wider than twenty feet (20') or twelve feet (12'). Their minimum widths shall be in accordance with minimum
linear foot width requirements listed in section 10-1-18, figure 1, column d, "Traffic Aisle Width", of this title.
D. Excess Areas: Public parking areas provided in excess of the requirements of this section or as a permitted use shall be designed and laid out in
conformance to section 10-1-18, figure 1, of this title. (Ord. 3835, 12-1-2008)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-22-4: COMMON PARKING FACILITIES FOR MIXED USES AND OFF SITE PARKING ALLOWANCE:
In the case of determining the number of required parking spaces for mixed uses (e.g., a shopping center, office complex, etc.), the total requirements for
off street parking spaces shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses.
Off street parking facilities for a particular use shall not be considered as providing parking facilities for any other use except under the following
conditions:
A. That in either case that documentation provided to the city via the planning director or his/her designee demonstrates that there is/are no substantial
conflict(s) in/between the principal operating hours of the structures or uses for which an arrangement of mixed use of off street parking facilities is
proposed.
B. That in either case the applicant presents to the city via the planning director or his/her designee properly drawn legal instruments/agreements to be
recorded with the county recorder, executed by the parties involved in the proposed mixed use of off street parking facilities. Upon planning division
approval of proposed shared or joint parking, such instrument(s)/agreement(s) shall be filed with the planning and zoning division.
The planning director or his/her designee may authorize the mixed use of parking facilities on a property or abutting property(ies), or the use of off site
parking spaces from a nonabutting/adjoining property under the following circumstances:
1. Up to one hundred percent (100%) of the parking facilities required by this section for primarily "nighttime" uses (i.e., theaters, bowling alleys, bars,
restaurants and related uses), may be supplied by other types of structures or uses herein referred to as "daytime" uses (i.e., banks, offices, retail,
personal service shops, clothing, food, furniture, manufacturing or wholesale and related uses); or
2. Up to one hundred percent (100%) of the parking facilities required by this section for primarily "daytime" uses may be supplied by primarily
"nighttime" uses; or
3. Up to one hundred percent (100%) of the parking facilities required by this section for a church or for an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial
school, may be supplied by the off street parking facilities provided by uses primarily of a "daytime" nature; or
4. Some portion of the required parking facilities (spaces) for any particular use not listed in subsections B1 through B3 of this section may be
accommodated by another property within three hundred feet (300') of the property lines of the site whereto the parking is linked provided that:
a. The off site parking area(s) is/are at least paved and properly striped; and
b. That the off site parking area(s) proposed to be "borrowed" from serve(s) as/is "extra" (i.e., a quantity above and beyond the minimum number
required) parking for another property/use; and
c. That the off site parking area(s) proposed to be "borrowed" is used by another user whose operating hours are such that shared parking could be
synchronized so as to not reduce below the minimum threshold the number of spaces available to the "donor" property/use intending to provide
the extra parking. (Ord. 2730; amd. Ord. 3151)
C. That all parking in the GBE zoning district is common and shared among district land uses. (Ord. 4281, 9-19-2016)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-22-5: PARKING AREA IMPROVEMENTS AND PLANS:
Parking spaces in the city shall be striped.
A. Plans: Required parking plans as noted below shall be in/to scale (e.g., 1" = 10'/20'/30'/40'/50'/60').
B. Site Plan Depicting Parking Plan: A plan of any proposed parking area or lot associated with a building project for which a building permit is required
shall be submitted with the building permit to the city engineer when the building permit is applied for. When new or additional parking area is to be
constructed or reconstructed (as opposed to just restriped) outside the authority granted by the issuance of a building permit, then a site design permit
shall first be obtained from the city planning department.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 322/410
C. Site Improvement Permit: A site/landscape development plan shall be submitted with the application for the permit to the city building department with a
copy to the city planning and zoning department and to the city engineer prior to actual development. The plan shall indicate the proposed design
including location, size, shape, design, curb cuts, lighting, landscaping, drainage, and construction details, accessible spaces and ramps along with any
other features and appurtenances deemed necessary by the city engineer. Upon issuance of the permit, development plans may be executed. Any
improvements in the right of way, including curb and gutter, sidewalk, driveway approaches or cuts in existing curbs, etc., shall require application for
an issuance of a right of way permit from the city engineer's office prior to actual construction. The permit fee shall be set/established by council
resolution.
D. Surfacing: In any zoning district, all areas where any kind of vehicles may/will traverse, be parked or stored (e.g., new principal/primary residential
driveways, drive aisles and/or service drives, private or public roads, display areas, drive-throughs, loading dock areas, parking lot areas, parking pads,
turnaround areas, vehicle storage areas, etc.), emplaced subsequent to April 11, 2011, shall be required to be paved (via asphalt or concrete) except
secondary/auxiliary residential dwelling unit driveways and/or parking pads for recreational vehicles, and, certain parking lots as noted hereafter:
1. Certain Permanent Parking Lots Temporarily Exempted: Permanent parking lots may be initially established in the city without having to be paved,
striped or even landscaped for a time, but only in accordance with the following conditions/situations:
a. That the parking lot is approved to be temporary (as allowed and regulated by subsection 10-1-12A15 of this title); and that the parking lot is
covered with gravel or oiled, recycled asphalt as approved by the city council; or
b. That the parking lot is developed as a public facility by the city of Nampa upon special approval through vote of the city council;
However, this allowance shall not apply to any property whereupon:
a. The proposed use associated with a parking lot is subject to building and site design standards review.
2. Certain Permanent Parking Lots Exempted: Certain types of permanent parking lots may be established in the city without having to be paved,
striped or even landscaped, but only in accordance with the following conditions/situations:
a. That the parking lot is used or intended for use by/for vehicle salvage/wrecking yard areas, and/or used by/regularly parked on by semitrucks or
other trucks of equivalent GVW (gross vehicle weight unloaded) heavy or construction/mining type vehicle/machinery and/or are used as
contractor's storage yards in which case:
(1) The parking lot shall be completely enclosed/screened from view from any abutting public right of way (unless the parking lot serves as a
loading/unloading area for trucks or a sales display area for semitrucks). The fencing used to screen from view the parking areas shall not be
within, but rather shall be "behind" (when viewed from off the property/from abutting street, etc.) any required yard/setback area(s) as required
by subsection 10-1-8E of this title.
3. Directional Arrows And/Or Crosswalks: The planning director or his/her designee may require emplacement of painted directional arrows and/or
pedestrian/accessible crosswalks for new development sites as part of their parking lot/service drive/drive-through lane planning and
development/"build-out".
4. Unlawful To Park On Grass: It is and shall be unlawful for persons or parties to park vehicles for more than seventy two (72) hours on the grass on
properties in residential zones off of a driveway/parking pad (e.g., in their front yard area) if a hard surfaced driveway exists on the same property for
them to park their vehicle(s) upon. Vehicles shall not be parked on grass (including required landscape setback areas) in all other zones save for
limited protrusions as allowed by the director or his/her designee for automobile sales lot car display pads located in commercial or industrial zones,
as noted in subsection 10-33-4A1d of this title.
E. Traffic Control Devices: All traffic control devices such as parking stripes designating car stalls, directional arrows or signs, curbs and other
development shall be installed and completed as shown on approved plans. Hard surfaced parking areas shall use paint or similar devices to delineate
car stalls and directional arrows. Where pedestrian walks are used in parking lots for the use of foot traffic only, they shall be curbed, and raised six
inches (6") above the lot surface and made wheelchair accessible or painted crosswalks shall be provided. All driveways, vehicle display areas, off
street parking areas and public off street parking areas and public off street areas shall be hard surfaced with a minimum of two inches (2") thickness of
asphalt or concrete. Broken up areas of asphalt or concrete may be required to be replaced, patched or slurry sealed over by the planning division.
F. Parking Area Dimensions: Dimensions of off street parking areas shall be not less than as shown in section 10-1-18, figure 1 of this title.
G. Landscaping: Emplacement of landscaping along collectors and arterials is/shall be required and shall comply with applicable regulations contained in
chapter 33 of this title. Landscaping shall also be emplaced in and around parking lots according to the regulations listed hereafter in this chapter.
H. Form Of Screening: Screening in the form of either a solid masonry wall, architectural fences or dense coniferous hedges shall be erected or planted
and maintained to a height of not less than five feet (5') nor more than six feet (6') where a "commercial" parking lot shares a common boundary/abuts
up with any residentially zoned property.
I. Lighting For Parking: Lighting of areas provided for off street parking shall be so arranged to not constitute a nuisance or hazard to passing traffic and
where said lots share a common boundary with any residentially zoned property. Illuminating devices provided for nonresidential off street parking shall
be shuttered and directed so that the light shines away from or otherwise impacts as minimally as reasonably possible adjoining residential property.
J. Parking Lot Landscaping Development Standards: All parking areas shall include landscaping as stipulated in this chapter.
1. Size Of Plantings: Right of way, setback and fencing or screen plantings that have a mature size consistent with vehicular and pedestrian traffic
visibility needs shall be used (see "vision clearance" definition in section 10-1-2 of this title).
2. Maintenance Needs Of Plantings: Consideration shall be given to maintenance needs including: feeding, pruning, spraying, irrigation, necessary
replacement frequency, and applying new rules, regulations, or policies that do not conflict with commitments applicable to the property as set forth
within any duly executed agreement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 323/410
3. Parking Lot Development In Phases: If a parking lot is going to be developed in portions or phases, then landscaping shall extend to the extent of the
proposed paving work per phase.
4. Reconstruction Of A Parking Lot: When a parking lot is expanded, or torn up and then reconstructed (as opposed to being just resealed/slurried
and/or striped) only the parking lot area itself (i.e., that part being renovated) shall be improved to meet current code(s). This shall require that
landscaping and ADA parking be emplaced in and/or around the parking area such that the parking area complies with this chapter and chapter 33 of
this title including the fifteen foot (15') wide landscaping strip noted in subsection 10-1-6C4 of this title.
In addition, any engineering, water, wastewater or fire division/department improvement requirements shall apply to the "new" parking area. For
example, such things including, but not limited to, curbing, gutter, sidewalk, downtown business district street amenities, curb cuts, drainage features,
etc., shall all be improved or emplaced as part of the refurbishment of the parking area as required by the city. A site design permit shall be required
of an applicant and reviewed by the city (as specified in this chapter) to ensure correct execution of this requirement unless the parking lot is being
renovated because of concurrent interior structure remodeling occurring, or slated to occur, on the same property. In the case of parking simply being
restriped (whether a slurry seal is used or not), the parking shall be arranged to comply with section 10-1-18, figure 1 of this title, but need not be
landscaped.
5. Property Line Plantings: Exterior/perimeter planting along property lines shall be as follows:
a. Exterior planters around the perimeter of a parking lot shall be as wide as required by corridor regulations or zoning district yard setbacks
whichever is more restrictive or provides for the best matching of landscape strip lines in the area as determined by the planning director.
b. Perimeter landscape shall be landscaped. Landscape areas shall not be left in or with bare dirt, weeds, gravel or devoid of vegetation (i.e., grass,
shrubs, trees, etc.).
c. All landscaping shall be irrigated. New developments shall use underground irrigation. Existing sites being updated/renovated to meet code(s) may
use domestic water with an approved landscape meter and approved backflow device. Consult Nampa water division regarding the latter option.
6. Interior Parking Lot Planters: Interior parking lot planters (with curbed surrounds) are required as visual landscaping interruptions in parking
rows/banks.
a. Landscape Planter Spacing: Interior parking lot planters shall be located at intervals not to exceed ninety feet (90') within each parking bank
except for any parking bank/row located immediately fronting/against any principal commercial or industrial (termed commercial collectively)
building on a property and between the limits/span of its exterior side walls, for which such placement is optional.
If a parking bank that abuts the front entry area of such a building extends past the outside walls of the building, then planters shall be required
where any continuous ninety foot (90') parking space intervals are found past the building walls. Refer to the following illustration:
b. Parking Bank Interrupt Style Landscape Planters' Content(s): Each single interior interrupt style planter shall contain one 1.5-inch caliper
deciduous shade tree as may be selected by the developer or property or project manager or owner, provided such tree(s) will grow on/from a
single trunk and be at least fifteen feet (15') tall at maturity (see "Image (Example #1)" of this section). Interior parking lot planters shall also
contain some combination of decorative rock and/or shrubbery and/or lawn and/or bark.
c. Landscape Planters' Dimensions: Interior planters shall be of equivalent size, dimensions and angle of the parking stalls that surround them in the
same parking bank. For example, if located in a single row of ninety degree (90°) oriented parking spaces that are nine feet (9') wide by twenty feet
(20') deep/long, a landscape planter would also need to be nine feet (9') wide and twenty feet (20') deep.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 324/410
Where two (2) parking rows adjoin each other "head to head", back to back planters may be situated, or they may be separated. If placed back to
back in, for example, a pair of ninety degree (90°) oriented parking rows, then the resulting planters would likely appear to be a single nine foot (9')
wide by forty foot (40') deep/long planter.
d. Exception: In lieu of parking bank interim interrupt style planters, landscape strips as detailed in figure X1 of this section may, instead, be
emplaced between doubled parking banks. Within such landscape strips (when used), three inch (3") caliper deciduous shade trees from the
species listed in section 10-33-4, table 33-4 of this title shall be planted every forty feet (40') on center running laterally through the strip.
e. Drainage Channel: A one foot (1') cutout (preferred) or six (6) to eight foot (8') culvert pipe (less preferred) may be used at the end of or within a
parking planter's abutment against a curb or other barrier in order to facilitate site drainage (e.g., stormwater flow across a parking lot into a drain).
(See "Image (Example #1)" of this section.)
IMAGE (EXAMPLE #1)
f. Planters' Contribution To Parking Lot Landscaping: At least five percent (5%) of a parking lot area (i.e., area devoted to parking stalls and
maneuvering/backup/service drive(s)) shall be landscaped in/around the same. The area(s) of interior parking lot planters as well as any
immediate perimeter landscaping (e.g., that lies immediately around, abutting, or within required setback/yard areas) shall count toward providing
the five percent (5%).
g. Landscaping Irrigation, Generally: All landscaping emplaced in conjunction with new development shall be irrigated with an underground sprinkler
system. Said system will be designed to minimize watershed onto adjoining public right(s) of way. Properties being renovated and/or upgraded to
meet site development codes may utilize either underground or some kind of aboveground system (e.g., watering with hose).
K. Bicycle Parking: Where provided, bicycle parking shall conform to the design guidelines specified in Nampa's bicycle and pedestrian master plan
guidelines 5.5 and appendix 5.0. Racks shall support a bicycle at two (2) points and be permanently secured to a nonpermeable surface. Racks (or
spaces containing a bike rack) shall be located within fifty feet (50') of the main entrance of the building(s) which they serve, shall provide at least four
feet (4') of clear space around their perimeter, and otherwise, shall not obstruct pedestrian movement. It is recommended that there be one bicycle
parking space for each ten (10) required automobile parking spaces. For multi-family residential, one space per dwelling unit is recommended. (Ord.
2730; amd. Ord. 2978; Ord. 3247, 8-4-2003; Ord. 3383, 10-4-2004; Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008; Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011; Ord. 4190, 7-20-2015; Ord. 4203, 10-
19-2015; Ord. 4207, 10-19-2015; Ord. 4282, 9-19-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 325/410
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-22-6: SPECIAL PARKING AND LANDSCAPE CORRIDOR DISTRICTS AND SPACES REQUIRED:
A. Special Parking/Landscape Corridor Overlay District(s): Provision for special parking and landscape corridor overlay districts is hereby established in
order to accommodate the need for off street parking ratio and parking and landscape strip design alternatives in specific city areas above and beyond
what is normally allowed. Origination of such areas results from various causes including: legal nonconformities in landscape strip, parking area,
service drive, landscape area and even setback areas introduced by the city or state doing street improvements (including widening), implementation of
special plan studies, enactment of local improvement districts, and so forth.
The following regulations, in addition to the general regulations of this chapter, shall apply to all land classified as being and sited in a P district. If any
of the parking or chapter 33 of this title landscape corridor regulations specified in this title differ from the corresponding provisions of this section, the
regulations of this section shall govern. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
1. Nampa/Caldwell Boulevard Special Parking/Landscape Corridor District (P-1):
a. Boundaries: The boundary of the P-1 district is described as follows:
Commencing at the intersection of N. Canyon Street and the Nampa/Caldwell Boulevard on the northwest corner of that intersection and thence
northwesterly along the center line of the Nampa/Caldwell Boulevard to the intersection of the Nampa/Caldwell Boulevard and W. Karcher Road
then back easterly along the northernmost and rear property lines of each and every lot or parcel having immediate frontage along the
Nampa/Caldwell Boulevard to N. Canyon Street then southerly to the intersection of the Nampa/Caldwell Boulevard and N. Canyon Street, point of
beginning.
b. Requirements Of The P-1 District: Landscape corridor provision, parking layout/design, parking setback and provision of spaces shall adhere to
requirements set forth in section 10-1-18, figure 1 of this title, this section, and section 10-33-4 of this title. Expansion of site/structural
improvements or property redevelopment/new construction that would normally require updating of site improvements in accordance with section
10-1-6 of this title shall still be therein required. Exceptions to such standards, where necessitated because of the property being legally
nonconforming, may be allowed without requiring a variance. Structures destroyed by fire or other calamity may be rebuilt within the same footprint
as previously occupied by the same but are exempt from having to update site improvements at that time to establish parking in accordance with
this chapter. Those properties within the P-1 district whereupon an existing structure is located at or within thirty feet (30') from the back of the
sidewalk shall be allowed access off of, and onto, the Nampa/Caldwell Boulevard at any point along their property frontage abutting the same.
Thus, drive accesses in such situations may be as wide as the property's frontage.
c. Federal ADA Restrictions: The provisions of this section shall not be construed as abrogation of federal ADA regulations. Such shall still be
applicable provided that emplacement of handicap parking spaces and signage will not be enforced by the city in the P-1 zone. (Ord. 3636, 11-6-
2006)
2. Garrity Boulevard Special Parking/Landscape Corridor District (P-2):
a. Boundaries: The boundary of the P-2 district is described as follows:
Commencing at the east side of the intersection of N. Grant Street and Garrity Boulevard and thence along the centerline of Garrity Boulevard to
the center of the overpass at the interchange (exit 38) and including in the same each and every lot or parcel having immediate frontage along the
Garrity Boulevard on either side of the same at the time of the passage date hereof.
b. Requirements Of The P-2 District: Landscape corridor provision, parking layout/design, parking setback and provision of spaces shall adhere to
requirements set forth in section 10-1-18, figure 1 of this title, this section, and section 10-33-4 of this title. Expansion of site/structural
improvements or property redevelopment/new construction that would normally require updating of site improvements in accordance with section
10-1-6 of this title shall still be therein required. Exceptions to such standards, where necessitated because of the property being legally
nonconforming, may be allowed without requiring a variance. Structures destroyed by fire or other calamity may be rebuilt within the same footprint
as previously occupied by the same but are exempt from having to update site improvements at that time to establish parking in accordance with
this chapter. Additionally, as indicated in chapter 33 of this title, private properties within the P-2 district that have frontage abutting Garrity only
have to install four feet (4') of landscaping along Garrity when such is required to be emplaced instead of fifteen feet (15'). Also, it shall be unlawful
to place any form of temporary or portable sign on or in the landscape strips that lie along and abutting any section of Garrity Boulevard which is in
the P-2 district.
c. Federal ADA Restrictions: The provisions of this section shall not be construed as abrogation of federal ADA regulations. Such shall still be
applicable provided that emplacement of handicap parking spaces and signage will not be enforced by the city in the P-2 zone. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-
2008)
B. Number Of Spaces Required: The number of off street parking spaces required and/or provided for land and structure uses shall be no less than as set
forth as follows. Where fractional number results, round to the next highest whole amount. Thus, 2.6 spaces needed for a project means that three (3)
spaces are/will be actually required. Required spaces do not apply to uses in the DH or GBE zones. (Ord. 4281, 9-19-2016)
Property's/Structure's
Principal Use Type Parking Spaces Required
Barber and beauty shops 1 per 75 square feet of gross floor area
Churches, clubs, lodges 1 per every 4 fixed seats or every 8 feet of bench length or every 28 square feet
Dwelling, single-family 2 per dwelling unit on a single lot
Dwelling, (to be) converted into a commercial
business/office
Shall be in accordance with other requirements in this section (e.g., for small item
retail 1 per 250 square feet of net floor area) or the maximum number of parking
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 326/410
spaces that will/can be made to fit on the property without needing to obtain a
variance, whichever standard is less restrictive
Dwelling, two-family or multiple 2 per dwelling unit (plus 1 extra per building [for use as an ADA space] when a
fourplex or higher density residential building is served/developed)
Elderly housing 1 per 2 dwelling units
Fraternities, sororities, cooperatives and dormitories 1 for each 3 occupants for which sleeping accommodations are provided
Hospitals 1 per patient bed plus 1 per 400 square feet of office floor area
Hotels, motels, motor hotels, etc. 1 per room
Industrial:
General 1 per 500 square feet of gross floor area
Laboratories and research facilities 1 per 800 square feet of gross floor area
Machine shop area/repair bay area(s) _ when
part of, or accessory to, a larger facility
0 required if accessory, otherwise 1 per 500 square feet of gross floor area
Machinery or equipment sales (not of vehicles) _
indoor
1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Wholesale and storage buildings/
operations, when employees are never or very
infrequently occupying said space
0 required
Wholesale and storage buildings/
operations, when employees are regularly
occupying said space
1 per 700 square feet of gross floor area
Libraries, museums, art galleries 1 per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Mortuaries 1 per 75 square feet of gross floor area used for assembly
Nursing/convalescent/retirement homes, asylums,
welfare, correctional institutions
1 per 5 beds plus 1 per regular employee
Offices:
Medical offices (e.g., doctor, dental, optometrist,
chiropractic, etc.)
1 per 150 square feet of usable/used net floor area
Standard/professional business/
accessory to industrial use (i.e., all but medically
related types)
1 per 400 square feet of usable/used net floor area
Pharmacies 1 per 150 square feet of gross floor area
Recreational, entertainment, amusement
establishments:
Bowling alleys 6 per lane
Participating type (e.g., skating rinks) 1 per 75 square feet of gross floor area
Racquetball, handball 3 per court
Spectator type _ outdoor/indoor (e.g.,
auditoriums, assembly halls, theaters, stadiums,
outdoor bleachers, etc.)
1 per 4 seats
Restaurants, delicatessens, other eateries with sale and
consumption on premises:
Less than 4,000 square feet in size 1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area
Over 4,000 square feet in size 20 plus 1 per 100 square feet of gross floor area in excess of 4,000 square feet
Retail:
Bulky (e.g., furniture, appliances, mattresses,
indoor auto showrooms, carpet stores, etc.)
1 per 600 square feet of gross floor area
General (e.g., variety, grocery, antique, home
and garden improvement, antique stores, etc.)
1 per 250 square feet of net floor area
Rooming or boarding house 1 per room
Schools/learning centers:
Elementary 1 per employee and faculty member
Junior high 1 per employee and faculty member and 1 per 20 students
Senior high 1 per employee and faculty member and 1 per 4 students
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 327/410
Colleges, commuter 1 per full time equivalent student and faculty member
Colleges, resident 1 per 3 full time equivalent students plus 1 for each faculty member
Vocational/commercial business 1 per full time equivalent faculty member plus 1 per 3 classroom seats
(Ord. 3636, 11-6-2006; amd. Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
C. Unspecified Or Undetermined Uses: Off street parking requirements for buildings and uses not set forth herein and of undetermined use shall be
determined by the planning director. The director's determination shall be based upon the requirements for the most comparable building or use
specified herein. The director's decision may be appealed to the commission. (Ord. 3636, 11-6-2006)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-22-7: LOADING SPACES:
Each off street loading space shall measure not less than thirty five feet by twelve feet (35' x 12') and shall have an unobstructed height of fifteen feet (15')
and shall be made permanently available for parking and shall be surfaced, improved and maintained as required in section 10-22-5 of this chapter.
Required loading spaces shall be in conformance with the following:
A. Department stores, freight terminals, hospitals, sanitariums, industrial or manufacturing establishments, retail or wholesale stores or storage
warehouses or any similar use which has, or intends to have, ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more, shall provide the following truck loading or
unloading spaces:
Square Feet Of Aggregate
Gross Floor Area
Required Number
Of Spaces
10,000 to 15,999 1
16,000 to 39,999 2
40,000 to 65,000 3
Each additional 16,000 1 additional space
B. Auditoriums, convention or exhibit halls, sports arenas, hotels, office buildings, restaurants or similar uses which have, or intend to have, an aggregate
gross floor area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet or more, shall provide the following truck loading or unloading spaces:
Square Feet Of Aggregate
Gross Floor Area
Required Number
Of Spaces
40,000 to 59,999 1
60,000 to 99,999 2
100,000 to 160,000 3
Each additional 60,000 1 additional space
(Ord. 2730; amd. Ord. 2907)
10-22-8: MAINTENANCE:
Maintenance of all areas provided for off street parking and loading shall include removal and replacement of dead and dying trees, grass and shrubs,
removal of trash, weeds and other debris. Maintenance shall also include repair of parking and loading surfaces, traffic control devices, signs, light
standards, fences, walls, curbs and railing. All areas shall provide for proper drainage of surface water to prevent drainage onto adjacent properties and
walkways. Any lights used to illuminate such areas shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from the adjoining properties. (Ord. 2730)
10-22-9: ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES, LOADING/UNLOADING AISLES, SIGNS, RAMPS AND ACCESSIBLE ROUTES:
A. Standards: Accessible parking spaces, loading/unloading aisles, signs, ramps and accessible routes shall be provided for disabled people in
accordance with provisions in the city's currently adopted version of the international building code and ICC CABO/ANSI standards whenever new
construction is commenced on a nonsingle-family, two-family or three-family project and/or whenever alteration to an existing parking lot or
development is made according to provisions in section 10-1-6 of this title. Accessible facilities shall be administered and enforced by the city building
division.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 328/410
B. Striping And Restriping Of Parking Areas; Effect(s) On Handicap Accessible Parking Space Marking:
1. When a multiresidential (4 plus units on 1 site) structure, commercial or industrial business structure, or the city of Nampa, as an entity, resurfaces or
paints a new striping pattern onto/over a parking lot containing more than five (5) spaces, it must provide correctly marked accessible parking
spaces, clearance, signage and ramps as required by provisions of the appendix for chapter 11 of the international building code, this chapter, state
law, and ADA standards for accessible design. Painting over old lines as maintenance work or nonslurry seal coating shall not be construed to be
"restriping" for the purposes of this section.
2. The color of lines and the accessibility symbol used in conjunction with marking/identifying an accessible space shall be contrasting as defined by
federal law. Within the city of Nampa, the coloration is specifically mandated. Acceptable colors on a gray to black tone asphalt parking lot surface
shall be white, yellow or blue in any combination. Upon a cement parking lot area surface, only yellow or blue shall be allowed. (Ord. 3383, 10-4-
2004)
10-22-10: DRIVE-THROUGH REGULATIONS:
No drive-up establishment shall be permitted unless the planning director or his/her designee finds that design and operation of the establishment is
substantially in compliance with the following requirements and conditions:
A. The waiting lane(s) be of sufficient length so as to prevent site traffic circulation from being disrupted by increased vehicular congestion, blockage, or
rerouting caused by the drive-through;
B. The design, signage or operational characteristics of the establishment prevent or discourage vehicles from waiting for service on public sidewalks or
streets;
C. Drive-through waiting lanes be designed so that curbs, gates or other devices do not prevent a vehicle from leaving them. A ten foot (10') wide
unobstructed emergency escape lane or area shall be provided adjacent and adjoining a drive-through lane starting twenty feet (20') past the entry
point. If an end of the drive-up lane splits into multiple lanes then the escape lane shall follow the outer side of the lane farthest from the drive-up
facility. Thus, in such a situation, multiple escape lanes are not required at the diversion point;
D. All lights and other illuminated materials/signage shall be screened to prevent lighting and glare from falling on adjoining residentially zoned or used
property;
E. The nearest edge of a drive-through lane is set back ten feet (10') from the nearest and adjoining residentially zoned, or used, property unless required
to be further displaced according to zoning district setback regulations pertaining to the property, whereupon the drive-through to be emplaced, are
more restrictive. The planning director may vary the setback requirements to lessen the impact of sound, exhaust, or other disturbance to the
residential area as appropriate. Areas of commercial sites with existing natural or manmade barriers or screens or lengthy distances separating them
from residential areas or uses are preferable for development of drive-through areas;
F. A drive-through lane is clearly marked with devices such as cones, signs or painted lines;
G. Any parking spaces lost in a parking lot covered by a drive-through associated with a detached business on a "pad" site do not reduce the total number
of available parking spaces for the principal business(es) on the same or associated site/property below the minimum number required for them. (Ord.
2730; amd. Ord. 3077)
Chapter 23
SIGNS
10-23-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to create the legal framework for a comprehensive and balanced system of signage in the city. These regulations are
intended to provide an easy and pleasant communication between people and their environment and avoid visual clutter that is potentially harmful to traffic
and pedestrian safety, property values, business opportunities, and community appearance. The intent is not to regulate content, only the number, type,
location, height and size of signs. This chapter has the following objectives:
A. To ensure that signs are designed, constructed, installed and maintained to assure public and traffic safety;
B. To reflect and support the desired character and development patterns of the community;
C. To allow adequate and effective signs without dominating the visual landscape;
D. To protect and enhance economic viability of the city's commercial corridors by assuring aesthetic appeal to businesses and residents alike;
E. To balance the needs of business with the desire to preserve and enhance the visual character of the city. (Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 329/410
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-23-2: DEFINITIONS:
A. Words Defined: Unless the context specifically requires otherwise, as used in this chapter:
ABANDONED SIGN: Any sign(s) located on a property that has become vacant and unoccupied, for a period of ninety (90) days or more.
ADDRESS NUMBERS: Premises identification numbers placed on residential structures, commercial and industrial structures, and multi-family residential
structures. All premises identification shall be in accordance with section 9-1-2 of this code.
APARTMENT COMPLEX: A group of four (4) buildings or more, each consisting of three (3) units or more therein arranged in and as a common
development and wherewith (a) common access drive(s), landscaping and parking area(s) are utilized in order to access all buildings and provide shared
amenities. Such developments may be associated with a subdivision and under one or multiple ownership, though usually under one management.
APARTMENT GROUP: Two (2) or three (3) buildings each consisting of three (3) units or more arranged in and as a common development and wherewith
(a) common access drive(s), landscaping and parking area(s) are utilized in order to access all buildings and provides shared amenities. Such
developments may be associated with a subdivision and under one or multiple ownership, though usually under one management.
APPROVED PLASTIC MATERIALS: Plastic that meets the standards of an approved testing agency for use in construction of illuminated signs.
APPROVED TESTING AGENCY: A nationally recognized organization primarily established for the purpose of testing methods and materials to approved
standards, and accepted as an approved testing agency by the building or planning director.
ART (MURAL): A pictorial or graphical representation applied to and made an integral part of an exterior wall that does not contain words, logos,
trademarks or graphic representations of any person, product or service that identifies or advertises a business.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 330/410
ATTACH: To stick, tack, nail or otherwise affix a sign to any object.
AWNING: A covering structure projecting horizontally and attached to a building that is collapsible, retractable or capable of being folded against the face
of the supporting walk, or if on a rigid frame, is constructed of canvas, cloth or other flexible material.
BALLOON: An inflatable object, including, by way of illustration, but not limitation, helium balloons and forced air filled balloons, generally made from
rubber, silk, or other similar material.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 331/410
BILLBOARD SIGN: A type of sign typically three hundred (300) square feet or larger, and of mono or dual pole devices that may or may not have
electronic displays or lighting, displayed outdoors or visible from a public right of way, which is typically, usually and customarily not used to advertise
goods, products, businesses, services, or facilities which are not sold, manufactured, or distributed on or from the property or facilities on which the sign is
located. A "billboard" is a type of outdoor advertising sign; however, this type is separately defined because of its aesthetics (size, look, and construction).
BLANKETING: The partial or complete obscuring of the face of one sign by another.
BUILDING FACE: The wall of a building on one elevation.
BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A combination of materials to form a construction used for occupancy, use, or ornamentation, whether installed on, above,
or below the surface of land. As used in this chapter, building or structure does not include signs.
BUSINESS COMPLEXES:
Commercial Complex: A group of commercial buildings planned, designed and constructed on the same site or contiguous sites and wherewith (a)
common access drive(s), landscaping and parking area(s) may be utilized in order to access all buildings and provide shared amenities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 332/410
Industrial Complex: A group of industrial businesses, that may include retail businesses, that forms a centralized unit with a joint parking area
available for use by patrons of any single business on the same site or contiguous sites and wherewith (a) common access drive(s), landscaping and
parking area(s) may be utilized in order to access all buildings and provide shared amenities.
Mixed Use Complex: A mixed group of two (2) or more buildings that are principally used for some combination of commercial, industrial or office
purposes and wherewith (a) common access drive(s), landscaping and parking area(s) may be utilized in order to access all buildings and provide
shared amenities.
Office Complex: A group of businesses, other than retail or industrial businesses that form a centralized unit with a joint parking area available for
use by patrons of any single business on the same site or contiguous sites and wherewith (a) common access drive(s), landscaping and parking
area(s) may be utilized in order to access all buildings and provide shared amenities.
CANOPY: A permanent roofed structure that is erected for the purpose of providing shelter to patrons of automobiles, which is not completely enclosed,
and which may be freestanding or partially attached to a building.
CAR WINDOW FLAGS: A flag made of fabric, located on a pole or holding device that is specifically designed to attach to the window of a vehicle.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE: An official document issued to a new tenant in an existing building that is not performing any type of work in which a
building permit is required, and is not a change of occupancy classification. This certificate is required prior to a building or tenant space being occupied.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: An official document showing that a business and/or residence have obtained the appropriate permits and have
completed all of the necessary inspections to ensure the building is in compliance to occupy. A certificate of occupancy is required prior to occupying any
building or tenant space that required a building permit.
COMBINATION SIGN: Incorporating any combination of the features of a freestanding pole, monument, projecting and/or roof signs.
COMMERCIAL (STRIP/CONVENIENCE) SHOPPING CENTER(S): Characterized as/by an attached row of stores or service outlets managed as a
coherent retail entity (often under 1 ownership and/or management), with on site parking and landscaping. Open canopies may connect the storefronts,
but a strip center does not have enclosed walkways linking the stores. A strip center may be configured in a straight line, or have an "L" or "U" shape. A
convenience center is among the smallest of the centers, whose tenants provide a narrow mix of goods and personal services to a very limited trade area.
They will feature shared parking, common service drive(s) and landscaping as regular amenities. They may be wholly sited on, or partially spread across,
two (2) or more lots or parcels. Generally, there are subcategories of such developments including, but not limited to: neighborhood, large neighborhood,
community, etc. The community center tends to provide a wider range of facilities for the sale of shopping goods such as apparel and furniture than the
neighborhood centers including having a junior department store, variety store or discount department store as the principal anchor tenant. Malls are
different in their nature and size and are, correspondingly, separately defined in this section.
COMMUNITY (PUBLIC) WORKS OF ART: Original works of art in any artistic medium (bronze, stone, paint, etc.) for temporary or permanent placement in
outdoor or indoor settings. Public art is accessible to all members of the public and it aims to enrich the community by evoking meaning in the public realm.
Art can take a variety of forms, including as an aesthetic element to a functional public work, to include, but not be limited to: architectural design features
(embedded relief sculptures), landscape features, streetscape design features (benches, artist gardens), site specific monumental works (sculptures),
community enhancement projects (artistic designed/painted sewer covers, embedded logos within the streets). Such artworks can include water elements
and walkways.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 333/410
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: An informational sign which is erected in conjunction with a building being proposed for construction or during the building
construction period.
DAWN TO DUSK: That time of day between sunrise and sunset.
DILAPIDATED OR DETERIORATED CONDITION: A sign which is shabby, neglected, or in disrepair, or which fails to be in the same form as originally
constructed, or which fails to perform its intended function of conveying a message. Any sign which in the opinion of the city has any of the following
characteristics:
1. Where elements of the surface or background can be seen, as viewed from the normal viewing distance, to have portions of the finished material or
paint flaked, broken off, or missing, or otherwise not in harmony with the rest of the surface; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 334/410
2. Where the structural support or frame members are visibly bent, broken, dented, or torn; or
3. Where the panel is visibly cracked, or in the case of wood and similar products, splintered in such a way as to constitute an unsightly or harmful
condition; or
4. Where the sign or its elements are twisted or leaning or at angles other than those at which it was originally erected (such as may result from being
blown or the failure of a structural support); or
5. Where the message or wording can no longer be clearly read by a person with normal eyesight under normal viewing conditions; or
6. Where the sign is torn, ripped, faded, or fallen into ruin or decay, as from age, wear or neglect.
DIRECTOR: The planning director, or the planning director's designee. The planning director's designee may subdelegate any or all authority, duties, and
powers under this chapter.
DISPLAY: Any visual form or character. A display may be comprised solely, or by a combination of words, symbols, images, or graphic elements.
DISPLAY SURFACE: The area of a sign that carries the display. Display surface does not include the sign structure, foundations, or supports unless the
structure is designed in a way to form an integral background for the display. Display area is calculated by measuring the perimeter enclosing the extreme
limits of the module/cabinet or background containing the advertising copy or graphic symbols. Display areas shall be calculated as follows:
1. Display area includes only one face of a double faced sign where the faces of the sign are parallel. A double faced sign is counted as one so long as
the two (2) faces are part of the same structural bracing system.
2. If any face is offset from parallel by more than five degrees (5°), such face shall be counted as a separate sign surface.
3. A sign with more than two (2) faces, such as a cube or pyramid, shall be calculated as the sum of the surface areas of all faces, divided by two (2).
4. In the event of an irregular, three-dimensional object that serves as signage, where the surface area is not readily measurable the area shall be
calculated by the largest area of the three-dimensional object visible from any one viewing angle.
EFFECT: Sequential, intermittent, or simultaneous illumination by flashing light other than by an electronic display. As used in this chapter, effects include,
but are not limited to:
Animated Effect: Illumination that depicts a moving object, thing, person, animal or happening, or depicts an ongoing series of images.
Chaser Effect: Illumination that is intended to lead the eye by directional or sequential movement, including, but not limited to, movement that is
linear or circular.
Scintillating Effect: Illumination that provides a random twinkling of lights, including illumination that forms images, words, or sentences at the end of
the sequence of twinkling lights.
Speller Effect: Illumination that produces letters, numbers, or visual symbols individually, or in group, including, but not limited to, illumination that
flashes a complete word, phrase, or sentence.
ELECTRIC SIGN: Any sign containing electrical wiring, but not including signs illuminated by an exterior light source (e.g., a floodlight).
ELECTRONIC DISPLAY: A display created by light emitting diodes, liquid crystal displays, plasma display panels, pixel or subpixel technology, or other
similar technology. As used in this chapter, electronic displays include, but are not limited to:
1. Dissolve: The changing of an electronic display by means of varying light intensity or pattern, where one display gradually appears to dissipate or
lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual appearance and legibility of a subsequent display.
2. Fade: The changing of an electronic display by means of varying light intensity, where one display gradually reduces intensity to the point of being
illegible or imperceptible and the subsequent display gradually increases intensity to the point of being legible or capable of being perceived.
3. Scrolling: The changing of an electronic display by the apparent vertical movement of the visual image, such that a new visual image appears to
ascend and descend, or appear and disappear from the margins of the sign in a continuous or unfurling movement.
4. Static display: An electronic display which does not change and is at rest, inactive or stationary.
5. Travel display: The changing of an electronic display by the apparent horizontal movement of the visual image.
6. Video display: Providing an electronic display in horizontal or vertical formats to create continuously moving images.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 335/410
ELEVATION, BUILDING: Synonymous with "facade", it is an exterior wall face or plane of a building, extending from the ground to the top of a parapet or
eave, but not including any portion of the roof of a building.
EVENT CENTER: An exhibition hall, conference center, convention center, civic center, or other large public building, typically offering enough floor area to
accommodate hundreds to thousands of attendees, with enough open space to host public social events, corporate conferences, industry trade shows,
entertainment spectacles, conventions, and concerts for the surrounding municipal and metropolitan areas.
FACADE: Any separate face of a building, including parapet walls and omitted wall lines, or any part of a building which encloses or covers usable space.
Where separate faces are oriented in the same direction, or in the directions within forty five degrees (45°) of one another, they are to be considered as
part of a single facade.
FLASHING: Sudden or intermittent electrical illumination that appears for less than one and one-half (11/2) consecutive seconds, and includes illumination
that constitutes an effect.
FLOODLIGHTED (INDIRECT LIGHTED) SIGN: A sign illuminated only by devices which reflect or project light upon it.
FRONTAGE, BUILDING: The linear measurement along the front building line of a building or portion of a building occupied by a business.
FRONTAGE, STREET: The linear measurement along the property line of a lot which faces upon an improved street or alley (public or private).
GATEWAY STREETS: Streets that provide unique sense of identity, transition, and anticipation. Gateway streets identify entrance points to the city and
key destinations as well as its neighborhoods. As provided in this chapter, a sign oriented to a gateway street listed below may be regulated differently
than a sign oriented to a street not listed. Where found to be appropriate, varying standards may exist between different gateway streets, and shall be so
specified. In the event that the provisions for gateway streets conflict or overlap with other sections of this chapter, the more restrictive requirements shall
control.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 336/410
1. Garrity Boulevard, from I-84 to the intersection of North Franklin Road and 11th Avenue N.
2. North Franklin Boulevard, from I-84 to the intersection of 11th Avenue N and Garrity Boulevard.
3. Northside Boulevard, from I-84 to the intersection of 2nd Street S and Caldwell Boulevard.
4. Caldwell Boulevard, from the intersection of 2nd Street S and Northside Boulevard to Midway Road.
5. 12th Avenue S, from 3rd Street S to a point where 12th Avenue Road begins at the intersection of 12th and Roosevelt Avenue.
6. 12th Avenue Road from the intersection of 12th and Roosevelt to Locust Lane.
7. North Midland Boulevard from Cherry Lane to I-84.
8. West Karcher Road/Karcher Road from I-84 to Midway Road.
9. 16th Avenue N, from the intersection of Garrity Boulevard to 16th Avenue S, continuing past Roosevelt, down Holly Street, to East Sheridan Avenue
then to Fern Street, to East Bird Avenue, then continues down Holly Street to the intersection of East Colorado and Holly Street.
10. 2nd Street S from Southside Boulevard to the intersection of 2nd Street S and Northside Boulevard.
11. 3rd Street S from 16th Avenue S to the intersection of 3rd Street S and 7th Avenue S/Yale Street.
12. East Amity Avenue from South Happy Valley Road to Chicago Street.
13. Idaho Center Boulevard from Cherry Lane to I-84.
14. East Franklin Road from South McDermott Road to Idaho Center Boulevard.
HEIGHT (OF SIGN): The vertical distance from the ground underneath a sign to the highest point of a sign or any vertical projection thereof, including its
support columns, or the vertical distance from the relative ground level in the immediate vicinity.
HOME OCCUPATION: A business within a residential home, where the occupant of the home still lives, resides and sleeps within the residence.
ILLEGAL SIGN: A sign installed without the issuance of the appropriate permit, or any sign installed that is not in compliance with city codes/ordinances.
ILLUMINATED, HALO: Illumination of a sign from a light source that is not visible and is concealed or contained within the sign or located between the sign
and the structure/wall. Illumination from the source of the light becomes visible in darkness when the light is reflected off of the structure/wall upon which
the sign is attached.
ILLUMINATED, INTERNAL: Illumination of a sign from a light source that is concealed or contained within the sign and becomes visible in darkness
through a translucent surface. This includes illumination by gas filled luminous tubes, such as neon, argon or fluorescent.
MALL: A building or structure where general merchandise or fashion oriented offerings are provided inside an enclosed structure with inward facing stores
connected by a common walkway. Parking typically surrounds the outside perimeter. They will feature shared parking, common service drive(s) and
landscaping as regular amenities. They may be wholly sited on, or partially spread across, two (2) or more lots or parcels.
MARQUEE: A permanent rooflike structure projecting over the entrance of a building, that is not completely enclosed, freestanding, or attached to or
supported by the building, and which is erected for the purpose of providing shelter to persons entering the building.
MURAL: A pictorial or graphical representation applied to or painted on and made an integral part of an exterior wall. A mural shall be considered a wall
sign if it contains words, logos, trademarks or graphic representations of any person, product or service(s) that identifies or advertises the building upon
which it is, or is to be located. A mural that does not represent any of the above may be classified as art.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 337/410
NONCOMBUSTIBLE: A material that, in the form in which it is used and under the conditions in which it is anticipated to be used, will not ignite, burn,
support combustion, or release flammable vapors when subjected to fire or heat.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign within the city limits or its extraterritorial jurisdiction that does not comply with the provisions of this chapter on the
effective date of this chapter or any governing amendment thereto. It is the intent of this chapter that legal nonconforming signs will not be made illegal by
the adoption of this chapter unless otherwise noted herein.
NORMAL MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS: Changing messages without changing the sign or its components, cleaning, replacement of bulbs or fluorescent
tubes, ordinary type maintenance repairs.
OPAQUE FACED SIGN: A sign whose background is nontransparent or nontranslucent with only its letters, figures, symbols, trademarks, or other copy
meant to aid in such advertisement, lighted.
OVERHEAD ELECTRICAL CONDUCTOR: Any electrical conductor installed aboveground, except when such conductor is enclosed in conduit or other
material covering of equal or greater strength.
PEDESTRIAN PATHWAY: That part of a sidewalk that is maintained for free and unobstructed movement by pedestrians.
PENNANT(S): See definition of Wind Sign.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, firm, partnership, cooperative, association, joint venture, joint stock company, or other entity
in law or fact.
PORTE-COCHERE: A covered structure projecting horizontally from and attached to a building, affording protection from the elements; typically used for
loading and unloading of vehicles.
ROOFLINE: The top edge of the roof or building parapet; excluding any cupolas, chimneys, or other projections.
SIGN: Any structure, board, poster, placard, or device which contains or comprises a display designed, used, or intended to attract attention of the public.
As used in this chapter, sign includes the sign structure, display surface, and all other components. For purposes of this chapter, the specific types of signs
are defined as follows:
Temporary Sign: A sign that is not permanently affixed or attached to a building, structure, or the ground and that is intended to be used for limited
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 338/410
periods of time. Temporary signs are lawn signs, movable signs, sidewalk signs, and temporary sign displays, which are further defined as follows:
1. Lawn Sign: A temporary sign made of corrugated plastic, greyboard, or similar type material and that is generally supported by stakes inserted into
the ground.
2. Movable Sign: A temporary sign that is self-supporting, and is designed to be moved from place to place. Movable signs include, but are not limited
to: A-frame or sandwich board signs, flags or banners attached to a pole with a permanent foundation, reader boards, and signs attached to selfsupporting
and movable wood or metal frames.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 339/410
3. Pole Banner: A sign made out of cloth, fabric or other lightweight material, with only such material for backing, and designed for hanging from light
poles or light posts. These banners are reinforced for extended, long term outdoor uses and are attached to the light pole/posts at the top, sides, and
bottom by manufacturer specified brackets/hangers. Such connections must have the ability to withstand wind, rain, and snow conditions that it is
subjected to.
4. Temporary Sign Display: An attention attracting device or devices, including, but not limited to, banners, flags and/or banners attached to a pole
without permanent foundation, balloons, and signs (not permitted or classified as a movable sign) attached to self-supporting and movable wood or
metal frames. See definition of "wind sign" for pennants, streamers, pinwheels and the like.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 340/410
Permanent Sign: A sign that is permanently attached to a building, structure, or the ground, designed and constructed to resist the wind and seismic
forces specified in the most current edition of the international building code and that is intended to be used for an ongoing, indefinite period of time.
This definition includes signs attached to buildings and signs attached to poles and/or bases placed in the ground. This does not include temporary
signs attached to structures and/or bases set on/in the ground. Permanent signs are further defined as follows:
1. Awning Sign: A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or surfaces of an awning. The entire awning shall be included in the sign
area calculation when the awning is backlit and the awning material exhibits the characteristics of luminosity obtained by means of a source of
illumination.
2. Building Directory: A sign giving the name and room number of the occupants of a building.
3. Canopy Or Marquee Sign: A sign which is attached parallel to the faces of or suspended below the ceiling or roof of a marquee or canopy,
except signs painted directly on the outward face of the marquee, canopy or awning.
4. Directional Sign: A sign designed to be read by a person on the premises on which the sign is located, and used for the purposes of identifying
and locating an entrance, exit, telephone, service, route, office, or similar place.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 341/410
5. Freestanding Sign: A single or multiple faced sign supported by one or more upright poles or braces, extending from and permanently attached
to the ground by a foundation or footing, with a clearance between the ground and the sign face. Pylon signs shall have no more than two (2)
faces.
6. Hanging Sign: A sign that is attached to the underside of a marquee, canopy, portico, porte-cochere, or other similar overhanging structure.
7. Interior Sign: A permanent sign located inside an enclosed building or structure, regardless of whether the sign is visible from the exterior of the
building.
8. Monument Sign: A sign which is attached directly to the ground, or is supported by a base of solid construction that is placed on or anchored in
the ground and is independent from any building or other structure. The base of the monument sign is not included in the calculation of display
surface.
9. Outdoor Advertising Sign: A sign which is a substantial permanent structure that is either a wall sign, freestanding or monument sign. Outdoor
advertising signs are not limited as to content, but are usually and customarily used to advertise goods, products, businesses, services, or
facilities which are not sold, manufactured, or distributed on or from the property or facilities on which the sign is located; or to present messages
dealing with political, public interest, public service, or education issues; an election, candidate for election, or ballot measure; or religious
matters, health, and other similar subjects.
10. Projecting Sign: A sign, other than a wall sign, that projects beyond the building frontage or building face to which it is attached. "Projecting"
means the distance that the sign extends from the building frontage or building face.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 342/410
11. Reader Board Sign: A sign display which is characterized by copy or illustration which may be modified at periodic intervals, regardless of the
method, but which is permanently secured to the ground in the same manner as a freestanding or monument type sign, or permanently secured
to the wall of a building in the same manner as a wall sign, or incorporated into a portion of a freestanding, monument or wall sign.
12. Roof Sign: A sign erected upon or painted upon the roof of a building, canopy, portico, or marquee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 343/410
13. Vehicle Directional Sign: A freestanding sign or a wall sign that designates an automobile entrance onto or exit from property.
14. Vehicle Viewing Sign: A freestanding, monument or wall sign that is intended to be seen by a person doing business from the vehicle
accessway while the person is within the person's motor vehicle.
15. Wall Sign: A sign painted on or attached to a wall or parapet of a building or structure, sign tower, or the face or end of a marquee or canopy,
with the sign face parallel to and projecting not more than eighteen inches (18") from, the plane of the wall, parapet, face, or end.
SIGN PROGRAM: A coordinated, comprehensive, detailed and packaged set of drawings and narration meant to illustrate and describe one or more signs
intended for utilization by multiple tenants within an apartment complex, business complex, shopping center, mall, specialized purpose business center,
and/or a residential subdivision. Such programs often contain sign structures meant to be shared by tenants as well as individual tenant sign structures.
Sign program application packages, as explained to the city should feature a "to scale" site plan showing intended sign locations (including manifesting
compliance with clear vision triangle requirements and setback measurements), elevation drawings depicting proposed sign dimensions (height and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 344/410
square foot area) and intended appearance (including colors and materials), and any proposed lighting or sign specific landscaping treatments/schemes to
be associated therewith.
SIGN STRUCTURE: The entire structure that comprises the sign, including, but not limited to, the display surface, supports, foundation, and sign tower.
SNIPE SIGN: Any sign which is attached to a public utility pole, fixture poles, canopy supports, tree, fence, etc., including, but not limited to, garage/yard
sale signs, auction signs, etc.
SPECIALIZED PURPOSE (BUSINESS) CENTERS: 1. Power centers contain category dominant anchors, including discount department stores, off price
stores, wholesale clubs, with only a few small tenants.
2. Lifestyle centers contain upscale national chain specialty stores with dining and entertainment in an outdoor setting.
3. Factory outlets contain manufacturers' and retailers' outlet stores selling brand name goods at a discount.
4. Theme/festival centers contain leisure, tourist, retail and service oriented offerings with entertainment as a unifying theme. Often located in urban
areas, they may be adapted from older, sometimes historic, buildings and can be part of a mixed use project.
STREET FRONTAGE: The width of a legal tax lot measured along the line separating the lot from a street.
TENANT SPACE: The portion of a structure occupied by a single commercial leaseholder with its own public entrance from the exterior of the building or
through a shared lobby, atrium, mall or hallway and separated from other tenant spaces by walls.
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE (OFFICIAL): Traffic signs, signals, directional signs, parking signs, wayfinding signs, notices, or any other uniform traffic
control device, regulatory sign, or law enforcement sign erected by the public body pursuant to lawful authority.
UNOBSTRUCTED: An area does not have any physical obstructions to free passage, any tripping hazards, or any area reserved for people to stand or sit.
UNSIGHTLY SIGN: Any sign which is in whole or in part: weak, unsafe, broken, inferior or old, torn, worn, faded or otherwise unpleasant or unattractive to
look at.
VEHICLE ACCESSWAY: Driveway that gives access to a window whereby goods or services are provided to patrons of a business, and that typically
includes queuing lanes, service windows, or service islands.
VEHICLE BUFFER ZONE: An area that runs parallel to and abuts a roadway, and creates a pedestrian safety zone and unobstructed accessibility to
parked vehicles.
VISION CLEARANCE (TRIANGLE) AREA: The specified areas along intersection legs across their included corners that shall be clear of obstructions that
might block a driver's view of potentially conflicting vehicles. Specific dimensional standards for vision triangles are found in the "City Of Nampa
Engineering Development Process And Policy Manual".
In residential districts where front yards are required vision clearance dimension (A) is forty feet (40') for corner lots and 7.5 feet for lots at alley
intersections.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 345/410
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 346/410
WAYFINDING SIGN: A government sign that provides directions or information to typically locate a destination, place, or facility.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 347/410
WIND SIGN: Any cloth, plastic or other flexible light material made in strips, triangles or other shapes, which are fastened together at intervals by wire,
rope, cord, string or other means and which are used or displayed to attract attention. This shall include, but not be limited to: pennants, streamers,
pinwheels, and similar.
WORKS OF ART (PUBLIC): An original work of art in any artistic medium for temporary or permanent placement in outdoor or indoor settings. Public art is
accessible to all members of the public and it aims to enrich the community by evoking meaning in the public realm. Art can take a variety of forms,
including as an aesthetic element to a functional public work, to include, but not be limited to: architectural design features (embedded relief sculptures),
landscape features, streetscape design features (artist gardens), site specific monumental works (sculptures), community enhancement projects (artistic
designed/painted sewer covers, embedded logos within streets, utility boxes). Such artwork can include water elements and walkways.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 348/410
B. Construction Of Words: As used in this chapter, words used in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and the
word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
C. Interpretation: Nothing in this chapter is intended, and shall not be construed, to restrict speech on the basis of its speaker, content, or viewpoint, and,
to the extent that any provision of this chapter is ambiguous, the provision shall not be interpreted to regulate on the basis of the speaker, content, or
viewpoint. (Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013)
10-23-3: GENERAL RULES:
The following shall apply to signs in all zoning districts:
A. Permits Required: No person shall construct, erect, enlarge, alter, or relocate any sign, or install electrical parts, wiring, or illumination in or upon a sign,
until all required permits have been obtained, including, but not limited to, sign permits, building permits, electrical permits, and any other permit
required by federal, state or local law.
B. Adherence To Provisions Of Chapter, Permit Required: No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, convert, equip, use, or
maintain any sign, or cause or permit the same to be done, in violation of any provision of this chapter or a permit issued hereunder. These regulations
apply to both commercial and noncommercial signage.
C. Stricter Standards Prevail: Nothing in this chapter is intended, nor shall be construed, to permit the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, or
maintenance of any sign at any place or in any manner unlawful under any other federal, state, or local law. When any part of this chapter conflicts with
another provision of federal, state, or local law, the provision that establishes the stricter standard shall control.
D. Placement Restrictions: No signs (whether permanent or temporary) shall be placed within any utility or access easement, public right of way (or
projected future right of way area as determined by the city engineer), or within any vision triangle.
E. Structure, Building Permit Or Certificate Of Compliance Required: No sign permit will be issued for any property and/or business without an existing
structure, valid building permit, or certificate of compliance for an allowed use within the applicable district.
F. Attachment: All signs shall be attached in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications, the registered design professional, or the sign contractor,
whichever is applicable and the most stringent. (Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013)
10-23-4: MEASUREMENTS:
A. Size: Size includes the height, length, width, and area of the display surface of a sign. Measurements shall be rounded up to the nearest foot, or nearest
square foot, as applicable.
B. Display Surface Area: Display surface area is the area that lies within a line drawn around the outermost points of the display surface of the sign.
Display surface area shall be expressed in square feet. Where the display surface is three-dimensional, including, but not limited to, round or irregular
solid shapes, the display surface area shall be calculated by taking the largest cross section, and drawing a line around the outermost points of the
cross section. If there is open space between sections or modules of a display surface area, the open shape shall be deducted from the calculation of
the display surface area.
C. Gross Face Area: The gross face area of a building frontage or a building face is the area that lies within a line drawn around the outermost points of
the building frontage or building face. Gross face area shall be expressed in square feet. Where a building houses more than one business, gross face
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 349/410
area for each business shall be that area lying within a line drawn around the outermost points of that portion of the building frontage or building face
that is actually occupied by the business.
D. Height: Sign height shall be measured from the average level of the grade below the sign to the topmost point of the sign structure.
E. Clearance: Clearance shall be measured from the average level of the grade below the sign to the lowest point on the sign structure.
F. Spacing And Density:
1. For the purpose of applying spacing requirements or density limits to signs, distances shall be measured along a line parallel to the centerline of the
adjacent street or highway and between the nearest edges of the display surfaces.
2. A back to back sign is counted as a single sign for the purpose of spacing and density limits.
G. Setbacks: For the purpose of applying setback requirements, distances shall be measured from the property line to the nearest edge of the display
surface, unless otherwise noted in this chapter. (Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013)
10-23-5: COPY REGULATIONS:
The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this chapter may substitute noncommercial copy in lieu of any other commercial or noncommercial
copy. The substitution of copy may be made without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent
favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial
message. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary. (Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013)
10-23-6: BLANKETING OF SIGNS:
This section refers to all permanent type sign(s).
A. No signs shall be erected in the same horizontal plane with other signs unless spaced the following distances apart, measured center to center:
1. Portions of sign cabinets/structures extending outwardly from their bases or poles three feet (3') or less to either side shall be spaced at least ten
feet (10') apart.
2. Portions of sign cabinets/structures extending outwardly from their bases or poles three feet (3') to four feet (4') to either side shall be spaced at least
twenty feet (20') apart.
3. Portions of sign cabinets/structures extending outwardly from their bases or poles four feet (4') to six feet (6') to either side shall be spaced at least
twenty five feet (25') apart.
4. Portions of sign cabinets/structures extending outwardly from their bases or poles more than six feet (6') to either side shall be spaced at least thirty
feet (30') apart.
B. Any sign erected at a shorter distance apart than required above shall be erected above the top edge or below the bottom edge of the adjacent sign so
as to prevent the two from sharing the same horizontal plane. (Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013)
10-23-7: EXEMPT SIGNS:
The following signs are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, except that exempt signs shall still comply with the requirements of subsection 10-23-
3D of this chapter:
A. Balloons: Balloons twelve inches (12") or less in diameter.
B. Door Or Wall Sign: One door or wall sign up to a maximum of two (2) square feet.
C. Directional Signs: Two (2) directional or instructional signs, per property, provided such signs are less than six (6) square feet in area.
D. Historical Markers: Historical markers erected or maintained by public authority or by a historical society or historical organization identifying sites,
buildings, or structures of recognized historical value.
E. Decorative Signs: Holiday decorations and signs of a decorative nature, incidental and commonly associated with any national, local or religious
holiday, provided vision triangles are maintained.
F. Hospitals; Public Facilities: Hospitals or city public facilities shall be allowed signage in accordance with BC zoning sign standards in this chapter even if
such structures are located in a non-BC zoned district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 350/410
G. House Numbers: House and building numbers.
H. Interior Signs:
1. Nonilluminated interior signs in commercial and industrial zones including, but not limited to, signs attached to or painted on the inside of a window;
provided, however that the total coverage of the window area does not exceed fifty percent (50%). Signs in the downtown districts must comply with
requirements specific to their zone.
2. Illuminated interior signs intended to be viewed from the public sidewalk, street, highway, alley, plaza, park, or other similar public place; provided,
however, that the sign does not flash or employ an effect, and does not exceed eight (8) square feet in display surface. Signs in the downtown
districts must comply with requirements specific to their zone.
3. Nonilluminated interior signs not visible from the public right of way, public sidewalk, street, highway, or alley. Signs in the downtown districts must
comply with requirements specific to their zone.
I. Murals; Public Works Of Art: Murals and public works of art as defined in section 10-23-2 of this chapter.
J. Traffic Control Signs: Official traffic control signs, to include wayfinding signs.
K. Building Identification: Permanent building plaques, cornerstones, nameplates, and similar building identifications, one nonilluminated or externally
illuminated sign not exceeding one square foot in area.
L. Signs Required By Law: Signs required to be erected by public officers pursuant to law or by order of the court.
M. Certain Flags: United States and government flags.
N. Temporary Signs: Temporary signs authorized by use within city parks or on city owned property. (Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-23-8: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs are prohibited:
A. Public Or Moral Nuisance: Any sign which creates a public nuisance due to statements, words, or pictures of defamation, obscene, lewd or
pornographic nature, perjury, criminal conspiracies, threatening life, violent or destructive acts, deceptive commercial speech, or which depicts or
describes patently offensive representations or descriptions in accordance with Idaho state statute, title 52, chapter 1.
B. Hazardous Or Unsafe Signs: Any sign that, in the opinion of the building official, planning director, engineer or traffic officer, creates a hazard to
vehicular or pedestrian traffic or a hazard to the public in general, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
1. Design and construction.
2. Signs which by reason of their size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of illumination may be confused with or construed as a traffic
control sign, signal or device, or the light of an emergency or radio equipment vehicle, or signs which obstruct the visibility of any traffic or street sign
or signal device.
3. Location which creates a vehicular or pedestrian hazard.
4. Any sign that emits any sound, odor or visible matter.
5. Any signs within the clear vision triangle.
6. Any sign not maintained in a safe condition.
C. Abandoned Signs: Signs located on property which becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of ninety (90) days or more, or any sign which
pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies.
D. Unsightly Signs: Any sign which is in whole or in part weak, unsafe or constructed of broken, unsightly, inferior or old, worn material.
E. Signs In Right Of Way: Any sign, poster, placard, sticker, banner or other device as listed within this chapter that is fixed or otherwise placed upon any
public sidewalk, crosswalk, median strip, curb, lamppost, hydrant, tree, utility pole, or any fixture of the traffic control, fire alarm or police alarm system,
to include snipe signs.
F. Animated Signs: Except as specifically provided in section 10-23-20 of this chapter.
G. Wind Signs: Wind signs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 351/410
H. Car Window Flags: Except on the front row of vehicles which are adjacent to the street frontage at a car sales lot only, so long as the flags do not
exceed two (2) square feet.
I. Illegal Signs: Any sign that employs a structure, material, illumination, size, or placement not specifically allowed under this chapter, unless the sign is a
lawfully established nonconforming sign.
J. "Billboard Type" Outdoor Advertising Signs:
1. New "billboard type" signs shall not be allowed.
2. Existing "billboard type" signs already located within city limits prior to the effective date hereof or subsequently annexed into the city after the
effective date hereof may be relocated to new sites within city limits. Application for a sign permit must be filed for relocation of a billboard. (Ord.
4051, 2-19-2013)
3. In order to relocate a billboard within the city, application shall first be made to the planning and zoning department. A relocated billboard must
meet/comply with requirements listed in this chapter in order to be allowed. Not more than one billboard sign shall be allowed per property. Minimum
spacing between poster type billboard signs on the same side of a right of way shall be no less than one thousand (1,000) linear feet, measured
along the centerline of the roadway. Minimum spacing between painted type billboard signs on the same side of a right of way shall be no less than
three thousand (3,000) linear feet, measured along the centerline of the right of way. Minimum spacing between a poster type or painted type
billboard sign on the other side of a right of way from another such sign shall be no less than three hundred (300) linear feet, measured along the
centerline of the right of way. No grouping of signs on a single pole shall be allowed. If a proposal for relocation of a billboard sign is deemed to meet
applicable codes, the city shall permit relocation of the sign. (Ord. 4178, 5-18-2015)
4. The allowance to relocate billboards shall not be deemed or construed to permit painted billboard signs existing along Interstate 84 prior to the
effective date hereof to be moved to other parts of the city away from the interstate.
5. Other types of outdoor advertising signs are permitted in accordance with this chapter.
K. Temporary Signs In Lieu Of Permanent Wall Signage: Temporary signs in lieu of permanent wall signage. (Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013)
10-23-9: SIGN PERMITS:
A. Applicability: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, move, construct, alter or enlarge any sign without
first obtaining a sign permit. A separate permit shall be required for each group of signs on a single supporting structure. In addition, electrical permits
shall be obtained for electric signs.
B. Application For Permanent Sign Permits: Application for a sign permit shall be made upon forms furnished by the planning director and shall be
accompanied by such information as may be required to ensure compliance with all appropriate laws and regulations of the city.
1. Sign applications shall be accompanied by an elevation drawing, footing design and connection details illustration set for any and all freestanding
and monument signs.
2. Structural engineering calculations for any freestanding or monument signs that are over fifteen feet (15') in height shall also be required.
3. An elevation and connection specification drawing and specifications sheet shall be required for all attached wall signs.
4. Freestanding and monument signs shall be designed so as to resist a ninety (90) mile per hour wind load.
5. If work authorized under a permit has not been completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of issuance, said permit shall become
null and void. Permits are nontransferable.
C. Application For Temporary Sign Permits: Application for temporary signs as listed in sections 10-23-2 and 10-23-19 of this chapter shall be made upon
forms furnished by the planning director and shall be accompanied by such information as may be required to ensure compliance with all appropriate
laws and regulations of the city. Sign applications shall be accompanied by a site plan indicating location of such sign, an elevation drawing depicting
the sign size, advertisement, connection method, and design color scheme.
D. Application For Murals Or Public Art: Application for works of art or murals shall be made upon forms furnished by the planning director and shall be
accompanied by such information as may be required to ensure compliance with all appropriate laws and regulations of the city. Applications shall be
accompanied by a site plan indicating location of such mural or art, an elevation drawing depicting the size, connection method (if applicable), design
color scheme, and a colored rendering of such art.
E. Criteria: An application for a sign permit shall be granted if the following criteria are met:
1. The sign meets the requirements of this chapter.
2. The sign is allowed in the zone.
3. The sign will not interfere with the use of any public right of way, other public easements, or other publicly owned property.
4. The sign conforms to all the applicable standards in this chapter.
F. Identification: A numbered identification decal shall be issued at the time of permit issuance. The decal shall be displayed on the sign to which it has
been assigned. When the planning director or designated code official determines that a numbered identification decal has not been posted on a sign,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 352/410
the planning director or designated code official shall notify the owner of the sign in writing by certified mail that unless the numbered identification
decal is posted on the sign within thirty (30) days after the date such notice is mailed, the sign shall be considered illegal. The planning director or
designated code official shall initiate the necessary proceedings to secure removal of the sign.
G. Fees: Sign permit applications shall be accompanied by fees as established by council resolution.
H. Activities Exempt From Permit Requirements:
1. The following activities do not require a sign permit:
a. Changing of copy on a sign specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy. However, if this is a change of use (business), a certificate of
compliance/occupancy is required from the building department.
b. Painting, repainting, cleaning, and normal maintenance and repair of a sign, where no substantial structural alteration is made. (Ord. 4051, 2-19-
2013)
10-23-10: SIGN VARIANCES:
A. Applicability: Sign variances may be granted to the height and display surface standards, to increase the number of allowed signs, to allow relocation of
a sign, and to allow structural alterations to a sign in accordance with chapter 24 of this title. (Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013)
10-23-11: INSPECTION; REINSPECTION:
A. The planning director and his duly authorized representatives are authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter and for such
purposes shall have the powers of law enforcement officers.
B. The director or the director's designee may inspect, at any time he/she deems necessary, any sign regulated by this chapter to ensure that such sign
conforms to this chapter and all other ordinances of the city.
C. A footing inspection is required prior to the pouring of any concrete or covering of any footing. All requests for such footing inspection shall be made
directly to the building department.
D. It is the responsibility of the sign contractor and/or sign permit applicant to ensure that full compliance is met with all requirements of this chapter.
Failure to comply may result in the removal, replacement and/or alteration of the noncompliant sign at the sole expense of the contractor and/or sign
permit applicant.
E. Upon presentation of proper credentials, enforcement officers may enter at reasonable times any building, structure or premises in the city to make
inspection of a sign, its structural and electrical connections and to ensure compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter, including repair or
structural alteration for safety of signs which present a hazard to the public. (Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013)
10-23-12: MATERIALS:
A. Except as otherwise specified in this section, materials used for construction of signs shall be of the quality and grade specified for buildings and
structures pursuant to the currently adopted building code.
B. Except for lamps, tubes, bulbs, or neon tubing, no glass shall be used in the display surface of any sign.
C. Roof signs, wall signs, projecting signs, and hanging signs shall be constructed of noncombustible materials, except for nonstructural trim, display
surfaces, and cutouts which may be constructed of wood, metal, approved plastics, or any combination thereof.
D. Except as provided in subsection E of this section, only metal and approved plastics shall be used in construction of electronic display signs, internally
illuminated signs, and externally illuminated signs.
E. Combustible materials for covering or ornamenting a sign structure may be used for electronic display signs, internally illuminated signs, and externally
illuminated signs, provided that no load bearing member of the sign structure is constructed of combustible materials and there is no substantial fire or
electrical safety hazard.
F. Freestanding pole signs shall have their poles sheathed or boxed and have material components which match the primary business building(s) finishes
for the property in which the sign resides. Such coverings may include, but not be limited to: stucco, decorative metal, rock, simulated rock, and/or
brick. (Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013)
10-23-13: SIGN SUPPORTS:
Unless approval to place a sign in right of way has been obtained from the applicable government agency, sign supports shall be located on private
property. (Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 353/410
10-23-14: GENERAL ILLUMINATION STANDARDS:
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section and in tables located in section 10-23-20 of this chapter, permanent signs may be externally or internally
illuminated.
B. Temporary signs shall not be externally or internally illuminated.
C. No sign shall use lights or illumination that creates an unduly distracting or hazardous condition to motorist, a pedestrian, or the general public, or that
may be confused with or construed as an official traffic control device.
D. Wall signs, roof signs, and projecting signs placed on a building face that fronts a residential use may not be externally or internally illuminated. (Ord.
4051, 2-19-2013)
10-23-15: SIGNS INSTALLED OVER OR WITHIN THE RIGHT OF WAY:
A. Permanent signs and sign structures may, to a limited extent, project over or within the right of way (or future right of way where known or determined
by the city engineer), provided that a right of way/encroachment permit is obtained and that:
1. No permanent sign or sign structure shall project over or past the curb line of a public or private street where said sign is proposed to be located
within fifty feet (50') of the intersection of the existing curb lines (or projected future curb lines) of two (2) intersecting streets.
2. Permanent signs proposed to be located more than fifty feet (50') away from an intersection may project over public right of way. They shall not,
however, project beyond two feet (2') of a line/plane drawn perpendicularly upward from the back of an existing curb line (or a projected future curb
line as determined by the city engineer), or more than six feet (6') over the public right of way in any event.
3. In order to allow any projection over the public right of way it must be determined by the city engineer that said projection shall not constitute a future
traffic hazard or conflict with existing or future utilities or street signing.
4. Any signs that project over public right of way shall provide at least twelve feet (12') of clearance from a sidewalk or finished grade underneath the
sign cabinet, except that the bottom of a marquee or awning may be eight feet (8') from/above the top surface of a sidewalk, or, absent a sidewalk or
similar walkway, eight feet (8') over the finished grade.
5. Signs spanning over the street right of way shall be no larger than two hundred (200) square feet, and shall require special right of way permits and
approval.
6. Signs spanning over the street right of way shall be at least seventeen feet (17') above the highest point of the right of way, or as directed by the
public works director. (Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013)
10-23-16: SIGNS IN VISION CLEARANCE AREAS:
A. No sign shall be located in a vision clearance (triangle) area of an intersection of public streets, a private service drive, driveway or private street into a
public street or other private service drive, driveway or private street unless a variance is granted. (Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013)
10-23-17: SIGN MAINTENANCE:
A. Graffiti on a sign shall be removed within five (5) days of notice of its placement on such sign. Graffiti remaining on a sign for longer shall be considered
a nuisance.
B. The display upon any surface area of a sign shall be maintained in good condition, without rips, tears, or similar damage.
C. All parts, portions, units and materials composing a sign, together with the frame, background surface, support or enclosure therefor shall be
maintained in a safe condition, painted, and adequately protected from weathering with all braces, bolts, and structural parts and supporting frames
and fastenings reasonably free from deterioration, rot, rust, and loosening so that they do not create a hazard to persons or property or constitute an
attractive nuisance.
D. Any sign or sign structure that is sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed, broken, deteriorated, faded, or in another dilapidated condition shall be promptly
repaired, to the satisfaction of the city, or removed.
E. All ground area surrounding signs shall be kept free of rubbish and weeds. (Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013)
10-23-18: SPECIFIC SIGN TYPE REQUIREMENTS:
Where such sign types as listed herein are permitted by this chapter, such signs shall meet the specific requirements. Specific requirements are in addition
to and supplemental to all other requirements found in this chapter.
A. Abandoned Signs:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 354/410
1. All abandoned signs shall be removed by the owner of the sign or owner of the premises within thirty (30) days of being declared an abandoned
sign.
B. Awning Signs:
1. No sign shall project from an awning. Awning signs shall not project above the roofline, or be located over a public right of way without permission
from the city of Nampa.
2. Awning graphics may be painted or affixed flat to the surface of the front or sides.
3. All awning signs shall count as part of the building wall signs allowances as set forth in this chapter.
C. Balloons/Inflatables:
1. Balloons/inflatables are permitted to be displayed, but in no case shall they be displayed for more than ninety (90) days in any calendar year.
2. Sign permits are required to be submitted to the planning director for approval for each separate time period balloons/inflatables are displayed.
D. Bus Stop Benches:
1. Bus stops, as designated by the regional transportation organization and authorized by the city of Nampa, may have benches with flat, poster or
painted signs fastened to their back supports/rests.
2. Such signs shall not require sign permits.
3. Signs attached to bus stop benches shall be securely fastened and kept clear of graffiti.
4. Movable, temporary, prohibited or other similar type signs shall not be chained, tied, propped upon or otherwise affixed to benches.
5. Bus stop benches may be located on private residentially zoned U or GB2 zoned properties; or private properties zoned commercially or industrially
even if said properties in those zones already have preexisting, freestanding signs located on them along/in the same street frontage yard area as
a/the newly proposed bus bench location(s).
6. Bus stop benches with signage affixed thereto shall not be placed on properties zoned DH, DV, or DB (but bus benches without signage may be
placed therein).
E. Construction Signs:
1. Construction signs are permitted in the BC, BF, BN, IH, IL, IP, RMH, U, and GB zoning districts only.
2. Temporary signs, such as: banners, flags, reader boards, A-frames and similar shall not be used as construction signs.
3. Display surface areas shall not be more than fifty (50) square feet. Signs having a display area in excess of fifty (50) square feet may be approved
by the planning director or designated staff representative based on criteria, such as: location of signage, size of construction site/parcel, and/or
special circumstances as determined.
4. All other requirements shall be as required for permanent monument and freestanding signs, such as, but not be limited to, height, material, location,
etc.
5. Signs shall not be placed on a site more than sixty (60) days prior to the start of construction, are confined to the site of construction, and need to be
removed not more than thirty (30) days after occupancy.
F. Electronic Changing Or Flashing Signs (Including Message Centers): Electronic message center and display signs that are changing or flashing types
shall be allowed in all commercial (including gateway), industrial, residential professional, and university zones, and on church, school or professional
office sites, except they are not permitted within the DH zone. When permitted, all signs shall comply with the following restrictions:
1. Signs that are proposed to feature electronic reader board message centers: The electronic display/message center portion of a freestanding pole or
monument sign shall not exceed forty five percent (45%) of the sign's overall area and shall be made an integral part thereof.
2. The display/message of an electronic reader board sign shall remain static for at least one and one-half (11/2) seconds. The display of a changing
LED type billboard sign shall remain static for at least eight (8) seconds.
3. The display of any electronic sign shall not, or shall not appear to, flash, undulate, pulse or portray explosions, fireworks, flashes of light, or blinking
or chasing lights; the display shall not appear to move toward or away from the viewer, expand or contract, bounce, rotate, spin, twist, or otherwise
portray movement or animation as it comes onto, is displayed on, or leaves the sign board.
4. Scrolling or traveling of a static display onto an electronic reader board sign from one direction only per display shall be allowed. A change of display
must not take longer than one and one-half (11/2) seconds to accomplish in the case of LED billboards and such signs shall also feature a default,
static image that will be displayed in the event of malfunction or absence of advertiser paid messages.
5. The display may be of a classic nature having a dark background and copy lit in a white, amber or red shade and/or may be full color.
6. All electronic reader board signs shall have installed ambient light monitors and shall at all times allow such monitors to automatically adjust the
brightness level of the electronic sign based on ambient light conditions so as to minimize and keep consistent sign brightness. Direct light sources
shall not, in any event, exceed forty (40) watts or sixty (60) milliamps. Full color LED billboards featuring full color display shall not exceed seven
thousand (7,000) nits between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and two thousand five hundred (2,500) nits from eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
7. At no time shall the sign be operated at a brightness level greater than the manufacturer's recommended levels.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 355/410
8. Electronic signs shall not be allowed within or in association with any dwelling or home occupation.
9. Businesses, churches or schools are allowed electronic reader board type signs provided that they comply with the standards of this section.
10. Electronic sign permit applications must also include a certification from the owner or operator of the sign stating that the sign shall at all times be
operated in accordance with city codes and that the owner or operator shall provide proof of such conformance upon request of the city.
11. Electronic displays may not depict, describe, exhibit, or feature any image or message that is a moral nuisance or obscene per state code.
G. Electrical Signs:
1. The enclosed shell of electric signs shall be watertight, except that service holes fitted with covers shall be provided into each compartment of such
signs. Electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance with the current edition of the national electrical code. Every electrical sign projecting
over any street or alley or public place shall have inscribed on the surface of the sign: the name of the sign erector, the listing label, and the date of
manufacture.
H. Freestanding Signs: All freestanding pole and monument signs shall conform to the requirements as listed herein:
1. Structure:
a. A freestanding sign shall be directly supported by poles or a foundation, and shall be constructed in accordance with the sign installation details for
foundation and connections. Signs exceeding fifteen feet (15') in height are required to have structural engineering calculations for the foundation,
pole connections, and cabinet connections.
b. Foundations for all freestanding signs must be entirely within the property line boundaries.
c. Site address or range of addresses, as required, shall be included on the main freestanding sign/monument sign. When the freestanding
sign/monument sign is located on a corner street or faces a street frontage in which the street is not part of the legal address, the location of the
address on the sign shall be determined by the city of Nampa. Address shall be delineated with a minimum of ten inch (10") numbers and shall not
be counted as part of the allowable sign or copy area. Building mounted addresses shall be provided as required by the city of Nampa fire official.
d. Freestanding pole signs shall have their poles sheathed or boxed and have material components which match the primary business building(s)
finishes for the property in which the sign resides. Such coverings may include, but not be limited to: stucco, decorative metal, rock, simulated
rock, and/or brick.
I. Hanging Signs:
1. Hanging signs shall have a vertical clearance of at least twelve feet (12') from a sidewalk or finished grade underneath the sign, except that the
bottom of a marquee or awning may be eight feet (8') from/above the top surface of a sidewalk, or, absent a sidewalk or similar walkway, eight feet
(8') over the finished grade.
2. The display surface of a hanging sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet.
J. Interstate And Highway Signs:
1. Signs along interstate and primary highways shall conform to federal and state transportation department regulations as well as city standards.
Notwithstanding, applicants are responsible for ensuring their compliance with any federal or state regulations as the city will not evaluate signs in
accordance with those entities' rules.
K. Marquee Signs:
1. Marquee signs may be placed on, attached to, or constructed as part of a marquee.
2. A minimum of twelve feet (12') of clearance is required to the sidewalk or finished grade underneath the sign cabinet, except that the bottom of a
marquee or awning may be eight feet (8') from/above the top surface of a sidewalk, or, absent a sidewalk or similar walkway, eight feet (8') over the
finished grade.
3. Such signs shall, for the purpose of determining projection, clearance, height and material, be considered a part of and shall meet the requirements
for a marquee as specified in the most current adopted international building code.
L. Nonconforming And Conditional Uses:
1. Sign structures for nonconforming uses shall not be erected, enlarged, altered or relocated, except by a conditional use permit. The application for
the CUP must be accompanied by a pictorial sketch of the sign, showing the type of sign, material, lighting, setback, clearance and overhang. Prior
to the approval of the CUP, the commission must make a determination that the proposed sign will not detract from the general area where it is
located.
M. Pole Banners:
1. There is/shall be no limit to the number of pole banners which are located on private property so long as such pole banners are installed in
compliance with the following:
a. Pole banners are permitted on light poles, which are located on private property. Such pole banners must be attached by the appropriate brackets
supplied by the manufacturer, and secured across the top and bottom;
b. Pole banners shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 356/410
c. A minimum clearance of eight feet (8') shall be maintained between the bottom of the pole banner and the finished grade;
d. Pole banners may be permitted on city owned light poles with the expressed written consent of the city of Nampa.
N. Projecting Signs:
1. A minimum of twelve feet (12') of clearance is required to the sidewalk or finished grade underneath the sign cabinet, except that the bottom of a
marquee or awning may be eight feet (8') from/above the top surface of a sidewalk, or, absent a sidewalk or similar walkway, eight feet (8') over the
finished grade.
2. The maximum projection of a projecting sign shall not exceed four feet (4') from the building, however, that, where a projecting sign is located on a
corner, the maximum projection is five feet (5').
3. Shall not extend beyond the top of the wall on which it is placed.
4. Only one projecting sign shall be allowed per business. A double sided projecting sign is counted as one so long as the two (2) sign faces are part of
the same structural bracing system.
5. Projecting signs shall count as part of the building wall sign allowances as set forth in this chapter.
O. Reader Board Signs (Permanent):
1. Reader boards five feet (5') or less in height will be considered as monument type reader board signs. Reader boards greater than five feet (5') in
height will be considered as freestanding pole type reader boards.
2. Permanent monument type reader boards are permitted; however, such sign shall count against the number and square footage allowed for
monument type signage.
3. Monument type reader boards shall meet all of the same requirements as specified for a monument type sign.
4. Permanent freestanding pole type reader boards are permitted; however, such sign shall count against the number and square footage allowed for
freestanding type signage.
5. Freestanding pole type reader boards shall meet all of the same requirements as specified for a freestanding sign.
6. Permanent reader board type signs shall be of the nonilluminated type.
P. Roof Signs: Roof signs, where permitted, shall conform to the following:
1. Roof signs shall not exceed the highest point of a roof or parapet wall and shall not project farther than eighteen inches (18") from the building.
2. Roof signs shall be thoroughly secured and anchored to the frame of the building over which they are constructed and erected.
Q. Searchlights, Hot Air Or Helium Balloons:
1. Searchlights, hot air or helium balloons greater than ten feet (10') in their widest dimension, or other devices determined to be similar, which do not
advertise, but which are intended to provide direction or attraction are subject to the following:
a. No searchlight beam shall flash against any building, cause any visual or traffic hazard, sweep an arc greater than forty five degrees (45°) from
vertical and the searchlight shall be set back at least thirty feet (30') from any public right of way.
b. No searchlight or balloon shall be used by a new or existing business or enterprise more than four (4) times yearly, and for no more than a
maximum period of fifteen (15) consecutive days.
c. Sign permits are required to be submitted to the planning director for approval each separate time period a searchlight or balloon is utilized.
R. Wall Signs:
1. Wall signs shall not extend above the top of the wall to which it is attached.
2. Wall signs shall be attached flat against the wall and project no farther than eighteen inches (18") from the building.
S. Business Complex, Commercial Shopping Center, Mall, Apartment Complex, And Residential Sign Program(s):
1. Comprehensive Sign Program: All business parks, commercial shopping centers, special purpose centers, malls, single-family residential
subdivisions and residential apartment complexes shall create a detailed sign program to govern sign type and emplacement in their respective
developments. Owners/developers of such complexes shall submit to the city a sign application package describing and illustrating their sign
program. The sign package shall include the following elements (as pertaining to all uses and tenants):
a. Identification of the colors and materials to be used for all signage in the development. (The colors and materials shall be consistent with those
used/proposed for the applicable development.)
b. Details regarding the proposed method of mounting signs; supporting structures and illumination shall be delineated. (Each sign program shall
utilize consistent sign construction techniques, mounting mechanisms and methods of illumination.)
c. Intended sign location(s), copy and logo height and dimensions.
2. Sign Program In Addition To Sign Permits: Approval of a planned sign program does not waive the requirement to obtain sign permits for individual
signs or sign structures. In cases of sites that have no preapproved sign program, all signs shall be regulated in conformance with all other sections
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 357/410
of this code until such time as a planned sign program is submitted, reviewed and approved.
3. Placement Standards: The/any principal park, center, mall, subdivision or apartment complex advertising sign(s) shall:
a. Be placed as near as possible to the main service drive(s) providing principal access to the center without being set in a vision triangle.
b. Not be placed in nor overhang public right of way notwithstanding section 10-23-15 of this chapter.
c. Be placed on any lease space or lot that is part of the development to which the sign directly pertains (and thereby not be considered as "off
premises" and thus allowable only via issuance of a variance permit).
4. Center Freestanding Sign(s) Dimensions: Maximum area, height and number allowed standards for primary freestanding center signs shall be the
same as for freestanding pole or monument signs allowed in the same zone as listed in tables located in section 10-23-20 of this chapter.
5. Additional Freestanding Signage: In addition to a center sign, a freestanding sign for each (separate) building within the center is permitted, provided
that the same is a monument style sign measuring eight feet (8') or less in height and sixty four (64) square feet or less in area.
6. Directory Signage: Wall directory signs, for listing all tenants who have offices/businesses within a center, shall be permitted as a standard wall sign
or may be allowed as separate freestanding sign from any center sign provided that:
a. Only one such sign shall be allowed per street frontage of the center unless the center has more than five hundred feet (500') of continuous
frontage in which case another such sign may be allowed provided it is placed at least three hundred feet (300') away from the other tenant sign.
b. The directory sign(s) do/does not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area and eight feet (8') in height, or, if in a vision clearance triangle three
feet (3') in height.
7. Wall Signage: Each individual business within a center shall be permitted to have wall signage in accordance with tables located in section 10-23-20
of this chapter.
8. Sign Design(s): Center signs shall incorporate materials, colors and a design motif that is compatible with and complements the architectural theme
and style of the complex which the sign serves to identify/advertise.
9. Temporary Signs: All temporary signs shall comply with section 10-23-19 of this chapter; however, such temporary signs may be placed as near as
possible to each main service drive(s) where it intersects with a public street that provides access to but does not vector through a shopping center
(providing principal access to the center without being set in a vision triangle).
10. Binding Effect: After approval of a planned sign program, no signs shall be constructed except in conformance with such plan. Upon approval, the
sign program shall apply to all tenants. This planned sign program shall be included in the lease for each individual tenant. Proof of said inclusions
shall be submitted to the planning department by the lessor. (Ord. 4123, 7-7-2014)
10-23-19: DISTRICT TEMPORARY SIGN ALLOWANCES:
A. Zone Temporary Sign Provisions: It is unlawful for any person to erect or install a sign having a size or height greater than allowed by the following
tables or found in other sections of this chapter (including bus benches with signage thereon) located on the site or in a zoning use district in violation
of the controls specified in this section/tables. (Ord. 4070, 10-7-2013)
B. Certain Temporary Signs Prohibited: If a sign type is desired in a zone but is not recognized/listed in the tables (e.g., a roof sign in the BC or GB zone)
then it is not, and shall not, be allowed. For additional regulations governing the DB, DV and DH districts, refer to subsections 10-15-4J, 10-15-5J and
10-15-6F of this title respectively. (Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
C. Standards Supplemental: The standards in these tables and those expressed below are supplemental to those found in the remainder of this chapter
(e.g., blanketing of signs, signs installed over or within public right of way, signs in vision clearance areas, specific sign type requirements, permitting
requirements, and temporary signs) and also in certain sections of chapter 15 of this title and require variance approval to deviate from. (Ord. 4070, 10-
7-2013)
D. Temporary Signs, General Standards: All temporary signs shall adhere to the size, height, and placement locations as listed within this chapter.
1. Number: A maximum of one temporary sign shall be displayed per business at any given time, except as noted in the tables, whether freestanding or
on the building wall.
2. Construction And Maintenance: All temporary signs must be professionally made, be weatherproofed and kept in a state of good appearance, safety
and repair. No broken, unsightly, inferior, faded, ripped, or worn materials may be utilized.
3. Support: Temporary signs shall be self-supporting so as to remain in an upright position.
4. Location:
a. All temporary signs shall be located on private property; however, no signs shall be placed within any landscaping strips that are maintained by the
city of Nampa regardless if they are private property or public property.
b. Temporary signs shall not be attached to trees, shrubbery, utility poles, or like items and shall not obstruct or obscure permanent signs on adjacent
premises.
c. No temporary sign shall be erected or maintained which, by reason of its size, location, or construction constitutes a hazard to the public by
impeding the vision of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, placed in/on the streets or other public rights of way, or placed within the vision clearance
area. See chapter 15 of this title for downtown district allowances.
5. Freestanding Banners: Freestanding banners shall be adequately fastened at all four (4) corners to post/poles at each end of the banner, and pulled
taut. Such poles/posts shall be securely embedded into the ground a minimum depth of twelve inches (12").
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 358/410
6. Wall Banners: Wall banners shall be securely fastened on all four (4) corners and at midway points along the top and bottom of the banner for the
entire length.
7. Spacing: All temporary signs shall be spaced a minimum of five feet (5') away from any other temporary or permanent sign, except for fence
banners, which shall be spaced a minimum of ten feet (10') from any other temporary or permanent sign.
8. Compliance Time Line: All temporary signs must be in compliance with this code within sixty (60) days of the effective date hereof.
E. Temporary Signs In Residential Zones: The following temporary signs are allowed in the suburban residential (RA), two-family residential (RD), multifamily
residential (RMH), limited multi-family residential (RML), residential (RS 6), (RS 7), (RS 8.5), (RS 12), (RS 15), (RS 18) and (RS 22), university
(U), and the planned unit development (PUD) zones. Temporary signs shall conform to the number, height, location, and display surface limitations as
provided in table 10-23-19(A) of this section, and this chapter.
1. Subdivisions: Properties which have received subdivision approval may, from the date of recording of the final plat until such time as a building
permit is issued for the last lot or parcel to be sold, have temporary signs in accordance with table 10-23-19(A) of this section.
TABLE 10-23-19(A)
TEMPORARY SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES; BY TYPE/ZONE/LAND USE
Permitted Zones
And Land Uses
Type Of
Temporary Sign Number Allowed
Maximum
Height Of
Sign Above
Grade
Display
Surface
Area
Limitation1
Location/Setback
All residential zones Lawn3 1 per property 30" 3 2 sq . ft.3
Multi-family, 3 units
and greater
Wall banner on each
building
1 per building n/a 12 sq . ft. Building wall
Subdivisions2 Lawn 1 per 100 linear feet of
street frontage
4' 6 sq . ft.4 Minimum of 10' from the edge of
asphalt/street
Subdivisions2 Movable:
Horizontal banners 1 per 100 linear feet of
street frontage
5' 12 sq . ft. Minimum of 15' from the edge of
asphalt/street
Vertical banners 8' 12 sq . ft.
All other 4' 12 sq . ft.
Subdivisions2 Flags on poles without
foundation
1 per 100 linear feet of
street frontage
10' 15 sq . ft. Minimum of 15' from edge of
asphalt/street
Notes:
1. Temporary signs shall be spaced a minimum of 5 feet from any other temporary or permanent sign. Temporary signs on fences may be spaced
a minimum of 10 feet from any other temporary or permanent sign.
2. Temporary signs for subdivisions refers to signage located at the entrance to subdivisions or to model homes.
3. During the period of time when realty is offered for sale, lease or exchange, the sign shall not exceed 3 square feet and shall not exceed a
maximum height of 3 feet.
4. See section 10-23-18 of this chapter for signs utilized during construction. Signs utilized as construction signs can be temporary monument
and/or freestanding signs.
F. Temporary Signs In Commercial/Industrial Zones: The following temporary signs are allowed in the community business (BC), freeway business (BF),
neighborhood business (BN), downtown business (DB), downtown village (DV), downtown historic (DH), heavy industrial (IH), light industrial (IL), and
industrial park (IP). Temporary signs shall conform to the number, height, location, and display surface limitations as provided in table 10-23-19(B) of
this section. (Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013; amd. Ord. 4070, 10-7-2013)
TABLE 10-23-19(B)
TEMPORARY SIGNS IN COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL ZONES, BY TYPE AND ZONE/LAND USE2
Permitted Zones
And Land Uses Type Of Sign
Number
Allowed
Height
Above Grade
Display Surface
Area Limitation1,6
Location And
Minimum
Setback2,3
Permit
Required
All zones, except
DH, DB and DV
Lawn 1 per business 30" 5 2 sq . ft.5 No
Movable, Sidewalk And Temporary Sign Displays:
All zones, except
DH, DB and DV
Horizontal banners 1 per business1
5' 12, 18, 24 or 40 sq.
ft.
No
Event centers Horizontal banners 1 per event4 5' 12, 18, 24 or 40 sq. No
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 359/410
ft.
All zones, except
DH, DB and DV
Vertical banners 1 per business1
8' 12 sq . ft. No
All zones, except
DH, DB and DV
Fence banners 1 per business1
n/a 12 sq . ft. Spaced 10' apart No
All zones, except
DH, DB and DV
Wall banners 1 per business n/a Counts toward wall
signage allowance
On tenant space
building wall
Yes
All zones, except
DH, DB and DV
Flags on poles with
permanent engineered
foundation
1 per business1
Based on
structural
calculations
Based on structural
calculations
Yes
All zones Pole banners 2 per pole n/a 15 sq . ft. On private property No
All zones, except
DH, DB and DV
Flags on poles without
foundation
1 per business Not greater than
height of building
15 sq . ft. No
All zones, except
DH, DB and DV
Searchlights, hot air or
helium balloons >10' wide
1 per business 30' from any public
right of way
Yes
All zones, except
DH, DB and DV
Balloons or inflatables 1 per business Yes
All zones A-frames, chalkboard, and
reader boards
1 per business 5' 12 sq . ft.7 No7
All zones Construction 1 or more up to
maximum size
50 sq . ft. No
Notes:
1. Parcels that contain a single occupancy/tenant business may have 1 sign for each 50 linear feet of street frontage, spaced accordingly.
2. Temporary signs shall be spaced a minimum of 5 feet from any other temporary or permanent sign. Temporary signs on fences may be spaced
a minimum of 10 feet from any other temporary or permanent sign.
3. A-frames, chalkboard signs and reader board signs may be located on the sidewalks within the downtown zones in accordance with chapter 15
of this title.
4. Banners can be put up 2 weeks prior to the event and must be taken down within 3 days following the event.
5. During the period of time when realty is offered for sale, lease or exchange, the sign shall not exceed 6 square feet for properties up to 1 acre in
size, or 12 square feet for properties greater than 1 acre, and the distance from the ground to the top of the sign shall not exceed 4 feet.
6. See section 10-23-18 of this chapter for signs utilized during construction. Signs utilized as construction signs can be temporary monument
and/or freestanding signs.
7. Reader boards greater than 12 square feet are permitted so long as:
a. The sign is utilized for a special temporary event.
b. A temporary sign permit is obtained.
c. The time frame does not exceed 30 days.
d. The sign does not exceed 32 square feet.
(Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013; amd. Ord. 4070, 10-7-2013; Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-23-20: DISTRICT PERMANENT SIGN ALLOWANCES:
A. It is unlawful for any person to erect or install a sign having a size, quantity or height greater than allowed by the following tables or found in other
sections of this chapter (including bus benches with signage thereon) located on the site or in a zoning use district in violation of the controls specified
in this section/tables unless a variance permit is first obtained by authorization of the City Council.
B. If a permanent sign type is desired in a zone but is not recognized/listed in the tables (e.g., a roof sign in the GB Zone) then it shall not be allowed, save
by issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with standards set forth in subsection 10-25-4B of this title. For additional regulations governing
the DB, DV and DH Districts, refer to subsections 10-15-4J, 10-15-5J and 10-15-6F of this title respectively. (Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
C. The standards in these tables and those expressed below are supplemental to those found in the remainder of this chapter (e.g., blanketing of signs,
signs installed over or within public right-of-way, signs in vision clearance areas, specific sign type requirements, permitting requirements, and
temporary signs) and also in certain sections of chapter 15 of this title and require variance approval to deviate from. (Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
TABLE 10-23-20(A)
PERMANENT SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE AG ZONE1
Type Of Sign
Number Allowed
Maximum Allowable
Height Above Grade
Maximum Display Surface
Area
Per Establishment
Spacing
And Location1
Illumination2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 360/410
Freestanding pole or monument
1 40' 20 sq . ft.
Nameplate type sign 1 n/a 2 sq . ft. Not allowed
Notes:
1. If not noted, see section 10-23-3 of this chapter for general provisions and section 10-23-7 of this chapter for exemptions.
2. Not to be confused with or construed as the presence of an electronic reader board message center component in a sign.
(Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013; amd. Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
TABLE 10-23-20(B)
PERMANENT SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE BC/BF ZONES1
Type Of Sign
Number
Allowed
Maximum
Allowable
Height
Above
Grade
Maximum Display Surface Area
Per Establishment
Spacing
And Location1
Illumination4
Freestanding pole,
monument or
projecting2
1 per
street3
25' 11/2 sq. ft. per linear foot of street frontage or 200
sq. ft. maximum, whichever is more restrictive
Indirect,
internal
Freestanding billboard 1 per
street
40' 312 sq. ft. maximum Indirect,
internal
Freestanding billboard 1 per lot 40' 672 sq. ft. maximum Only if oriented to, and on
property abutting, I-84
Indirect,
internal
Wall or marquee 1 or
more2
5' above
building
25% of building or tenant wall space (as pertinent) Indirect,
internal
Notes:
1. If not noted, see section 10-23-3 of this chapter for general provisions and section 10-23-7 of this chapter for exemptions.
2. The combined maximum sign area for these signs shall not exceed the total area allowed.
3. 1 additional sign per street may be allowed when street frontage exceeds 500 feet and signs are at least 300 feet apart.
4.Not to be confused with or construed as the presence of an electronic reader board message center component in a sign.
(Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
TABLE 10-23-20(C)
PERMANENT SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE BN/DB/DV ZONES1
Refer also to special sign provisions in subsections 10-15-4J and 10-15-5J of this title
Type Of Sign
Number
Allowed
Maximum
Allowable
Height
Above Grade
Maximum Display Surface Area
Per Establishment
Spacing
And
Location1
Illumination4
Freestanding pole,
monument or projecting
1 per
street3
25' 1 sq. ft. per linear foot of street frontage or 100 sq. ft.
maximum, whichever is more restrictive
Indirect,
internal
Wall or marquee2 1 or more2 5' above
building
15% of building or tenant wall space (as pertinent) Indirect,
internal
Notes:
1. If not noted, see section 10-23-3 of this chapter for general provisions and section 10-23-7 of this chapter for exemptions.
2. The combined maximum sign area for these signs shall not exceed the total area.
3. 1 additional sign per street may be allowed when street frontage exceeds 500 feet and signs are at least 300 feet apart.
4. Not to be confused with or construed as the presence of an electronic reader board message center component in a sign.
TABLE 10-23-20(D)
PERMANENT SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE DH ZONES1
Refer also to special sign provisions in section 10-15-6 of this title
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 361/410
Type Of Sign
Number
Allowed
Maximum
Allowable
Height
Above
Grade
Maximum Display Surface Area
Per Establishment
Spacing
And
Location1
Illumination4
Freestanding pole
or monument
1 per
street3
20' 1 sq. ft. per linear foot of street frontage or 40 sq. ft. maximum,
whichever is more restrictive
Indirect or
opaque faced
internal
Projecting, wall or
marquee2
1 or
more2
No taller
than
building
1 sq. ft. per linear foot of building or tenant wall length frontage (as
pertinent) or 100 sq. ft., whichever is more restrictive
Indirect or
opaque faced
internal
Notes:
1. If not noted, see section 10-23-3 of this chapter for general provisions and section 10-23-7 of this chapter for exemptions.
2. The combined maximum sign area for these signs shall not exceed the total area.
3. 1 additional sign per street may be allowed when street frontage exceeds 500 feet and signs are at least 300 feet apart.
4. Not to be confused with or construed as the presence of an electronic reader board message center component in a sign.
(Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013; amd. Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
TABLE 10-23-20(E)
PERMANENT SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE GB1/GB2/GBE ZONES1
Type Of Sign
Number
Allowed
Maximum Allowable
Height Above Grade
Maximum Display Surface Area
Per Establishment
Spacing And
Location1 Illumination3
Freestanding pole,
monument or
projecting
1 per
street
frontage
25' 11/2 sq. ft. per linear foot of street frontage
or 200 sq. ft. maximum, whichever is more
restrictive
Indirect or internal,
or direct
Freestanding pole,
monument or
projecting
1 per
street
frontage
70' 11/2 sq. ft. per linear foot of street frontage
or 300 sq. ft. maximum, whichever is more
restrictive
Only if oriented to,
and on property
abutting, I-84
Indirect or internal,
or direct
Wall, marquee,
canopy or awning
1 or
more2
1' above building for
single story; 5' for
buildings >30'
20% of building or tenant wall (as
pertinent)
Indirect internal for
wall; also direct for
others
Notes:
1. If not noted, see section 10-23-3 of this chapter for general provisions and section 10-23-7 of this chapter for exemptions.
2. The combined maximum sign area for these signs shall not exceed the total area.
3. Not to be confused with or construed as the presence of an electronic reader board message center component in a sign.
TABLE 10-23-20(F)
PERMANENT SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE IL/IH ZONES1
Type Of Sign Number Allowed
Maximum
Allowable
Height
Above
Grade
Maximum Display Surface Area
Per Establishment
Spacing And
Location1
Illumination4
Freestanding pole,
monument, projecting,
or roof2
1 per street3 40' 11/2 sq. ft. per linear foot of street frontage
or 300 sq. ft. maximum, whichever is more
restrictive
Indirect or
internal
Freestanding pole,
monument, projecting or
billboard2
1 per street3 40' 400 sq. ft. maximum Indirect or
internal
Freestanding pole,
billboard
1 per lot 40' 672 sq. ft. maximum Only if oriented to,
and on property
abutting, I-84
Indirect or
internal
Wall or marquee 1 or more up to
maximum square
5' above
building
25% of building or tenant wall (as pertinent)
Indirect or
internal
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 362/410
feet allowed2
Notes:
1. If not noted, see section 10-23-3 of this chapter for general provisions and section 10-23-7 of this chapter for exemptions.
2. The combined maximum sign area for these signs shall not exceed the total area.
3. 1 additional sign per street may be allowed when street frontage exceeds 500 feet and signs are at least 300 feet apart.
4. Not to be confused with or construed as the presence of an electronic reader board message center component in a sign.
(Ord. 4282, 9-19-2016)
TABLE 10-23-20(G)
PERMANENT SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE IP ZONES1
Type Of Sign Number Allowed
Maximum
Allowable
Height
Above
Grade
Maximum Display Surface Area
Per Establishment
Spacing
And
Location1
Illumination4
Freestanding pole,
monument, projecting, or
roof2
1 per street3 40' 11/2 sq. ft. per linear foot of street frontage or
300 sq. ft. maximum, whichever is more
restrictive
Indirect or
internal
Freestanding pole,
monument, projecting or
billboard2
1 per street3 40' 400 sq. ft. maximum Indirect or
internal
Wall or marquee 1 or more up to
maximum square feet
allowed2
5' above
building
25% of building or tenant wall (as pertinent) Indirect or
internal
Notes:
1. If not noted, see section 10-23-3 of this chapter for general provisions and section 10-23-7 of this chapter for exemptions.
2. The combined maximum sign area for these signs shall not exceed the total area.
3. 1 additional sign per street may be allowed when street frontage exceeds 500 feet and signs are at least 300 feet apart.
4. Not to be confused with or construed as the presence of an electronic reader board message center component in a sign.
(Ord. 4178, 5-18-2015; amd. Ord. 4282, 9-19-2016)
TABLE 10-23-20(H)
PERMANENT SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE RML ZONES1
Type Of Land Use Type Of Sign
Number
Allowed
Maximum
Allowable
Height Above
Grade
Maximum Display
Surface Area
Illumination3
Private or public elementary or
secondary school
Freestanding pole or
monument
1 per street
frontage
25' 150 sq. ft. maximum Indirect or
internal
Private or public elementary or
secondary school
Wall 1 or more up to
maximum2
15% of building wall that
faces a street
Indirect or
internal
Apartment project Freestanding pole or
monument
1 per street
frontage
8' 64 sq . ft. Indirect or
internal
Residential subdivision Subdivision identification
(e.g., monument)
1 per entry 8' 64 sq . ft. Indirect or
internal
Religious facilities Freestanding pole or
monument2
1 or more2 Not to exceed height
of building
32 sq . ft. Indirect or
internal
Religious facilities Wall 1 or more2 15% of building wall that
faces a street
Indirect or
internal
All other Wall 1 n/a 2 sq . ft. Not allowed
Notes:
1. If not noted, see section 10-23-3 of this chapter for general provisions and section 10-23-7 of this chapter for exemptions.
2. The combined maximum sign area for these signs shall not exceed the total area.
3. Not to be confused with or construed as the presence of an electronic reader board message center component in a sign.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 363/410
TABLE 10-23-20(I)
PERMANENT SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE RMH ZONES1
Type Of Land Use Type Of Sign
Number Allowed
Maximum
Allowable
Height Above
Grade
Maximum Display
Surface Area Illumination3
Private or public
elementary or secondary
school
Freestanding pole or monument 1 per street
frontage
25' 150 sq. ft. maximum
Indirect or
internal
Private or public
elementary or secondary
school
Wall 1 or more up to
maximum sq. ft.2
15% of building wall
that faces a street
Indirect or
internal
Apartment project Freestanding pole or monument 1 per street
frontage
8' 64 sq . ft. Indirect or
internal
Residential subdivision Subdivision identification (e.g.,
monument)
1 per entry 8' 64 sq . ft. Indirect or
internal
Religious facilities Freestanding pole or monument2 1 or more2 Not to exceed
height of building
32 sq . ft. Indirect or
internal
Religious facilities Wall 1 or more2 15% of building wall
that faces a street
Indirect or
internal
All other Freestanding pole or monument
(subsection 10-23-18H of this chapter)
1 8' 18 sq . ft. Opaque faced
or indirect only
All other Wall 1 n/a 2 sq . ft. Not allowed
Notes:
1. If not noted, see section 10-23-3 of this chapter for general provisions and section 10-23-7 of this chapter for exemptions.
2. The combined maximum sign area for these signs shall not exceed the total area.
3. Not to be confused with or construed as the presence of an electronic reader board message center component in a sign.
TABLE 10-23-20(J)
PERMANENT SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE RP ZONES1
Type Of Land Use Type Of Sign
Number
Allowed
Maximum
Allowable
Height Above
Grade
Maximum Display
Surface Area Illumination3
Private or public elementary
or secondary school
Freestanding pole or monument
1 per street
frontage
25' 150 sq. ft. maximum Indirect or
internal
Private or public elementary
or secondary school
Wall 1 or more up to
maximum
15% of building wall
that faces a street
Indirect or
internal
Apartment project Freestanding pole or monument
1 per street
frontage
8' 64 sq . ft. Indirect or
internal
Residential subdivision Subdivision identification (e.g.,
monument)
1 per entry 8' 64 sq . ft. Indirect or
internal
Religious facilities Freestanding pole or
monument2
1 or more2 Not to exceed
height of building
32 sq . ft. Indirect or
internal
Religious facilities Wall 1 or more2 15% of building wall
that faces a street
Indirect or
internal
All other Freestanding pole, monument,
projecting or marquee2
1 Not to exceed
building height
32 sq . ft. Opaque faced or
indirect only
All other Wall 1 n/a 2 sq . ft. Not allowed
Notes:
1. If not noted, see section 10-23-3 of this chapter for general provisions and section 10-23-7 of this chapter for exemptions.
2. The combined maximum sign area for these signs shall not exceed the total area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 364/410
3. Not to be confused with or construed as the presence of an electronic reader board message center component in a sign.
TABLE 10-23-20(K)
PERMANENT SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE RS6, RS7, RS8.5,
RS12, RS15, RS18, RS22, RA, AND RD ZONES1
Type Of Land Use Type Of Sign
Number
Allowed
Maximum
Allowable
Height Above
Grade
Maximum Display
Surface Area Illumination4
Residential Wall or door 1 2 sq . ft. Not allowed
Private or public elementary or
secondary school
Freestanding pole or
monument2
1 per street
frontage
25' 150 sq. ft. maximum Opaque faced or
indirect only3
Private or public elementary or
secondary school
Wall 1 or more2 15% of building wall that
faces a street
Indirect or internal3
Apartment project Freestanding pole or
monument
1 per street
frontage
8' 64 sq . ft. Indirect or internal
Residential subdivision Subdivision identification
(e.g., monument)
1 per entry 8' 64 sq . ft. Indirect or internal
Religious facilities Freestanding pole or
monument2
1 or more2 Not to exceed
height of building
32 sq . ft. Indirect or internal3
Religious facilities Wall 1 or more2 15% of building wall that
faces a street
Indirect or internal3
Businesses Wall 1 2 sq . ft. Indirect or internal3
Businesses Freestanding pole or
monument2
1 5' 32 sq . ft. Indirect or internal3
Notes:
1. If not noted, see section 10-23-3 of this chapter for general provisions and section 10-23-7 of this chapter for exemptions.
2. The combined maximum sign area for these signs shall not exceed the total area.
3. Signs that front a residential district/use may not be illuminated.
4. Not to be confused with or construed as the presence of an electronic reader board message center component in a sign.
(Ord. 4207, 10-19-2015)
10-23-21: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Nonconforming signs shall not be replaced, relocated or be structurally altered unless every portion of such sign is made to conform to all city regulations
governing signage.
A. Schedule Of Amortization: Signs not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter but which met requirements in effect at the time of their
installation shall be amortized. Thus, such signs shall be removed or made code compliant (including being removed from any city right of way) at such
time as the use of the structure and/or property to which such signs are pertinent is developed, changed or expanded as described by regulations
specified and listed in section 10-1-6 of this title. (Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013)
10-23-22: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Violations: Any person erecting, constructing, enlarging, altering, repairing, moving, improving, removing, converting or demolishing, equipping, using or
maintaining any sign or sign structure in the city, or causing or permitting the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance.
B. Signs On Public Property Or Public Right Of Way: The city shall have the right to immediately remove and dispose of any signs found illegally located
within public property or public right of way, or any sign(s) that are declared to endanger public safety. Owners of said signs illegally placed within
public property or public right of way shall not be entitled to the notice provisions pending removal and disposal of said signs.
C. Notice To Comply: Upon determination of a sign being unlawful and/or a public nuisance, the sign shall be removed, in a reasonable period of time, as
determined by the planning director, code enforcement official, or their designated representative.
1. A written or oral notification shall be given to the property owner, last known owner, manager, employee of the business, or responsible party, as
applicable, that the sign has been declared unlawful, specifying the reasons why the sign is unlawful and ordering that the sign be repaired, modified
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 365/410
or removed within a reasonable time being either the same day or up to a total of twenty (20) calendar days from pronouncement or issuance of
notice or notices.
2. After twenty (20) days have elapsed from the notice(s) of violation, the city may issue an order to abate if the violation has not been corrected.
Abatement proceedings shall be as set forth in subsection D of this section.
3. If a sign is determined to be hazardous or presents an immediate and serious danger to the public, it may be immediately removed by the city
without prior notice and the removal costs charged to the owner of said property.
D. Abatement Of Unlawful Signs: Nothing contained herein or elsewhere shall limit the power of the city to cause or effect abatement of any sign by
notifying the occupant in writing to remove the same within five (5) days, or sooner if deemed expedient by a code enforcement official, following the
receipt of such notice.
1. In default of abatement of such sign(s), the city is empowered to remove and abate the unlawful sign(s) at the expense of the owner creating,
causing, committing, or maintaining the same, and to levy a special assessment of the premises whereon the unlawful sign(s) is situated to defray
the cost or to reimburse the city for the cost of abating the same.
2. The city has the authority to employ such labor as is necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter and allow the bills therefor.
3. Any sign (except those illegally located within public property or public right of way which are subject to immediate removal and disposal) found in
violation of this chapter that has been abated shall become the property of the city, to be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate as follows:
a. Impoundment And Expense: Any unlawful sign which has been abated may be impounded at the request of the planning director, code
enforcement official, or his/her designee, and the costs of removal and storage shall constitute a lien in favor of the city upon and against the
property for such sign. Neither the city nor its agents shall be liable for any sign damage at the time of removal or storage. If removal and storage
costs have not been paid and the sign reclaimed within thirty (30) days of its removal by the city, the city may proceed to sell or otherwise dispose
of the sign in accordance with subsection D3c of this section.
b. Proof Of Ownership: Any person claiming ownership of any impounded sign shall furnish proof of ownership. The owner of the premises shall be
presumed to be the owner of all signs thereon, unless otherwise brought to the attention of the planning director or code enforcement official. The
sign shall be released to the owner upon payment of all the costs assessed against such property for such sign(s).
c. Sale Or Disposal Of Impounded Signs: All signs impounded which are not reclaimed may be subjected to sale to the highest bidder for cash, or
disposed of in the manner provided in subsection D3d of this section. Any proceeds shall go toward defraying the cost or reimbursing the city for
such expense of removal, to include, paying off any liens that exist because of such sign. Any proceeds in excess of removal and storage costs
shall be paid to the owner. In the event there are no purchasers for the sale of such signs, the city may discard such signs in any way deemed
convenient.
d. Notice Of Sale Or Disposal: Whenever any sign shall be sold hereunder, written notice shall be given to the owner as well as notice in one issue of
the official newspaper five (5) days prior to the date of sale. The notice shall state that a sign sale will be held giving the time and place of such
sale, that all bids shall be for cash to the highest bidder and that the city reserves the right to reject any or all bids. Upon payment of the bid prices,
the city shall execute and deliver a bill of sale to the purchaser of such sign.
E. Public Liability Bond: No person shall construct, erect, alter, repair, paint or remove any sign or sign structure of any design or description which is now
or may hereafter be erected within three feet (3') of or on or over any public sidewalk, street or alley right of way, or which shall project from or be
erected on any building and no sign permit shall be issued unless said person shall have on file with the planning department, a public liability policy of
insurance or surety bond providing limits of not less than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) on account of injury to or death of one person, and
not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) on account of injury to or death of two (2) or more persons in any accident. The policy of insurance or
surety bond shall be conditioned on and save harmless the city and its officers, agents, servants and employees against any and all damages, losses,
claims and demands, expenses and costs on account of any accident.
F. Appeals: The council shall hear and decide appeals from any decision, requirement or interpretation made by the planning director, or his duly
authorized representatives, in the enforcement of this chapter. Such appeals must be made within thirty (30) days from the date of such action. (Ord.
4051, 2-19-2013)
10-23-23: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION:
In order to prevent the construction of signs that are faulty and hazardous to the public, signs and sign structures shall comply with the wind and seismic
requirements as listed within the current adopted international building code. Such design, construction, and installation are the sole responsibility of the
sign contractor and property owner to which the sign is installed. (Ord. 4051, 2-19-2013)
Chapter 24
VARIANCES
10-24-1: PURPOSE:
A variance is a modification of quantifiable/measurable (bulk regulation) requirements imposed by this title (e.g., lot/parcel: size, width, depth, coverage,
street frontage required; structure heights, size or shape; parking space dimensions/quantities; setback or build to line requirements; sign
dimensions/height; number of signs allowed; fence height; etc.). All variance permit applications must be approved by the City Council in order to be
considered valid and in force. A variance shall not have the effect of allowing a use not otherwise allowed or conditionally allowed by chapter 3 of this title.
The Council is empowered to grant variances in order to prevent or to lessen practical development difficulties, unique site circumstances and
unnecessary physical, geographical hardships inconsistent with the objectives of zoning as would result from a literal interpretation and enforcement of
certain of the placement, bulk or quantifiable regulations prescribed by this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 366/410
A variance shall not be considered a right or special privilege, but may be granted to an applicant only upon a showing of undue hardship because of: a)
special characteristics applicable to the site which deprive it of privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zone or vicinity, and b) the
variance is not in conflict with the public interest. Hardships must result from special site characteristics relating to the size, shape or dimensions of a site
or the location of existing structures thereon, from geographic, topographic or other physical conditions, or from population densities, street locations,
surrounding property land use/build-out patterns or condition(s), or traffic flow concerns, or other unique circumstances (i.e., historical or human error
issues, etc.).
Variances are not intended to allow something that others do not have a permitted right to do. The purpose of a variance is to provide fair treatment and to
see that individuals are not penalized because of site characteristics or a site situation beyond their control. (Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-24-2: ACTIONS:
A. Granting Of Variance Permit: The Council may grant a variance permit with respect to requirements for fences and walls, site, area, width, frontage,
depth, coverage, front yard, rear yard, side yards, outdoor living area, height of structures, distances between structures or landscaped areas as the
variance was applied for or in modified form if, on the basis of application, investigation and evidence submitted, the Council concludes the following:
1. Literal interpretation and enforcement of the regulation would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship inconsistent with the
objectives of the zoning ordinance.
2. There are extraordinary site characteristics applicable to the property involved or to the intended use of the property which do not apply generally to
other properties classified in the same zoning district.
3. Literal interpretation and enforcement of the regulation would deprive the applicant of privileges enjoyed by the owners of other properties classified
in the same zoning district.
4. The granting of the variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties classified in the same
zoning district.
5. The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the
vicinity.
B. Waiver: The Council may grant variance permits for the waiver of required front yard setbacks, fence, walls or hedge heights. In order to approve such
variances, the Council must conclude that a request is acceptable based on the conclusions listed in subsection A of this section and also accept a
substitute plan, which provides equal safety or aesthetics qualities by other means. The substitute plan must:
1. Provide adequate vision clearance for vehicles, both those passing on the street and those leaving the development site.
2. Include landscaping.
3. Provide a front yard of at least one-half (1/2) that required in the relevant zoning district along at least one-half (1/2) the property's frontage.
4. Not be detrimental to public health, safety or welfare, or be materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity.
C. Parking Reduction(s): The council may grant a variance permit with respect to requirements for off street parking facilities (e.g., number of spaces
required) or off street loading facilities if, on the basis of the application, investigation and the evidence submitted, the council concludes the following
(exclusive of those listed in subsection A of this section):
1. Neither present nor anticipated future traffic volumes generated by the use of the site(s) in the vicinity reasonably require literal interpretation and
enforcement of the regulations.
2. The granting of the variance will not result in the parking or leading of vehicles on public street in such a manner as to interfere with the free flow of
traffic.
3. The granting of the variance will not create a safety hazard or any other condition inconsistent with the objectives of the zoning ordinance. (Ord.
2140; amd. Ord. 2978)
10-24-3: DURATION AND CONDITION(S) OF APPROVAL:
The use or construction permitted under the terms of any variance permit shall be commenced within a six (6) month period. If such use or construction
has not commenced within such time period the variance shall no longer be valid. Prior to the expiration of the six (6) month period the council may, as a
routine business item, and upon request of the applicant, extend approval for up to an additional six (6) months from the original date of approval. The
council may also establish conditions of approval in conjunction with issuance of a variance permit in order to improve or mitigate situations involving a
variance request. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2978)
10-24-4: APPLICATION:
Application for a variance permit shall be filed with the planning division on a form prescribed by the city which shall include any information the director or
his/her designee deems necessary.
The application shall be accompanied by an accurate scale drawing of the site and any adjacent property affected, showing all existing and proposed
locations of streets, property lines, uses, structures, driveways, pedestrian walks, off street parking and off street loading facilities and landscaped areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 367/410
The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee which is established by council resolution and is nonrefundable.
More than one variance may be requested in conjunction with an application and each item needing variance approval as part of the application will
require separate council action but not separate advertisement, notification, or placement on an agenda. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2978)
10-24-5: NOTICE:
A notice of public hearing shall be given not less than ten (10) calendar days nor more than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing
by mailing notices to property owners adjacent to the property being considered for a variance. The notice shall contain the address or location of property
for which the application is taken as well as a brief description of the nature of the application. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2978)
Chapter 25
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
10-25-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
Certain types of uses require special consideration prior to their being permitted in a particular district. The reason for special consideration involves,
among other things, the size of the area required for the full development of such uses, the nature of the traffic problems incidental to operation of the use,
the effect such uses have on any adjoining land uses and on the growth and development of the community as a whole.
All uses permitted conditionally are declared to typically possess such unique and special characteristics as to make impractical their being included as
outright uses in any of the various districts defined within this title. The authority for the location and operation thereof shall be subject to review and the
issuance of a conditional use permit (CUP). The purpose of review shall be to determine that the characteristics of any such use shall not be unreasonable
or incompatible with the type of uses permitted in surrounding areas, and for stipulating such conditions as may be reasonable so that the basic purposes
of the chapter shall be served. Nothing construed herein shall be deemed to require the commission to grant a CUP. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2929)
10-25-2: USE PERMIT PREREQUISITE TO BUILDING:
No building permit shall be issued when a CUP is required by the terms of this chapter unless a permit has been granted by the planning and zoning
commission or council and then only in accordance with the terms and conditions of the CUP. Conditional use permits may be made temporary or
permanent for any use or purpose for which such permits are required or permitted by provisions of this title. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3113)
10-25-3: APPLICATIONS:
Application(s) for a CUP or to otherwise modify a previously approved CUP shall be made with the office of planning and zoning and community
development on a form prescribed by the planning director. The application shall be accompanied by such information as may be required by the director
to enable the pertinent criteria to be applied to the proposal together with a filing fee that is and shall be established by council resolution. (Ord. 2140; amd.
Ord. 3113)
10-25-4: GENERAL USE PERMIT CRITERIA:
A. A CUP may be granted only if the proposal conforms to all the following general use permit criteria, provisions of the zoning ordinance unless lawfully
waived or modified by authorization of the commission, and the Nampa comprehensive plan. The general use permit criteria are as follows: (Ord. 4159,
1-20-2015)
1. The location, size, and design and operating characteristics of the proposed development will be compatible with and will not adversely affect the
livability or appropriate development of abutting properties and the surrounding neighborhood, with consideration to be given to harmony in scale,
bulk, coverage and density, to the availability of public facilities and utilities; to the harmful effect, if any, upon desirable neighborhood character; to
the generation of traffic and the capacity of surrounding streets; and to any other relevant impact of the development.
2. The location, design and site planning of the proposed development will provide a convenient and functional living, working, shopping, or civic
environment, and will be as attractive as the nature of the use and its location and setting warrants.
3. The proposed development will enhance the successful operation of the surrounding area in its basic community functions, or will provide an
essential service to the community or region. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3113; Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
B. A conditional use permit may be issued to authorize emplacement of a permanent sign in accordance with satisfaction of the following standards: (Ord.
4159, 1-20-2015)
1. The proposed sign is one of three (3) types: freestanding pole or monument (not billboard), wall or projecting style; (Ord. 4189, 7-20-2015)
2. The proposed sign will be compatible with the character (size, architectural styling, height and placement) of other signs in the vicinity of the sign
proposed;
3. The proposed sign will be compatible with the purpose, intent and character of either the zoning district within which the sign is to be emplaced, or,
with the character of buildings and/or uses in the area wherein the sign is proposed; (Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
4. The proposed sign may be an electronic message center or contain an electronic message center component; provided it complies with standards
applicable to such signs as iterated in subsection 10-23-18F of this title; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 368/410
5. The proposed sign may contain exposed neon lighting, or, neon as a primary lighting source, save within any residential zone (including RP, unless
the use upon an RP zoned property is nonresidential in nature in which case the aforenoted neon lighting types may be allowed). (Ord. 4189, 7-20-
2015)
10-25-5: INVESTIGATION:
The commission shall cause to be made an investigation of facts necessary to provide information to ensure a decision consistent with the intent and
criteria of this chapter. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2908)
10-25-6: CONDITIONAL USE PUBLIC HEARINGS:
A. Procedures Followed: Public hearing and legal notification procedures required by chapter 2 of this title shall be followed. The purpose of a conditional
use hearing shall be to determine whether the proposal conforms to criteria set forth in section 10-25-4 of this chapter. The commission may grant or
deny the application for the proposed CUP or require such changes or impose such reasonable conditions of approval as are in its judgment necessary
to ensure conformity to said criteria. The determination of the commission shall become final fifteen (15) calendar days after the date of decision unless
appealed to the council in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Exception: When a rezone (or annexation and initial zoning designation)
application is combined with a conditional use permit application, the commission shall make recommendations on both applications, rather than
recommending on the rezone/initial zoning designation and making a (conclusive) decision on the conditional use permit. (Ord. 4282, 9-19-2016)
B. Mobile Home Parks:
1. Whenever application for a mobile home park is considered, there shall be two (2) public hearings. The first public hearing shall be limited to
consideration of permit criteria relative to land use. Ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing a concept plan shall be submitted to the office of the
planning director. The plan shall be drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and show the following:
a. Existing conditions of the proposed site in terms of land use, zoning and circulation systems.
b. Proposed location and number of mobile home spaces.
c. Proposed locations of accessways.
Following the first public hearing if land use approval is given, the developer may proceed with preparation of the preliminary site plan of the park
which is to be prepared in accordance with chapter 28 of this title.
Following receipt of the preliminary site plan, within thirty (30) days it shall be reviewed by the commission to determine if it is consistent with the
purpose and intent of chapter 28 of this title.
Upon approval or conditional approval of the preliminary site plan the developer may proceed with preparation of the final site plan.
Following receipt of the final site plan, a second public hearing shall be scheduled before the commission for the purpose of review of the final site
plan. Action by the commission shall be to approve, disapprove or approve with conditions.
2. Individual approval at one of the two (2) required public hearings does not constitute final approval.
3. Final approval for mobile home parks CUPs shall require approval at both public hearings.
4. The CUP shall be issued with all conditions listed thereon, following the second required public hearing at which approval has been given.
5. Appeal to action by the commission at either public hearing may be made to the council. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2929)
10-25-7: ACTION BY COMMISSION:
The action by the commission upon the application for a CUP shall be by the majority of the members of the commission present at the meeting where the
application is considered. If a CUP is denied, the minutes of the commission shall clearly state the reasons for denial. In order to grant a CUP, the findings
of the commission shall be that the establishment, maintenance and operation of such use or structure shall expectedly satisfy the conclusions of law
affiliated with CUPs as listed in section 10-25-4 of this chapter. Any CUP shall comply with approval conditions imposed by the commission or by the
council, whichever body makes the final decision on the CUP. (When a rezone [or annexation and initial zoning designation] application is combined with a
conditional use permit application, the commission shall make recommendations on both applications, rather than recommending on the rezone/initial
zoning designation and making a [conclusive] decision on the conditional use permit.) (Ord. 4282, 9-19-2016)
10-25-8: CONDITIONS:
A. The commission or council shall condition its approval of a CUP as it deems necessary to secure the purpose of this chapter and may require the
guarantees and evidence that such conditions will be complied with. Such conditions may include:
1. Regulations of uses;
2. Special yards, spaces;
3. Fences and walls;
4. Surfacing or parking areas to city specifications;
5. Street dedications and improvements (or bonds);
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 369/410
6. Regulation of points of vehicular ingress and egress;
7. Regulation of signage;
8. Landscaping and maintenance;
9. Maintenance of the grounds;
10. Regulation of noise, vibration, odors or other similar nuisances;
11. Regulation of time for certain activities;
12. Duration of use;
13. Regulation of building design and appearance;
14. Master site signage in the case of multistructure commercial or industrial park subdivisions or business/shopping center or plazas;
15. Such other conditions as will make possible the development of the city in an orderly and efficient manner in conformity with the intent and
purposes set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3113; Ord. 4282, 9-19-2016)
10-25-9: EFFECTIVE DATE:
No CUP shall become effective until after an elapsed period of fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the action of the commission or council. (Ord.
2140; amd. Ord. 3113; Ord. 4282, 9-19-2016)
10-25-10: APPEALS AND FEE:
During the fifteen (15) day period from the date of the action by the commission, written appeals from action of the commission may be taken to the council
by the applicant or other interested party. The use permit shall not become effective until the determination of any appeal pending against it. Appeals
accompanied by the appropriate fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be filed with the planning and zoning division of the office of public
works. Said office shall transmit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2929)
10-25-11: ADHERENCE TO APPROVED PLAN:
A CUP shall be subject to the plans (e.g., site plan, elevation, landscape plan, etc.) and other conditions upon the basis of which it was granted. Unless a
different termination date is prescribed, the permit shall terminate six (6) months from the effective date of its approval, unless actual construction or
alteration, or actual commencement of the authorized activities has commenced. However, such period of time may be extended by the commission, upon
application filed at any time before said period has expired, but in no event shall the order be extended for more than twelve (12) months from the date the
original CUP was first granted. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3113)
10-25-12: REVOCATION:
In the event of a violation of any of the provisions of zoning regulations, general use permit criteria, or in the event of a failure to comply with any
prescribed condition of approval, the commission may, after notice and hearing, revoke any CUP. The determination of the commission shall become final
fifteen (15) calendar days after the date of the decision, unless appealed to the council. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3113)
10-25-13: ACTION ON APPEALS BY COUNCIL:
The council, at the next duly held meeting, shall set a date and time for a public hearing on any appeal of the planning and zoning commission's grant of a
CUP and notify affected parties and property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the property made the subject of the appeal. The commission or
planning staff shall submit to the council a report setting forth reasons for the commission's action. Alternatively, members of the commission shall be
present at the council's public hearing to represent the commission's position on the matter. The council, after said public hearing, shall render its decision
within fifteen (15) calendar days after the filing of such appeal. The council may by resolution affirm, reserve or modify any decision, determination or
requirements of the commission, but before granting any item which was denied by the commission or before changing any of the conditions imposed by
the conditions in the use permit, the council shall make written findings of facts setting forth wherein the commission findings were in error. (Ord. 4282, 9-
19-2016)
10-25-14: HEARING PROCEDURES FOR CUPs AFFILIATED WITH APPLICATION FOR PUDs:
Prior to granting a CUP or PUD permit, at least one public hearing in which interested persons shall have an opportunity to be heard shall be held. At least
fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the hearing, notice of the time and place, and summary of the proposal shall be published in the city's official newspaper.
Notice shall be posted on the premises not less than one week prior to the hearing. Notice shall also be provided property owners or purchasers of record
within the land being considered, and within three hundred feet (300') of the external boundaries of the land being considered, and any additional area that
may be substantially impacted by the proposed conditional use or PUD as determined by the commission. When notice is required to be given to two
hundred (200) or more property owners, or purchasers of record, an alternative form of procedure of official notice shall be published in the official
newspaper two (2) consecutive days. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2929)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 370/410
10-25-15: CONDITIONAL USE EXPANSIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
Holders of valid conditional use permits may apply to change the nature of, or conditions affiliated with, their respective CUPs. The city recognizes two (2)
kinds of changes to CUPs (that may happen to be sought at the same time). Said changes entail expansions to CUPs and/or modifications of approval
conditions of CUPs.
A. Expansions To Uses And/Or Structures: Expansions to uses and/or structures that were originally approved via a conditional use permit may be allowed
in accordance with the following provisions:
1. Allowed Without Special Zoning Approval: Expansions that do not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the square footage (whether related to 1 or
more structure's size(s) and/or a use's area coverage on a property) of an approved conditional use shall be allowed without special zoning approval
provided that they conform to all zoning regulations of this title, and any needed permits (e.g., building, right of way, variances, etc.) for such change
are obtained from the city as appropriate.
2. Expansions: Proposed expansions to uses and/or structures exceeding twenty five percent (25%) of the square footage (whether related to 1 or
more structure's size(s) and/or a use's area coverage on a property) of a use previously approved via a conditional use permit shall require public
hearing approval from the planning and zoning commission before any such expansion will be considered lawful.
Uses that otherwise meet either of the following criteria shall also have their approvals modified only by the commission:
a. Any increase in residential dwelling unit density or the number of principal structures on the property.
b. Request to change the nature of the use(s) the original CUP sanctioned provided that the new use(s) proposed are allowed via a new CUP
issuance. (Ord. 4010, 3-19-2012)
B. Conclusions: In order to approve such expansions, the commission shall be required to conclude that:
1. The proposed expansion will not add to the existing, approved use, land or structural square footage whose use would be contrary to that allowed in
the zoning district within which the expansion is proposed; and
2. The proposed expansion as proposed will otherwise comply with all relevant sections of Nampa's zoning code (e.g., parking, landscaping, exterior
storage, setback, height restrictions, etc.) as contained within this title; and
3. The proposed expansion will not adversely impact the surrounding neighbor(s) or neighborhood(s).
C. Modifications: Modifications to approval conditions once imposed by the commission may and shall only be modified/changed by order of the
commission unless the commission's decision(s) on a modification request is appealed to the city council. The commission may revoke or modify a
CUP condition (or even add new ones if deemed important), as a business item on its regular meeting agenda if acting upon request as applied for by
a true representative of the CUP holder(s).
Modifications to approval conditions once imposed by the city council acting as an appeal review board shall only be modified/changed by order of the
council.
Conditional use permits that were issued on proposals that were once controversial or whose conditions are perceived to be potentially controversial if
modified may necessitate convening a public hearing to entertain any proposal to modify their conditions. Any decision to hold a public hearing to
review proposed modification(s) to a CUP's condition(s) shall be made by the planning director.
1. Changes to uses and/or structures that were originally approved or allowed as CUPs that meet any of the following criteria shall also require
commission approval (or council approval if they approved the original CUP request) to be allowed:
a. A modification to a specifically approved or required open space area or amount (excepting those made a part of a subdivision plat or PUD);
and/or
b. A change in elevation(s) of one or more structures where the elevation was once specifically required to be in a certain form or was proposed and
accepted to be in a particular style or height; and/or
c. A change in the site layout of a project including relocation of pads, streets, structures, or parking areas when such were specifically approved or
required as part of an earlier CUP approval; and/or
d. A request to delete one or more conditions of approval originally imposed on a CUP project. Excepting, however, any proposal to modify
conditions associated with a CUP that was the subject of a formal appeal during its review process may only be processed as a public hearing
item.
2. Modifications to approval conditions may be allowed provided that the evidence presented to the commission/council is such to establish that:
a. The requested modification, once executed (if it would affect them at all) will/would not adversely impact them more than benefit them, or not affect
them at all; and
b. The site whereupon the modification/expansion is to occur is large enough to accommodate the proposal and still provide adequate space for all
required yards (setbacks), open spaces, pathways, walls and fences, parking, signature, required landscaping and other required site
elements/features (e.g., fire hydrant, light poles, power poles, pumping or lift station, roads, etc.).
c. The proposed change will not cause the use(s)/structure(s) approved under a CUP to become nonconforming with the Nampa comprehensive
plan or the zoning ordinance.
d. The proposed change, if it complies with all conditions imposed as modified will not substantially impact the roadway upon which the property with
the change(s) fronts/accesses. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3113; Ord. 3247, 8-4-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 371/410
Chapter 26
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
10-26-1: PURPOSE:
The intent of PUD overlay district regulations is to permit greater flexibility, and consequently, more creative design for development than generally is
possible under conventional zoning regulations or subdivision regulations as affected by zoning regulations. It is further intended to promote more
economical and efficient use of land while facilitating a harmonious variety of neighborhood development, a higher level of urban amenities, and
preservation of natural scenic qualities of open spaces. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-26-2: USE REQUIREMENTS:
All uses allowed within the underlying land use district are permitted within a PUD. Also, up to twenty percent (20%) of the gross land area may be directed
to other uses that are or would not otherwise be allowed within the base/starting/underlying land use district; provided, there is a favorable finding by the
planning and zoning commission that the criteria for approval of such uses, as outlined in this chapter, are satisfied. Unless multiple land use zones are
used/applied within a project, the use of a PUD shall be the only means whereby the city of Nampa will/shall allow uses in a zone not normally allowed
therein, development agreement conditions not excepting. (Ord. 4070, 10-7-2013)
10-26-3: OWNERSHIP/AREA REQUIREMENTS:
An application for a PUD permit may be filed by a single person or party (i.e., an LLC, Inc., etc.) having an existing interest in or option to purchase on the
property to be included in the PUD. The application shall be filed in the name(s) of the recorded owner or contract purchaser. However, the application
may be filed by the holder(s) of an equitable interest in such property. Before approval is granted for a/the PUD, the entire project shall be under single
ownership or control and legal title or proof of a legally binding sales agreement must be presented with the final development plan. Unless otherwise
approved by the commission, no PUD shall be for an area less than two (2) acres in size. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-26-4: EXCEPTIONS TO DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
Individual uses and structures in PUDs need not comply with the specific zoning based regulations of the underlying districts provided the following basic
principles are adhered to:
A. Detached Building Spacing:
1. Fire Regulations: Where two (2) walls oppose each other minimum separation shall be as required by city fire regulations.
2. Privacy: Where windows are placed in only one of two (2) facing walls or there are no windows, or where the builder provides adequate screening for
windows, or where the windows are at such a height or location to provide adequate privacy, the building spacing may be reduced.
3. Light And Air: Building spacing may be reduced where there are no windows or very small window areas and where rooms have adequate
provisions for light and air from another direction.
4. Use: When areas between buildings are to be used for utility purposes a reduction of building spacing shall be permitted. Where this use is similar
for both houses, a reduction of building space permitting effective design of a utility space shall be permitted. Kitchens and garages are suitable uses
for rooms abutting such utility yards.
5. Building Configuration: Where building configuration is irregular so the needs expressed in subsections A2, A3 and A4 of this section are met by the
building configuration, reduced building spacing is permissible, as determined by the average spacing or by measuring spacing where rooms open
toward adjacent buildings.
B. Bulk Requirements (i.e., Setbacks, Property Depth, Property Width, Building Height, Density, And Street Frontage): Bulk requirements that would
otherwise be applicable to a project developed in a given zone wherein a PUD is proposed/allowed may be altered by the commission as part of a
PUD's review and approval process. The commission may allow deviations from those setback, property depth, property width, building height, density
(required property area) and street frontage requirements without one or more variance application permits being required provided that they conclude
that any code required bulk requirement exceptions allowed comply with the following standards by assuring that:
1. Building Separation: Any detached structures shall be set at least six feet (6') apart;
2. Parking Space Clearance: Any garages, carports or parking pads shall be no closer to the drive, street or alley which they access than twenty feet
(20');
3. Access: Access to a public street is assured to each and every building lot/parcel by recorded easement;
4. Setback: At least five feet (5') is maintained between any detached structure and a side or rear building lot property line;
5. Residential Unit Density: Density of residential units is kept to that normally allowed by the base zone in which the PUD is located/proposed plus ten
percent (10%), unless the PUD is deemed to be an "infill development" in which case the density may be increased by twenty percent (20%) above
the base zoning allowance. If a PUD is residential in base nature and proposed in conjunction with or later applied against a subdivision, the
allowances made in section 10-27-4 of this title shall not stack with or be in addition to the allowances made in this chapter. In other words, a project
may use the allowances in section 10-27-4 of this title in a residential subdivision or the allowances of this chapter but not one in addition to the
other;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 372/410
6. Height Of Buildings: Building heights, if increased beyond that normally allowed in the zone in which the PUD is located/proposed, are not increased
by more than two (2) stories over and above the height normally allowed and this only when the PUD does not abut an existing single-family
residential subdivision on the side(s) of the PUD where the height increase is desired;
7. Reduced Property Area: For a structure it is sufficient to fully contain that structure on a single lot/parcel.
C. Zero Lot Line Structure Placement(s): By placing buildings close to or on the lot line or straddling the lot line by common wall construction, and reducing
lot frontage, higher densities can be achieved while at the same time maintaining privacy and an increased amount of open space. Zero lot line units
shall be allowed in PUDs provided the following requirements are met:
1. In the case of common wall construction all applicable city, state and federal building regulations shall be complied with.
2. Sites shall be selected to avoid drainage problems since it becomes more difficult for each lot to drain on its own with one side yard eliminated.
3. In the case of buildings which are to be placed close to or on the lot line the following shall apply:
a. The adjoining lot shall provide a five foot (5') maintenance easement on the zero lot line side.
b. The use of maintenance easements shall be restricted to daylight hours and the total number of days per year the easement may be used shall be
agreed upon.
c. The owner(s) of the adjacent lot shall not make any attachments to lot line walls, alter it in any way, or use it as a playing surface for any sport.
(Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-26-5: OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Common Open Space: Unless otherwise approved, not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the total gross area of any residentially based PUD shall be
retained as permanent, common open space privately held and maintained by the PUD's property owners.
B. Open Space (Functional) Includes: Open space may, and shall, only be constituted by/as:
1. Land area of the overall PUD project site which is neither covered by buildings, parking structures, or accessory structures (except commonly held
recreational structures), nor is trapped inside individual, privately held building lots. Also, open space lots or parcels provided in a development shall
be not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet in area nor less than thirty feet (30') in their smallest width or depth dimension unless due to the
need to make them into odd shapes as approved by the commission;
2. Land which is held in common by all property owners in the PUD and shall therefore be both legally and physically available and accessible to all
occupants of dwelling units in the PUD.
C. Not Included: Open space shall not be deemed to be, nor construed to include:
1. Any proposed or existing street, common driveway, service drive, alley or rights of way or easements.
2. Any open parking pads/areas and driveways for dwelling units.
3. Any school sites (including all lands inside a school's property boundaries or lacking such its playground(s)).
4. Any commercially developed areas or areas proposed to be devoted to commercial uses, and, the land devoted to/covered by buildings, accessory
buildings, parking and loading facilities for these areas.
5. Unsuitable land (e.g., a hillside, water channel, waterway easement area, swamp or high water table ground, etc.) as may be determined by the
commission. Specifically regarding slopes, open spaces with excessive slope are unusable for most active recreational uses. At least one-half (1/2)
of the required open space shall have an overall finished grade not to exceed fifteen percent (15%).
6. Land necessarily established in street frontage landscape strips via common lots or in easements in order to satisfy requirements of chapter 27
and/or 33 of this title.
D. Location(s): Common open spaces shall be distributed equitably throughout projects in relation to the dwelling units of the people they are intended to
serve. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
10-26-6: PRIVATE STREETS:
Private streets shall be allowed in PUDs in accordance with city of Nampa standards as noted in the city's adopted subdivision process policy manual and
the standard construction specifications manual. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-26-7: CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL:
The commission in making its determination shall give consideration to the following:
A. Proposed Development: The proposed development is consistent in all respects to the spirit and intent of this chapter, is in general conformance with
the comprehensive plan, that the area surrounding the development can be planned and zoned in coordination and substantial compatibility with the
PUD and that the benefits and improved design of the development will have a beneficial effect which would not be achieved under standard district
regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 373/410
B. Project Design:
1. Project design including:
a. Landscaping: Streetscape, open spaces and plazas, use of existing landscape, pedestrianway and recreational areas.
b. Siting: Visual focal points, use of existing physical features such as topography, view, solar access orientation according to the provisions of the
specifications in chapter 27 of this title, sun and wind orientation, circulation patterns, physical environment, variation in building setbacks and
building grouping.
c. Design Features: Street sections, architectural styles, harmonious use of materials, varied use of building types and parking areas broken by
landscaping.
d. Easements: In the case of private reservation the open area to be reserved shall be protected against building development by conveying to the
city as a part of the conditions for project approval an open space easement over such open area restricting the area against any future building or
except as is consistent with that of providing landscaped open space for the aesthetic and recreational satisfaction of surrounding residences.
Building or uses for noncommercial recreational or cultural purposes compatible with the open space objective may be permitted only where
specifically authorized as part of the development plan or subsequently with the express approval of the council following approval of building, site,
and operational plans by the commission.
e. Maintenance: The maintenance of such open space reservations shall be assured by establishment of appropriate management organization for
the project. The manner of assuring maintenance and assessing such cost to individual properties shall be determined prior to the approval of the
final project plans and shall be included in the title to each property.
f. Ownership: Ownership and tax liability of private open space reservation shall be established in a manner acceptable to the city and made a part of
the conditions of the plan approval.
g. Commercial Area Site Development: The architectural design, landscaping, control of lighting and general site development will result in an
attractive and harmonious service area creating an effect upon the property values of the surrounding neighborhood compatible with that
anticipated under the comprehensive plan.
h. Commercial Area Planned Groups: Commercial uses, commercial buildings and establishments are planned as groups having common parking
areas and common entrance and exit points.
i. Commercial Area Landscaping: Planting screens or fences shall be provided on the perimeter of any commercial areas/properties abutting
residential areas.
All areas designed for future expansion or not intended for immediate development shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained in a neat and
orderly manner.
All intervening spaces between rights of way and building lines, and between buildings, drives, parking areas and improved areas shall be
landscaped with trees and shrubs and properly maintained.
j. Industrial Area Site Development: The operational character, physical plant arrangement and architectural design of buildings shall be compatible
with contemporary performance standards and industrial development design and will not produce an effect upon the property values of the
surrounding neighborhood incompatible with that anticipated under the comprehensive plan.
k. Industrial Area Planned Groups: There will be harmony of buildings and a compact grouping in order to economize the provision of such utilities as
are required.
l. Industrial Area Landscaping: Industrial uses and parcels shall be developed in parklike surroundings utilizing landscaping and existing woodlands
as buffers to screen lighting, parking areas, loading areas or docks and/or storage of raw materials and products.
All intervening spaces between rights of way and building lines, and between buildings, drives, parking areas and improved areas shall be
landscaped with fences and shrubs and properly maintained at all times. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-26-8: PROCEDURE FOR PUD PLAN APPROVALS:
A. Preapplication Meeting: The developer should meet with the planning director prior to submission of the concept plan. The purpose of this meeting is to
discuss informally the purpose and effect of this chapter and the criteria and standards contained herein, and to familiarize the developer with the
comprehensive plan, "zoning ordinance", "subdivision ordinance" and such other items as deemed appropriate.
B. Application For A PUD Permit:
1. An application for a PUD permit shall be filed with the planning director or his/her designee by a property owner or person having existing interest in
the property.
2. The application shall be on a form as prescribed by the planning director and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as established by
resolution of the council.
3. The application for a PUD permit shall be accompanied by a written statement by the developer setting forth the reasons why, in his opinion, the
PUD would be in the public interest.
C. Public Hearing Procedures: When a public hearing is required by this chapter the same procedures for public hearing and legal notification, as required
by chapter 25 of this title for conditional use permits, shall be followed.
Alternatively, an applicant may incorporate all PUD design elements into one plan for presentation to the commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 374/410
D. PUD Development Plan Details: The preliminary development plan shall be presented in the same form and contain the same information as outlined
for preliminary subdivision plats under chapter 27 of this title. In addition, the preliminary development plan shall contain the following information:
1. Location and type of land uses.
2. Parks and community or open spaces.
3. Notation(s) regarding proposed ownership of streets, public or private.
4. A landscape plan identifying landscape materials/elements used for private and common open spaces, intervening spaces between rights of way
and building lines, and between buildings, drives and parking areas.
5. A description of the design principles for buildings and streetscapes; tabulation of the number of acres in the residential population by type of
housing; estimated nonresidential population; standards for height, open space, building density, parking areas, population density and public
improvements proposed for each unit of the development whenever the applicant proposed an exception from standard zoning districts or other
ordinances governing development.
6. Deed restrictions, protective covenants and other legal statements or devices to be used to control the use, development and maintenance of the
land, and the improvements thereon, including those areas which are to be commonly owned and maintained.
7. General outline of intended organizational structure related to property owners' association, deed restrictions and provisions of services.
8. A copy of the legal title to the property or proof of a legally binding sales agreement ensuring the entire project area is under single ownership or
control.
9. Existing features of the development site including major wooded areas and structures.
10. The pattern of public and private roads, driveways, parking facilities, pedestrianways and intended design standards.
11. The size arrangement and location of lots or of proposed building groups.
12. The type, size and location of structures.
13. The type, size and location of recreational and open space areas and areas reserved or dedicated for public uses such as schools, parks, etc.
14. Site plan, showing building(s), various functional use areas, circulation and their relationship.
15. Preliminary building elevation renderings/pictures/etc., as available to the applicant.
E. Commission Action: Following application for PUD plan approval, the commission shall review the development plan in accordance with the approval
criteria set forth in this chapter.
Approval of the commission along with any pertinent conditions of approval shall cause the planning director or his/her designee to issue a PUD permit
in accordance with the approved final development plan and the supplementary conditions attached thereto.
F. Amendments: Any subsequent amendment to the final development plan changing location, positioning, and height of buildings and structures may be
authorized by the commission as a business item without additional public hearings, if required, by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at
the time the final plan was approved. In no case shall the commission authorize changes which may, by reasonable judgment, expectedly cause any of
the following:
1. A substantial change in the use or character of the development.
2. A decrease in common open space below that required in the project (e.g., via increase in overall coverage of structures).
3. An increase in the intensity of any afore identified use(s) (e.g., via operating hours, trip traffic, building area increase, signage display, etc.) beyond
that presented to the commission.
4. An increase in the problems of traffic circulation and public utilities.
All other changes in use, rearrangement of lots, blocks, travel distances and building tracts, or in the provision of common open spaces and changes
other than those listed above which constitute substantial alteration of the original plan, shall require a new public hearing before the commission.
(Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-26-9: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS:
In addition to those sections of chapter 27 of this title which have been specifically referred to within this chapter, the following sections of this title shall
also be applicable and considered a part of this chapter or affect PUDs just like they do residential subdivisions, unless specific exceptions have otherwise
been granted by the commission based on positive recommendation(s) from the City's Engineering and Zoning Departments as part of the PUD review
and approval process:
A. Section 10-27-6, "General Development And Improvements; Requirements".
B. Section 10-27-7, "Construction Observation".
C. Section 10-27-8, "Subdivision Improvement Agreement".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 375/410
D. Section 10-27-10, "Financial Security And Guarantee".
E. Section 10-27-11, "Dedications". (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
F. Section 10-27-12, "Correcting/Vacating/Amending Plats". (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008; amd. Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
10-26-10: EXPIRATION AND EXTENSION OF APPROVAL PERIODS:
If the applicant: a) fails to apply for final development plan approval within two (2) years of approval of the preliminary development plan, or b) fails to
record an associated subdivision plat and begin project development within two (2) years of approval of the final development plan, the preliminary and/or
final development plans shall be rendered/considered null and void. Extensions of time beyond the two (2) year validity period of approved preliminary
and/or final plans may be granted by the commission, in/for up to one year increments, if the commission determines such extensions are in the public
interest. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-26-11: CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS:
Whenever there is a conflict or difference between the provisions of this chapter and those of other chapters of this title, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail. Subjects not covered by this chapter shall be governed by the respective provisions found elsewhere in this title. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
10-26-12: FEES:
A. Persons making application for a PUD permit/approval shall submit requisite materials as determined by the Planning Director or his/her designee and
shall pay to the City a nonrefundable office checking fee in an amount to be established by the Council. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
Chapter 27
SUBDIVISIONS
10-27-1: GENERAL SUBDIVISION POLICY, JURISDICTION STATEMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY:
A. Establishment And Enforcement: Establishment, interpretation, application and enforcement of the land division regulations found in this chapter by the
City of Nampa and its authorized personnel is sanctioned by Idaho Code title 50, chapter 13 and title 67, chapter 65, and article 12, section 2 of the
Idaho Constitution, as amended or subsequently codified. These standards or regulations shall apply to all land contained within the limits of the City of
Nampa as presently constituted or as may be subsequently incorporated. They also shall apply to the area of City impact per agreement with the
County, and shall be in force as allowed according to the City of Nampa and Canyon County's joint powers agreement, and as each jurisdiction's
impact legislation may allow.
B. Idaho State Code: Idaho State Code notes that a division of a tract of land into "five or more lots, parcels, or site for the purpose of sale or building
development, whether immediate or future" constitutes a subdivision. Nevertheless, State Code allows for individual cities or counties to "adopt their
own definition of subdivision" in lieu of the State's. Nampa has defined a "subdivision" as one that creates three (3) or more lots from an original lot or
parcel.
C. Subdivision: No person or party shall subdivide any zoned property that is located wholly or in part in the City after June 11, 2002, or subdivide land
within the area of City impact after June 14, 1977, into more than two (2) parcels, unless he shall first have made, or cause to have made, a subdivision
plat thereof as required by Idaho Code title 50, chapter 13, and as set forth within this chapter, save where allowed otherwise in this chapter.
D. Review And Approval: It is unlawful to receive or record any plat or replat within the above boundaries until such plat has been reviewed and approved
by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the Mayor and Council, and bears the approval, by signature, of the City Engineer, Mayor,
Planning and Zoning Commission Chairperson and the City Clerk (in addition to the health district's and appropriate County official's signatures).
E. Administrative Authority: Discretionary administrative authority is considered retained by adoption of this legislation. That authority shall permit duly
authorized representatives of the City of Nampa Fire, Police, Forestry and Parks Departments to suggest subdivision design changes to the Planning
and Zoning Department. That authority shall permit duly authorized representatives of the Nampa Planning and Zoning Department and Engineering
Department to suggest design changes to subdivision plats undergoing review to the City's Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council. The
Nampa Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall carefully consider staff suggestions in their review and approval of plats.
F. Reference Manuals: The following manuals shall be included by this reference:
1. "Subdivision Process and Policy Manual";
2. "Standard Construction Specification Manual".
G. Severability And Disclaimer: Where any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or other part of these regulations may be held invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall only affect that part so held invalid. City (planning and zoning commission or city council) approval
of a preliminary or final plat or portion thereof shall not be considered as constituting approval of any engineering or construction drawings, applications
or constructs. Such elements require separate city engineering approval. (Ord. 3573, 5-1-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 376/410
H. Common Areas: The provision of all residential subdivision common areas along with special amenities such as/including, but not limited to: open
space, tot lots, playgrounds, park area, walking path areas, water features, storage areas (e.g., for RVs, buildings that by nature of use and/or design
basically equivalent to ministorage type facilities, etc.), pools and clubhouses, etc., by a project developer shall, unless otherwise specifically approved
by the city council, be located in common space(s) owned and maintained by a home/property owners' association and shall not be retained in private
ownership by a developer. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
I. Covenants, Conditions And Restrictions: Any covenants, conditions, restrictions that are in conflict with ordinances of this title or conditions of approval
issued/ordered/imposed against a property, project, development, subdivision, PUD or use by the city by virtue of its authority shall be considered
invalid by the city insofar as enforcement of the provisions of this title or the conditions of approval are concerned. Correspondingly, provisions, terms,
conditions, etc., of covenants, conditions, and restrictions recorded against a property, project, development, subdivision, PUD, or use in Nampa after
receiving land/structure use entitlement from the city shall be drafted to be in harmony with city ordinances or conditions of approval
issued/ordered/imposed by the city if the covenants, conditions and restrictions are to be effective. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-27-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION FORM, CONTENT AND PROCESS:
A. Preapplication Conference: After development of a concept plan, and prior to submitting a preliminary plat application or having their preliminary plat
heard by the planning and zoning commission or city council, a subdivider and/or their engineer may schedule a preapplication conference with the city
engineer and planning and zoning director or their designees and other agency officials.
Resubmittal(s) of plats to the planning office prior to planning and zoning commission review in a public hearing forum may necessitate rescheduling
and possibly readvertising of those plats.
B. Application: Every person seeking to subdivide land shall file with the planning and zoning director appropriate application materials including a
completed subdivision application package including fifteen (15) copies of the preliminary plat (with supporting data as required in this section). One
reduced copy eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17") and one reduced copy eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11") of the
preliminary plat together with requisite review fees shall also be concurrently submitted. An electronic copy of all preliminary plats shall be filed in
AutoCAD format, version 14 or higher.
1. Form Of Presentation: The information hereinafter required as part of the preliminary submittal shall be shown graphically or by note on plans or by
letter, and may comprise several sheets showing various elements or required data. All mapped data for the same plat shall be drawn at the same
standard engineering scale, having a minimum scale of no more than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'). Drawings shall not exceed
twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") in overall dimensions.
2. Contents Of Map: The preliminary plat map prepared by the subdivider and filed with the planning and zoning director or his designee shall contain
the following:
a. Proposed name of subdivision and its location by section, township and range, reference by dimension and bearing to a section corner or quarter
section corner. Subdivision names shall be sufficiently distinct from each other to avoid confusion or duplication. Subdivision names shall not be
duplicative with any other plat name found in the city or Canyon County.
b. Name, address and phone number of subdivider and engineer, surveyor, landscape architect or land planner preparing the plat.
c. Scale, north point and date of preparation including dates of any subsequent revisions.
d. Vicinity map drawn to a scale of one inch equals five hundred feet (1" = 500'), clearly showing proposed subdivision configuration in relationship to
adjacent subdivisions, main arterial routes, collector streets, etc.
e. Topography shown in the same map as the proposed subdivision layout. Contour interval shall reflect the character and drainage of the land.
f. Location of water wells, streams, canals, irrigation laterals, private ditches, washes, lakes or other water features, direction of flow, and location
and extent of known areas subject to inundation.
g. The approximate location of existing sanitary sewers, septic systems, leach fields, storm drains, pressure irrigation main and domestic water
supply mains within the tract and within five hundred feet (500') adjacent thereto.
h. The location, widths and other pertinent dimensions of existing or platted streets and other important features such as railroad lines, watercourses,
easements of public record, permanent structures to remain and exceptional topography within and contiguous to the tract to be subdivided.
i. Boundaries of the tract to be subdivided shall show approximate dimensions and acreage.
j. Name, book and page numbers of any recorded adjacent subdivision having common boundary with the tract.
k. The location, widths and other pertinent dimensions of proposed streets, curbs, alleys, pedestrianways, sidewalks, subdivision fencing, utility
easements, storm drainage easements, right of way, parks and other open spaces.
l. All portions of property intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved for the use of all property owners with the purpose and method of
maintenance indicated and all proposed easements.
m. Typical lot dimensions to scale; approximate dimensions of all corner lots and lots of curvilinear sections of streets; proposed lot and block
numbers; total number of lots; and individual lot square footage and individual lot, nonstandard utility, waterway, easement (i.e., power lines)
square footages. Individual lot square footage shall be written upon each lot and listed in a separate table upon the face of the preliminary plat.
n. The proposed names of all the streets whether new or continuous. Street names shall be sufficiently distinct from each other to avoid confusion or
duplication.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 377/410
o. By note, the existing zoning classification of the tract and any requested zoning changes.
p. Appropriate information that sufficiently details the proposed development within any special development area, such as hillside, planned unit
development, floodplain, cemetery, mobile home, large scale development, hazardous and unique areas of development.
q. A statement describing the proposed irrigation source shall appear on the preliminary plat. The delivery of water shall be executed in accordance
with Idaho Code section 31-3805. The statement shall be accompanied by proof of transferable irrigation water rights.
r. The proposed method of handling sanitary sewage, stormwater, irrigation and potable water within the tract and any off site improvements if
required including a preliminary layout for sewer, water and storm drainage systems/flows.
Sealed engineering calculations are required to substantiate the proposed methods and document the impacts to the city water, sewage, irrigation,
and stormwater system(s). Engineering calculations are also required for individual and/or private water, sewer, irrigation, and stormwater
system(s).
s. Any proposed private streets or accessway shall be identified.
t. All utilities shall be underground including power at distribution voltage.
u. All requested variances to the subdivision, zoning, comprehensive plan or other city ordinance shall be identified by notes on the plat.
3. Separate Information Needed: The preliminary plat map submittal shall be further accompanied by the following information that may be on separate
sheets or in letter form:
a. Proof of property interest, which may include a warranty deed or affidavit of proprietary interest.
b. If the proposed subdivision is part of a larger area intended for development, a development master plan of the entire area.
c. An initial, preliminary landscape plan for the development that shows, as a minimum, proposed tree locations, calipers and species along with any
known overhead or belowground power line easements. The landscape plan shall be crafted in accordance with provisions in this chapter and
prepared by a landscape architect, landscape designer or qualified nurseryman.
d. Such evidence, data or calculations (e.g., including, but not limited to, traffic impact, soils, hydrological, stormwater, environmental studies) shall
be furnished as required by the city's current design policy, stormwater policy, as included in the manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-1F of this
chapter, or any other local, state, or federal requirements or as required by the city engineer to evaluate the proposed facilities or their impact upon
existing facilities.
e. When individual sewage disposal systems are proposed, a feasibility study shall be furnished which shall be a copy of that submitted to the
southwest district health department.
f. Appropriate fees.
g. If the proposed development contains private streets, water, sewer or irrigation facilities, the developer shall submit to the city a written description
outlining, at least, the following:
(1) Method of construction inspection.
(2) Method of maintenance.
(3) Financial arrangements for providing maintenance and future replacement of the facility(ies) following expiration of its(their) useful life(lives).
C. Review: The planning and zoning director or his designee shall transmit a copy of the application and preliminary plat to the city departments and such
other agencies that have jurisdiction or any interest in the proposed subdivision for their review and recommendation. If no reply is received within thirty
(30) calendar days from the date of notification, approval of the preliminary plat by such department or agency will be considered to be granted.
D. Public Hearing Requirement: All subdivisions shall have/require a public hearing prior to approval of the preliminary plat.
E. Notification Requirement(s): The city shall advertise forthcoming public hearings on preliminary plats. Advertisement of such hearings shall be executed
according to the following criteria:
1. At least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to a preliminary plat hearing, notice of the time and place of said hearing, together with a summary of the plat
proposal, shall be published in an official newspaper of local circulation.
2. Notice(s) of the hearing shall also be posted on the general premises of the subdivision site, alongside and visible from one or more abutting rights
of way and/or properties at least one week prior to the hearing.
3. Mailed notifications shall also be sent to area property owners or purchasers of record having property that lies within three hundred feet (300') of the
external boundaries of the land being considered for subdivision.
4. Any additional area that may be substantially impacted by the proposed subdivision, as determined by the planning director, should be notified by
issuance of mailed notices or extra posting of the property, as most appropriate.
5. When mailed notices are required to be given to two hundred (200) or more property owners or purchasers of record, an alternative form of
procedure for providing official notice may be utilized. In lieu of distributing mailed notices, two (2) additional newspaper notices shall be posted in an
official newspaper of local circulation for two (2) consecutive days.
6. Failure to notify every affected property owner of an upcoming plat review via public hearing shall not be considered sufficient cause to render the
review process or hearing invalid provided substantial mailed notification has been otherwise provided to area property owners, unless otherwise
determined by a court of law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 378/410
F. Planning And Zoning Commission Action: Within sixty (60) calendar days following receipt of preliminary plat submittal materials, said preliminary plat
application shall be placed on the planning and zoning commission's agenda for review as a public hearing item. The planning and zoning commission
shall approve, conditionally approve, table, or disapprove the preliminary plat within thirty (30) calendar days after the public hearing is closed, unless
all concerned agree upon an extension of time. Plats shall be eligible for approval if all requisite/needed application/submittal materials have been
received by the city, the proposed plat design complies with relevant zoning and subdivision standards, and engineering attests that provision of
services to the future development is available.
The planning and zoning commission shall evaluate a proposed plat's design based on city codes in making its determination(s). The reasons for such
action by the planning and zoning commission together with any conditions of approval shall be stated in writing, a copy of which shall be sent to the
subdivider. Any appeals of the planning and zoning commission's decision shall be filed and processed in accordance with provisions listed in section
10-27-5 of this chapter.
Reapplication for a plat that has been denied by the planning and zoning commission shall not be filed with the city any sooner than ninety (90)
calendar days after the commission's decision to deny the originally proposed plat.
At least one copy of an approved preliminary plat will be kept on file for public examination in the planning and zoning department. Approval of a
preliminary plat shall be valid for a period of five hundred forty (540) calendar days (approximately 18 months), unless an extension of time is applied
for and granted by the planning and zoning commission prior to lapse of the approval period.
Once a final plat to divide property is approved, recorded and its associated construction drawings have been approved by the city engineer for an area
of land, or portion thereof, previously approved via a related preliminary plat, that preliminary plat is then considered "vested", or valid and "in force"
indefinitely. Once a final plat is recorded, it shall be valid until replatted and/or vacated.
G. Revised Preliminary Plat Submittal: Following approval of any preliminary plat by the planning and zoning commission (or council if acting as an appeal
board), the developer or his/her engineer shall cause to be made and submitted to the city one or more copies as may be required by the city of the
revised preliminary plat. Such plat shall contain all modifications/revisions/corrections required by the city. The revised plan shall be reviewed by the
city and when deemed acceptable, shall be approved. After the revised preliminary plat is approved, the city council may then take action on any
related and subsequent final plat request for the same project.
H. City Council Action; Design Or Other Exceptions Made To Avoid Hardships: Whenever a tract to be subdivided is, in the opinion of the city council, of
such unusual shape or size or is surrounded by such development or features unusual conditions such that the strict application of city subdivision
requirements would expectedly result in real difficulties and substantial hardships, or injustices, or substandard design, or could be improved upon or
altered by another, perhaps even superior design, the council may vary or modify subdivision platting requirements. The fact that an owner could
realize a greater financial return from his property by subdividing said property contrary to these regulations is not sufficient reason for hardship. (In
other words, it is the intent of this subsection to allow a developer to divide property in a reasonable manner, but at the same time, protect the public
welfare and interests of the city and surrounding area and preserve the general intent and spirit of this chapter.)
The council may also approve exceptions to subdivision standards for a plat processed as a PUD, as detailed in section 10-27-4 of this chapter.
Subdivision proposals meeting any of the following criteria below shall be required to obtain city council approval, via business item review of the
preliminary plat, prior to the preparation and submission of a final plat to the city's planning and zoning commission:
1. Subdivision(s) proposing to not use city water, sewer storm drainage or irrigation service(s).
2. Subdivision(s) not anticipated/proposed to fully conform to city subdivision or zoning ordinance design and dimensional standards.
3. Subdivision(s) classified in this chapter as "special development(s)". (Ord. 3835, 12-1-2008)
10-27-3: FINAL PLAT APPLICATION FORM, CONTENT AND PROCESS:
After approval (or conditional approval) of a preliminary plat, the subdivider may cause the subdivision, or any part thereof, to be surveyed and a final plat
prepared in accordance with the preliminary plat as approved. The subdivider shall file with the planning and zoning department requisite final plat
application materials as hereafter denoted:
A. Form Of Presentation:
1. A completed subdivision application form (when and if required) and nine (9) copies of the final plat1, nine (9) copies of construction drawings,
including a copy of the final plat, an eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") reduction of the plat, an eight and one-half inch by eleven inch (81/2" x
11") reduction of the plat, a legal description of each phase proposed for final review and requisite fees and indication of the square footage of each
and every proposed lot.
2. The plat shall be so drawn that the top of the sheet faces generally north. All lines, dimensions and markings shall be made on the plat in
accordance with provisions of Idaho Code. The actual map shall be made on a scale of no less than one hundred feet (100') to the inch and shall
clearly show all details.
3. The final plat drawings and plans for subdivisions proposed in the city its impact area shall be submitted in digital form and to a datum approved as
specified in the manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-1F of this chapter. This will assist with the updating of the city "base maps", record
drawings, and addressing.
B. Contents: The following information shall be contained upon the final plat to be filed:
1. The name and general location of the subdivision in bold letters at the top of the sheet. (The name of the subdivision must not bear the name of any
town or plat in Canyon County.)
2. North arrow and scale of the plat.
3. Name, address and official seal of the registered land surveyor preparing the plat.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 379/410
4. The boundaries must be accurately drawn showing the proper bearings and dimensions of all boundary lines of the subdivision and where possible
the bearings and coordinate system for the plat shall be on the Idaho state modified coordinate system. These lines should be heavier than street
and lot lines.
5. Boundaries of the tract to be subdivided fully balanced and closed, showing all bearings and distances determined by an accurate survey in the field.
All dimensions, both linear and angular, are to be staked in the field by accurate control survey, which must balance and close within a limit of one in
ten thousand (10,000). If staking is to be provided after the recording of the plat, the subdivider shall meet all requirements established by Idaho
Code title 50, chapter 13.
6. The names, widths, lengths, bearings, curve data on centerlines of proposed streets, alleys and easements desired or necessary; the boundaries,
bearings and dimensions of all parcels within the subdivision intended to be dedicated to the use of the public; and the sizes, lines, dimensions,
curve data and number of all lots, blocks and/or parts reserved or excepted for any reason within the subdivision.
7. The widths of abutting streets and alleys, and their names (if they have any), the names and boundaries of all subdivisions which have been
previously recorded and are adjacent thereto, must be shown upon the plat offered for record. These adjacent subdivisions shall be shown as dotted
lines to show their relationship to the plat offered for record. If adjoining land is unplatted it should be indicated as such.
8. All linear dimensions shall be calculated to the nearest 0.01 of a foot and all bearings shall be calculated to the nearest ten (10) seconds of arc. All
curves shall be defined by the radius, central angle, tangent, arc, chord distances and chord bearings. The description and location of all monuments
shall be shown. Monuments shall be set in accordance with Idaho Code title 50, section 13.
9. All lots and blocks shall be numbered throughout the plat in accordance with Idaho Code.
10. Any excepted parcels within the plat boundaries shall show all bearings and distances, determined by an accurate survey in the field.
11. Location and description of cardinal points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referenced. In addition to
the requirements of Idaho Code title 50, chapter 13, the exterior boundary of the subdivision shall be tied to not less than two (2) recognized county
or city survey monuments.
12. The datum utilized for the final plat and construction drawings shall be stated on both the final plat and construction drawings.
13. The required forms shall be lettered on the plat for the following: registered land surveyor's "certificate of survey"; owner's dedication certificate with
notary public acknowledgment; the approval of the mayor and council as attested by the clerk; approval by the city engineer; approval by the
planning and zoning commission; and other certificates as required by Idaho Code.
C. Additional Materials: The final plat submittal shall also be accompanied by the following:
1. Private Restrictions: Copies of any private restrictions and/or covenants proposed to be recorded for the purpose of providing regulations governing
the use, building lines, open spaces or other aspects of development and use. This includes, but is not limited to, all easements to be recorded as
part of and/or intended to service the development.
2. Lot Area: Submittals shall include areas of all lots.
3. Water And Sewer Facilities Design: Design approval by the appropriate health agency, if other than the city, of the proposed water and sewer
facilities.
4. Improvement Drawings: Construction drawings and specifications prepared by a properly licensed engineer with details rendered in conformance
with the manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-1F of this chapter. A general utility sheet showing all utilities combined (i.e., sewer, water, storm
drainage, street lighting, etc.) shall be included in the set.
A professionally designed landscape plan is required. Landscape plans should be artfully and technically organized in a way that conveys
coherence, design, and organization. The landscaping should enhance the physical environment as well as the project's aesthetic character.
All final landscape plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect. Included on the landscape plan will be all plantings adequately defined by
species and size and all irrigation lines and irrigation water delivery methods including, but not limited to, pipe size and type, sprinkler size, type and
drip systems and placement of control details. Interfering utilities including all easements shall also be shown on the plan.
The drawings shall include sufficient, accurate topographic detailing of adjacent properties and roadway to adequately depict or address impact of
the development (e.g., span 50 feet beyond edge of properties' boundaries). All locations of regulatory signs, as classified by the "Manual On
Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD), shall be shown on the roadway plan sheets included as a part of the improvement drawings. A copy of
the landscape plan (drawn in accordance with regulations contained in this chapter and showing all overhead or underground power line
easements), as submitted to the city's planning and zoning department, shall be included in the improvement drawings package.
5. Ownership And Maintenance Agreement: Ownership and maintenance agreement for all common areas or areas of joint ownership.
D. Final Plat Review And Approval Procedures:
1. The final plat, after having been prepared in accordance with Idaho Code requirements and the provisions set forth herein, shall be submitted to the
planning and zoning director or his designee within eighteen (18) months after approval of the preliminary plat, unless a time extension has been
granted as herein provided in order to be reviewed by city staff and officials.
2. Final plat submission shall be made to the planning and zoning director or his designee for his review at least forty one (41) calendar days before the
planning and zoning commission meeting at which the plat is to be considered. The planning and zoning commission shall act on the application for
final plat approval as a business item on its agenda within thirty (30) calendar days from the first meeting at which the final plat was formally
presented, unless all concerned agree upon an extension of time.
3. The planning and zoning director or his designee shall transmit one copy of the final plat and/or improvement drawing(s) for review by departments
and agencies, or others as may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the approved preliminary plat. If no replies and/or preliminary staff
reports are received from any of the various departments or interested agencies within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of transmittal, approval
of the final plat by such department or agency shall be considered granted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 380/410
4. In the event the final plat does not substantially conform to the approved preliminary plat based on considerations listed in section 10-27-2 of this
chapter, the planning and zoning director or his designee shall so inform the subdivider and proceed to assign the final plat to the planning and
zoning commission agenda for its consideration of the plat as a revised/amended or new preliminary plat, as deemed most appropriate.
5. The planning and zoning commission may consider a final plat for approval, along with the improvement drawings associated with said plat. In all
cases the city council reserves the right to impose or sustain any reasonable condition it so deems necessary.
6. Notice of the approval or disapproval of the planning and zoning commission along with any other pertinent comments and/or recommended
conditions shall be submitted in writing to the subdivider and to the mayor and council. If approved, the final plat shall have endorsed thereon the
required approvals.
The council shall review the plat and consider the planning and zoning commission's recommendations at the next regularly scheduled council
meeting. If approved, the final plat shall have endorsed thereon the required approvals. If the council, however, receives the final plat for review
because of an appeal being filed on said plat, the council shall decide whether to approve the plat. In all cases the city council reserves the right to
impose or sustain any reasonable condition it so deems necessary.
7. At the time of approval and contingent upon the recording of the final plat, the city shall accept the dedications shown thereon.
8. Upon final approval and obtaining all required signatures the subdivider shall take the final plat to the county recorder for recording. One
reproducible copy, in mylar, of the plat must be prepared and filed with the city engineering department. The county recorder shall have attested the
content on the reproducible copy to be the same that has been recorded with the county. The final plat shall be filed with the county recorder within
one year after approval of the council, otherwise such approval shall become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and granted.
(Ord. 3573, 5-1-2006)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-27-4: SPECIAL SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENTS:
A. Infill Homes/Lots, Condos, Townhouses, Urban Neotraditional, Planned Unit And Other "Special" Developments:
1. Planned Unit Developments: A plat may be designed in accordance with provisions made in chapter 26 of this title excepting that no specific concept
or preliminary plan is required in addition to preliminary plat approval. The plat/plan sheet(s) shall label/identify the plat as being a PUD and within
the plat notes; a note shall summarize the nature of the variations from zoning standards that the PUD introduces into the plat design. If a residential
PUD is proposed in conjunction with (or later applied against/on a subdivision), the exceptions made in this section shall not be combined with the
exceptions made in chapter 26 of this title (the PUD section). In other words, a project may use the allowances in section 10-26-4 of this title in a
residential subdivision or the exceptions of this section, but not both together. (Ord. 4143, 9-15-2014)
2. Condominiums: Condominiums shall be created/executed via Idaho Code title 55, chapter 15 and shall be reviewed by the city's planning and zoning
department and engineering division for compliance/completeness. (Ord. 4189, 7-20-2015)
3. Reduced Sized Lot In RS Districts: Within a subdivision developed in an RS zone, building lots sized below normal minimum required size (termed
"infill lots") may be developed in accordance with the standards listed hereafter. Detached homes built on said lots are termed "infill homes", though
they might not be smaller than homes on regular sized lots in the same development. Furthermore, two-unit townhouses may be allowed without
requiring a conditional use permit to preauthorize emplacement of the same in a subdivision, in accordance with the standards listed hereafter:
a. The number of infill home or townhouse units does not comprise more than twenty percent (20%) of a subdivision if the same subdivision will also
contain detached single-family dwelling units. The homes or units may be grouped together in a subdivision or spread out amongst other lots.
b. The future locations of infill home or townhouse dwelling lots are designated on the preliminary plat.
c. Common party walls shall be constructed in accordance with the current building code adopted by the city of Nampa. Townhouses shall be
developed in accordance with regulations found in section 10-8-3 of this title.
d. The minimum lot size per individual infill home or each two-unit townhouse shall be at least two-fifths (2/5) that normally required in the RS zone
within which the residential structure is proposed. (For example, the minimum lot size for 1 unit of a 2-unit townhouse in an RS6 zone shall be
2,400 square feet according to that standard.)
e. Reduced lots shall not be factored into the subdivision minimum lot size average requirement stated in subsection 10-27-6F2a of this chapter.
f. Front, side and rear yard setbacks, pertaining to infill home or townhouse building lot(s), shall be per pertinent district standards. The side setbacks
between two (2) adjoining infill homes may be reduced below pertinent district standards, provided that the relevant plat also notes a one hour
protective, fire resistant easement will be between the building envelopes of those future infill homes and a building envelope is shown to identify
what separation between the two (2) units will be. Thus, this standard is applicable if the two (2) future infill homes will not be attached like
townhouses yet are proposed to be located closer than three feet (3') to the intervening, interior property line between them. Otherwise the side
setback between two (2) adjoining, but not abutting, infill homes shall be a minimum of five feet (5') (10 feet total) on either side of the property line
separating the two (2) units.
The city council may further approve reductions in required setbacks for special developments during review of a plat wherein the units will be
located. In such cases, the following conditions shall apply:
(1) In no case shall garages or carports be allowed closer than twenty feet (20') to the street giving access to a lot, although, the living space
(nonparking) part of the home may be closer than twenty feet (20') to the street. (Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
(2) If the council approves reduced setbacks in the plat review stage, then building envelopes reflecting council's allowances shall be depicted on
the final plat.
(3) Any "developer proposed" building envelopes be depicted on preliminary plats where possible, and as noted above, if approved, be likewise
noted on final plats (or portions of final plats where the provision for dwelling units was made).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 381/410
(4) Any setback area waived via de facto variance approval given by the council during plat review be transferred to another part of the plat in
equal measure. Such space shall be made into usable open space dedicated for use by "special" development lots in the subdivision.
B. Subdivision Within A 100-Year Floodplain: For any proposed subdivision that is located within or has part of its development proposed within a zone A
floodplain area, the subdivider shall provide the planning and zoning commission, as part of the normal preliminary plat application submittal, a
development plan of adequate scale that provides documentation that will show and explain at least the following:
1. Location of all planned improvements.
2. The location of floodways and the floodway fringe in accordance with sound engineering practices.
3. The location of the present water channel.
4. Any planned rerouting of waterways.
5. All major drainageways.
6. Areas of frequent flooding.
7. Means of floodproofing buildings.
8. The lowest floor (including basement) of any residential structure shall be elevated to at least one foot (1') above the 100-year flood line.
9. No subdivision or part thereof shall be approved if levees, fills, structures or other features within the proposed subdivision will individually or
collectively significantly increase flood flows, heights or damages.
10. Upon determination that buildings are planned within the floodplain or that alterations of any kind are anticipated within the floodplain area that will
alter the flow of water, the subdivider shall demonstrate conclusively that such development will not present a hazard to life, limb, or property,
adverse effects on the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel and not have an adverse impact on the natural environment or
public utilities. Floodproofing plans must be (individually) approved by the planning and zoning commission.
11. If only part of a proposed subdivision can be safely developed, development shall be limited to that part.
C. Subdivision For A Cemetery Or Columbarium: Property or structure which shall be used as a cemetery or columbarium shall be required to be platted.
A letter from an attorney that defines manner of management of the cemetery or columbarium (as well as whether they are to be used for human or
animal remains) shall accompany plat submittal plans and fees.
D. Areas Of Critical Concern:
1. Special Consideration: The development of any hazardous or unique areas that have been previously designated as areas of critical concern by the
planning and zoning commission as provided by Idaho Code shall demand that special consideration be given by the subdivider to assure that the
development is necessary and desirable and in the public interest in view of the existing unique conditions. The Planning and Zoning Commission
may, through due process, designate an area as hazardous or unique if one or more of the following conditions are present:
a. Unstable soils or slopes;
b. Unique animal, wildlife, or plant life habitat;
c. Particular or unique scenic value;
d. Historical significance;
e. Floodplains;
f. High ground water elevation;
g. Hazardous environmental conditions, either surface or subsurface; or
h. Other conditions which may be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission to be unique or of critical concern.
2. Plan Submission: The subdivider shall prepare and submit an environmental assessment (and mass grading and drainage plan if called for by City
Engineering) for those areas of critical concern as above noted along with the preliminary plat application materials.
3. Content Of Environmental Assessment: The content of the environmental assessment expectedly shall be prepared by a team of professionals that
will provide answers to the following questions:
a. What environmental impacts will probably occur (i.e., wildlife, plant life, social, economic, physical, etc.) as a result of the proposed development?
b. What corrective action or alternative plans could be developed so as not to significantly cause detrimental environmental impact?
c. What adverse effects of the proposed development cannot be avoided?
d. Review comments and correspondence from appropriate regulatory agencies shall be submitted to the City of Nampa Engineering Department.
(Ord. 3573, 5-1-2006)
E. Exceptions: The platting requirement and regulations governing for platting contained within this chapter shall not apply to any of the following:
1. A readjustment of property lines of a non-common lot as shown on a recorded final plat or established via a survey which does not reduce the area,
frontage, width or depth of each building lot/parcel below the minimum prescribed by applicable zoning standards. In the case of a readjustment, a
record of survey that conforms to Idaho Code title 55, chapter 19 shall be required. The following shall be included on the record of survey: (Ord.
4340, 9-18-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 382/410
a. The original plat lot or parcel line(s) involved in the request;
b. The proposed location(s) of the altered line(s);
c. The square footage of the adjusted lots, correct street names, positions of all existing buildings, a note giving the zone standard in effect for the
area or as specifically approved;
d. Depiction of all existing easements of record pertinent to the property(ies) involved and any newly proposed easements;
e. Certification and acknowledgment of the owners of property involved in the request together with a copy of the surveyor's Idaho State certification
or with an imprint of the surveyor's seal or stamp witnessing that they are licensed in Idaho;
f. Certification that no utility lines exist within an easement that will be affected by the lot line and easement adjustment;
g. Any recorded easements needing to be vacated be so vacated, by official action via public hearing review and vote of the City Council.
2. One division of any original lot or parcel of land (after June 14, 1977, in the City's impact area or June 11, 2002, if in the City proper, as appropriate)
into not more than two (2) lots or parcels may be done, provided that each building lot or parcel resulting from such a split meets applicable zoning
standards in order to be considered by the City as "buildable" property. Any subsequent divisions will require filing for subdivision plat approval.
In the matter of a simple division of a platted lot or nonplatted parcel that does not involve a change to a recorded public right-of-way or easement,
the person desiring the division may execute the division via a metes and bounds description provided the description will close, does not change or
interfere with recorded rights-of-way or easements (public or private) and does/will not conflict with contiguous property boundaries. Said description
may need to be written by a professional land surveyor, attorney, real estate broker, title company or civil engineer. (However, note that a survey will
still be required for the property when and if an application for a building permit for a structure is later submitted for those new properties.)
3. Divisions occurring as a result of condemnation.
4. A division of land in the settlement of an estate or as part of and subject to a court ordered property distribution and layout.
5. A reduction in the number of lots (executed by a "density reduction survey") which does not otherwise violate any City ordinance(s).
6. A division into parcels greater than five (5) acres in size that does not require any new street dedications. (Ord. 3573, 5-1-2006)
7. A split of a lot or parcel annexed from Canyon County into two (2) parcels (even if a previous lot split had occurred prior to annexation and after June
14, 1977), provided that each building lot or parcel resulting from such a split meets applicable zoning standards in order to be considered by the City
as "buildable" property.
8. A one-time split of a subdivision lot into two (2) parcels, provided that each building lot or parcel resulting from such a split meets applicable zoning
standards in order to be considered by the City as "buildable" property. (Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
F. Short Plats: Proposed land divisions wherein either it is proposed to create three (3) properties or more from a parent lot or parcel, or, wherein a simple
property split is no longer deemed to be available to a property may be executed by filing for a short plat permit in accordance with the following
standards:
1. The short plat shall be for no more than seven (7) lots (partitioned from an original lot or parcel); and
2. The short plat's drawings shall portray all features required to be shown on standard preliminary and final plat drawings; and
Short plats will be processed as combination preliminary and final plats requiring a public hearing before the City's Planning and Zoning Commission
and approval by the City Council. The time frame for review and processing of short plats shall be the same as for standard preliminary plats. (Ord.
4189, 7-20-2015)
10-27-5: APPEALS OF ACTIONS ON PLATS:
An appeal may be made to the City Council of the Planning and Zoning Commission's decision to approve, approve with conditions or deny a proposed
preliminary plat as follows:
A. Any aggrieved person or party whose preliminary plat has been denied or approved with conditions unacceptable to that developer may appeal to the
Mayor and City Council for a hearing to review the action of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Director or his/her
designee must receive any such appeal within fifteen (15) days (by 5:00 P.M. on the fifteenth day) starting on the day following the Planning and Zoning
Commission's action in order to schedule an appeal hearing. A public hearing shall be scheduled before the City Council. The Council hearing shall be
regarded as de novo and, therefore, not limited only to consideration of evidence presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
B. Any aggrieved person residing or owning property within an area affected by a proposed subdivision may appeal to the Mayor and Council for a hearing
to review the action of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Director or his/her designee must receive such an appeal within
fifteen (15) days (by 5:00 P.M. on the fifteenth day) starting on the day following the Planning and Zoning Commission's action in order to schedule an
appeal hearing in front of the City Council. The Council hearing shall be regarded as de novo and, therefore, not limited only to consideration of
evidence presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
C. The City Engineer or Planning and Zoning Department Director may appeal to the City Council a preliminary plat decision made by the City's Planning
and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Director must file such an appeal within fifteen (15) days (by 5:00 P.M. on the fifteenth day) starting
on the day following the commission's action in order for the appeal to be considered valid. If properly filed, the appeal shall then be heard as an
advertised public hearing before the City Council. The hearing shall be regarded as de novo and, therefore, not limited only to consideration of
evidence/information originally presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 3573, 5-1-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 383/410
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-27-6: GENERAL DEVELOPMENT AND IMPROVEMENTS; REQUIREMENTS:
In order to be approved, subdivisions shall conform to the City's adopted zoning laws, the referenced manuals in subsection 10-27-1F of this chapter,
stormwater policy, and other relevant ordinances and regulations of the City.
The owner or subdivider of a subdivision development shall be responsible to construct or cause to be constructed, in accordance with City standards,
certain minimum improvements for any subdivision as listed in the manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-1F of this chapter. All required permits are the
responsibility of the owner and/or subdivider. Said improvements shall be emplaced within, completely along, and through the development (property). The
improvements described in this section shall be shown on the construction drawings of any subdivision and installed in accordance with the procedures
and requirements hereinafter designated.
Land which the planning and zoning commission determines to be unsuitable for subdivision because of periodic flooding, poor drainage, excessively
steep slopes or other features likely to be harmful to the safety, health and welfare of future residents, shall not be subdivided unless adequate methods as
approved by the city engineer are utilized to overcome these conditions.
A. Street Requirements: Arterial and collector streets shall be dedicated to the public in all cases. All other streets shall also be dedicated to the public use
except under special circumstances, private streets may be allowed. All proposed, platted subdivisions shall comply with the street design
specifications contained hereinafter and in the manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-1F of this chapter. All collector and arterial street frontages as
well as local roads shall be required to have vertical, rolled, or ribbon curbing, gutter, sidewalk, bio swale, landscaping and paving improvements as
required by the manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-1F of this chapter. Both planning and engineering staffs may recommend future street
locations, extensions and connections for areas not specifically mapped by the city's street master plan. Additionally, all lots/parcels developed/"built
out", or proposed to be developed/"built out" with structures thereon shall have, or be demonstrated to have, legal access to a public street (this will
have to occur before the city will sign a plat when reviewing a newly proposed subdivision or otherwise will have to occur before the city will/may issue
or approve construction of any structures on that lot/parcel, as iterated in the definition of "property" in section 10-1-2, "Definitions", and subsection 10-
1-7B1 of this title).
1. Subdivisions With Private Streets; Other Requirements: Subdivisions with private streets shall be processed in the same manner as subdivisions
with public streets, subject to the following conditions:
a. Provision should be made for the future operation and maintenance of the private roadways in the proposed development since the city will not
maintain the roadways. Prior to the city accepting the roadways as public and maintaining them, they may have to be upgraded to city public street
standards. A local improvement district (LID) may be imposed by the city on those owners/users of the street(s) to pay for and execute the
upgrade(s) prior to the city accepting it. Notification of this requirement shall be noted on the plat.
b. The street(s) in the subdivision meets all applicable public road construction standards as detailed in the manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-
1F of this chapter.
c. Within the impact area the council may recommend to the county that the standard improvement requirements for a subdivision (e.g., curb, gutter
and sidewalk, streetlights, landscaping, street widths and paving, pressure irrigation, sewer, water) be waived. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
2. Subdivisions With Public Streets; Requirements: Subdivisions with public streets shall be reviewed in accordance with standards contained
hereinafter and within the manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-1F of this chapter.
a. City Transportation Plan: All streets in the subdivision must conform to the master transportation plan of the city and any adopted neighborhood
street plans. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street or railroad, the planning and zoning commission may
require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots
with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of
through and local traffic.
b. Stub Streets: Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall be such that said streets extend to
the boundary line of the tract to make provision for the future extension of said streets into adjacent property areas in accordance with the city's
master street plan or the city engineer's requirement(s). A reserve strip may be required and held in public ownership between the tract boundary
and the stub extension. Proper provision for a temporary or permanent turnaround at the end of the stub connection shall be made. Any such
turnaround shall be subject to acceptance by the Nampa fire department.
c. Traffic Impact Study: A traffic impact study (TIS) shall be submitted by the applicant or his/her representative/engineer in accordance with the
manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-1F of this chapter or when required by the planning and zoning commission, council, city engineer, or
planning and zoning department.
3. Sign Criteria: All traffic control and street name signs shall be constructed and installed by the developer. All signs and barricades shall meet the
requirements of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD) and applicable city of Nampa standards. All regulatory and street name
signs shall be in place prior to issuance of any building permits for the project. Street name signs on local streets in subdivisions shall show address
number ranges and directional designations (i.e., E for east, N for north, S for south, or W for west).
4. Dedication Of Streets: All streets within a subdivision shall be dedicated for public use unless proposed and approved by the council to be private.
The dedication of half streets in any subdivision is prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity
with the other requirements of these rules and where the council determines it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the
adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever there is an existing half street right of way adjacent to a tract to be developed and/or subdivided, the other
half of the street right of way shall be platted within such new tract. Gating or other closure of public rights of way within or at the edge of a
subdivision shall not be allowed. Nor shall gating or blockage of public right of way be allowed elsewhere unless specifically executed by the city for
safety reasons or as part of an approved street vacation request.
5. Right Of Way Requirements: New public streets shall have the following minimum right of way widths per the street designation as defined in the
city's design policy:
Right Of Way
Classification/Type
Right Of Way
Span/Width Required
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 384/410
Local streets - with parking on both sides 56 feet
Collector 80 feet
Minor arterial 100 feet
Section line-arterial 100 feet
6. Permanent Access Points: Any subdivision of single or two-unit (duplex or townhouse) detached structures with, or proposed to contain, thirty (30) or
more lots shall have two (2) or more permanent access points (ingress/egress) that connect to a roadway. During subdivision construction, this may
require that a developer emplace a temporary access and/or turnaround that can be moved or replaced as the project develops.
When a developer installs a second ingress/egress, they can eliminate the required temporary access(es) to the subdivision. Depiction of either of
the two (2) accesses into another adjacent parcel shall not be acceptable unless the access is shown connecting to another stub street in another
city subdivision that has access to a roadway.
B. Alleys And Easements: All alleys within a subdivision shall be dedicated for public use. Alleys shall be designed according to the manuals referenced in
subsection 10-27-1F of this chapter. Easements shall be established in accordance with standards contained in subsection 10-27-1F of this chapter.
(Ord. 3573, 5-1-2006)
C. Blocks/Subdivision Street Travel Distances:
1. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined by the guidelines outlined herein, the manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-1F of this
chapter, the respective zoning requirements for minimum lot size, lot widths, lot depths and street frontage, access availability/restrictions, circulation,
general sight visibility and safety issues, topography, and boundary limitations.
2. Maximum allowable intra (inner) subdivision street length/travel distance (i.e., block length) shall be regulated by the following standards:
a. Travel distance shall not exceed five hundred feet (500') midpoint to midpoint of either intersection or angle point when lot widths are sixty five feet
(65') or less for said block. For curved street under this subsection with angles greater than thirty degrees (30°), travel distance shall not exceed
one thousand feet (1,000'); or
b. Travel distance shall not exceed six hundred fifty feet (650') midpoint to midpoint of either intersection or angle point for blocks with lots sixty five
feet (65') to eighty feet (80') in width. For curved streets under this subsection with angles greater than thirty degrees (30°), travel distance shall
not exceed one thousand three hundred feet (1,300'); or
c. Traffic calming devices of at least forty two feet (42') in length, or as allowed/specified in the city's adopted subdivision engineering standards, may
be considered as the equivalent of a distance change.
3. Exceptions to the foregoing standards may be granted by the city engineer under one or more of the following circumstances:
a. The boundary of the property, or a portion thereof, prevents a common layout with angles or intersections; or
b. The topography of the area wherein a street is proposed, by introducing intersections or angles to a street's design, will expectedly create an
unreasonable burden for future adjacent lot owners - either because of grades or drainage pattern(s). (Traffic calming should be utilized, as
appropriate, in such instances.); or
c. The property is considered "infill", as that term is defined in this chapter, and meets the design exceptions provided for infill development; or
d. The majority of building lots in a given block section are eighty feet (80') or wider. (Ord. 4189, 7-20-2015)
D. Lots: Subdivision lots shall be designed/identified according to the manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-1F of this chapter.
Double frontage lots shall be prohibited except where unusual topography, limited access to arterial streets or other conditions make it impossible to
meet this requirement. A fifteen foot (15') wide planting strip (developed in accordance with chapter 33 of this title) shall be planted and maintained
adjacent to all lots that would otherwise have double/reverse frontage bordering public or city of Nampa approved local, public and/or private streets
that are not deemed corridor streets (where the 25 foot strip is instead required). The planting strip shall be landscaped in accordance with section 10-
33-4 of this title and shall be perpetually maintained through a homeowners' association. A plan for the landscaping, as already noted elsewhere in this
chapter, is required to be submitted in conjunction with the plat application materials.
All remnants of lots below allowed minimum lot size, according to the pertinent zoning district's regulations, that are left over after the subdividing of a
larger tract, must be added to adjacent lots rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels, or, may be used as common areas for children to play or
any other typically parklike, open space use.
Any subdivision with any amount of common area or land, which is not for sale as a buildable lot, shall establish a homeowners' association to provide
for maintenance of such property. Any such property shall be developed and maintained in accordance with "vision clearance" as defined in section 10-
1-2 of this title, and earthen berms shall be considered a fence for the purposes of definition of "vision clearance" as defined in section 10-1-2 of this
title.
The provision of subdivision amenities such as/including, but not limited to: open space (e.g., tot lots, playgrounds, park area, walking path areas,
water features, etc.), storage areas (e.g., for RVs, units similar to ministorage facilities, etc.), pools and clubhouses, etc., by a project developer shall
be held in common by property owners collectively and severally and shall not be retained in private ownership by a developer once the subdivision is
turned over to a homeowners' association. Furthermore, no subdivision feature shall be used, operated, or kept as a private business enterprise by a
developer which, by virtue and effect of its use, operation or ownership or through the covenants (CC&Rs) of the subdivision shall obligate property
owners including residents therein to pay fees from their private incomes or from HOA dues to a developer for the feature. (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
E. Stormwater:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 385/410
1. The stormwater system within a subdivision shall be approved in accordance with the manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-1F of this chapter or
as otherwise directed by the city engineer. Said policies shall be subject to regulations of the state health department division of environmental
quality, the federal environmental protection agency and the Idaho department of water resources as well as any other state and federal agencies
having jurisdiction over stormwater runoff and/or discharge.
F. RS6 And RS7 Zones; Residential Lot Compatibility:
1. Subdivisions Within City Limits: Any newly proposed single-family subdivision that is proposed to be located within city limits or proposed for
annexation into the same with an RS6 or RS7 zone designation, and that is abutting or within eighty five feet (85') of the property line(s) of a
recorded single-family residential city subdivision or one that has at least still valid preliminary plat approval, or an approved county subdivision
recorded after June 14, 1977, shall meet the compatibility requirements listed within this section, except as hereinafter exempted:
A newly proposed subdivision's lots (typically the periphery ones) need not meet the requirements of this section if either:
a. A signed waiver is obtained from the developer(s) of the "preexisting subdivision" and all the impacted property owners of lots within that
"preexisting subdivision" that abut the newly proposed subdivision; and/or
b. Proposed lot(s) would abut a planned unit development (PUD) lot (or when a proposed PUD lot would abut a standard lot), then lot compatibility
review is not required between the PUD and the subdivision. Average building lot area of an RS6 or RS7 zoned subdivision shall be determined by
dividing the total land area of a subdivision development by the acreage of all new (newly proposed) building lots (exclusive of unusable parts of
lots devoted to waterway easements, rights of way dedications, pedestrian paths) proposed within that same development.
2. Subdivision Lot Compatibility Requirement (Average And Perimeter Lot Areas):
a. In any RS6 or RS7 zone, the weighted average "building lot" size for a new standard subdivision development of five (5) lots or more, in its
entirety, shall be at least eight thousand (8,000) square feet. When calculating the average, twenty percent (20%) of the smallest and twenty
percent (20%) of the largest building lots in that subdivision shall be excluded.
b. Between subdivisions that are one hundred feet (100') apart or less: If the area of a preexisting or already preliminarily platted residential lot is
eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet or smaller, then the area of any newly proposed lot in a newly proposed RS6 or RS7 subdivision
shall be required to be equal to or greater than said lot. This requirement shall not be applied between phases of the same subdivision that were
all shown as part of the same preliminary plat.
c. Between subdivisions that are eighty five feet (85') apart or less: If the area of a preexisting or already preliminarily platted lot is over eight
thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet, then the area of any newly proposed lot in a newly proposed RS6 or RS7 subdivision shall be required
to be sized equal to or greater than eighty percent (80%) of the preexisting lot's area to a maximum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. This
requirement shall not be applied between phases of the same subdivision that were all platted via one preliminary plat.
d. When determining subdivision separation, distance shall be calculated based on where the edge of one subdivision's boundary lies versus
another's regardless of intervening physical features, rights of way or easements. Where lot lines or subdivisions abut or adjoin each other, but
there is a drain or canal easement between the properties and no intent is expressed to pipe (tile) the waterway, then the width of the waterway's
easement shall be considered the distance of lot separation.
G. Tree Planting: Local internal subdivision streets shall include trees in the right of way as required by the manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-1F of
this chapter or as may be required by the city council and recommended by the city forester. Tree planting in the landscape strips alongside a
subdivision's street frontage shall be in accordance with provisions noted in chapter 33 of this title.
H. Pedestrian/Cyclist Pathways/Trailways: The city may require the placement of bikeways, pathways, or trailways to encourage nonmotorized forms of
travel and to provide safe, convenient and aesthetic alternative travel routes to common destinations such as schools, parks and shopping centers.
Pathways shall be required, located, and designed per the city master trail plan, the manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-1F of this chapter, or as
required by the city staff or council.
1. Master planned pedestrian/cyclist pathways/trailways may be located on common lots or deeded lots to be owned and maintained by the city.
2. Maintenance of pedestrian pathways and surrounding common area grounds shall be by a subdivision homeowners' association, or in the case of a
single parcel or lot by that property owner; alternatively, those paths and adjoining property on land owned by the city shall be maintained by the city.
3. Any common areas associated with this section shall be open to the general public.
I. Common Areas: Ownership and maintenance agreements for common areas or areas of joint ownership shall be approved by the city council at the time
of final plat approval. Tax liability for such common areas shall meet with the approval of the county assessor.
J. Landscape, Screening And Vision Standards For Freeway, Arterial, Collector And Frontage Street Buffering: In order to improve the visual quality of the
streetscape, and to provide adequate protection from the street, landscaped buffer areas shall be provided between single-family residential lots whose
property lines are adjacent and parallel to collector and/or arterial streets. (The "buffer area" is a strip of ground between, and touching, the edge of the
right of way of the street[s] abutting the subdivision under consideration and those structures fronting the same street[s].)
A homeowners' association shall maintain the buffer strip. It shall be disclosed to private lot purchasers that will abut a buffer strip within a subdivision
that they must maintain the buffer and therefore not alter, build within it, or isolate it from view from the adjoining public right of way lying outside of the
subdivision. The buffer strip shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-1F of this chapter.
1. Required Perimeter Landscape Buffering:
a. A buffer strip is required to be a part of a subdivision development whenever a portion of that subdivision abuts a street identified as a collector or
arterial roadway by the city of Nampa functional classification map and/or street master plan. Such buffering shall be provided as outlined
hereinafter. That part of a proposed subdivision that will adjoin a local street shall also be landscaped. Such buffering shall be provided as listed in
the table below:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 386/410
Development Type
Roadway Type
Landscape Strip
Buffer (In Feet)
Single-family Local 15
Single-family Collector/arterial 25
Commercial Collector/arterial 15
Industrial Collector/arterial 15
Multi-family residential (2 plus units per building) Collector/arterial 15
b. Any proposed frontage roads adjoining and running basically parallel to a collector or arterial street shall be separated from the same by a
minimum fifteen foot (15') wide landscaped strip if those roads do not have lots accessing them that lie between the frontage road and a particular
arterial or collector street. Tree planting within that kind of a buffer area shall comply with zoning landscaping regulations in chapter 33 of this title.
c. All required buffer landscape strips shall be located/developed on the subdivision's private property developed inward into the proposed
subdivision starting from the property line where it abuts the edge of adjoining right of way. The landscape strip may contain berming and
landscaping (screening) but not fencing. The landscape strip shall not be a part of any common area or building lots in a subdivision established by
easement. Rather, the landscape strip shall be located within a separate lot owned and maintained by the homeowners' association (of the
subdivision that has the landscape strip).
d. Berming/fencing around subdivision entrances shall be designed to comply with vision clearance requirements detailed in chapter 1 of this title.
Landscape strip planting shall be in accordance with chapter 33 of this title. Where a berm is provided in a landscape strip, its minimum height
shall be three feet (3') high. The maximum slope for any berm shall be two foot (2') horizontal distance to one foot (1') vertical distance. Periodic
interruptions shall be made in any berming treatment as may be required by the city engineer to provide for storm water treatment.
e. Subdivision fences and/or walls are not allowed within a required landscape strip required along arterial or collector rights of way, nor shall a
subdivision fence be placed through actual building lots.
f. Sidewalk or pedestrian pathways along rights of way may be located within/upon the landscape area and shall be at least five feet (5') wide unless
required to be otherwise approved by the city engineer or in accordance with the manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-1F of this chapter.
2. Vision And Signage Clearance: Landscaping, trees and other site obstructions shall be regulated per the manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-1F
of this chapter or as directed by the city engineering department.
3. Fencing Along Exterior Subdivision Boundaries: The planning and zoning commission may require and the city council affirm or require that any
portion of a subdivision boundary that abuts neighboring properties be required to have up to six foot (6') high solid screen wooden or vinyl fencing
(either temporary construction or permanent or as otherwise required).
4. Fencing Along Waterways: Six foot (6') high chainlink fencing shall be emplaced adjacent to all water laterals (not farmer's ditches) in conjunction
with new subdivision development. To provide for maintenance (e.g., weed control) of the area of land between the fencing and the waterway, a
developer may propose one of the following methodologies:
a. Provide for a gate for each lot having the six foot (6') chainlink fencing abutting their rear property line to access the land; or
b. Provide one or more gaps in the fencing to allow multiple people to access the area between the subdivision fence and the top of bank of the
waterway being screened; or
c. Designate the land between the subdivision fence and the top of bank of the waterway being screened as a common lot (though it may contain an
easement controlled by the irrigation district) and provide for its maintenance by the associated subdivision's homeowners' association; or
d. Obtain a license agreement from an appropriate irrigation district in order to fence inside the water lateral's easement and consequently have all or
a portion of the land included as part of the private building lots adjoining the waterway (if any land remains between the fence and the bank of the
waterway, then it must be maintained); or
e. Cause any maintenance easement associated with the waterway to be vacated and the land once within the easement to be deeded to the
adjoining property owner for their use and maintenance; or
f. Introduce one or more gaps in the fencing to facilitate individual property owners or homeowners' association representatives or hired contractors
to access the easement area; or
g. Deed and dedicate the land in the easement to the city of Nampa. However, the city is and shall not be obligated to accept such a deed and
dedication.
K. Fire Protection: Central water lines and fire hydrants shall be provided in all subdivisions and be made fully functional in order to be able to provide
adequate fire suppression. All locations of hydrants shall be approved by the fire department and the engineering department. Fire hydrants shall be
factory painted "traffic safety yellow" in accordance with AWWA C502.
L. Out Parcels: Out parcels, created by the selling of land around and about an original "homesite"; so as to create separate land for creation of a new
subdivision (that would thereafter be separated from the old "homesite" property) shall be discouraged by annexation practice. Where possible, such
parcels that front a public road shall be required to provide right of way, street, sidewalk, and landscape strip improvements as normally required for
subdivisions by this chapter and chapter 33 of this title. (Ord. 3573, 5-1-2006)
10-27-7: CONSTRUCTION OBSERVATION:
The city of Nampa will provide documentation that work observed during construction was in general accordance with the project plans and specifications
and the manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-1F of this chapter. The city will prepare a set of reproducible record drawings complete with ties to water
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 387/410
valves and service connections using information provided by the developer and contractor. Any improvements deemed unsatisfactory by the city engineer
or his/her designated representative shall be corrected at the subdivider's expense. The city of Nampa's and developer's responsibilities are further
outlined in the manuals referenced in subsection 10-27-1F of this chapter. (Ord. 3573, 5-1-2006)
10-27-8: SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT:
The developer shall enter into a subdivision improvement agreement with the city prior to commencing development of the subdivision. Developers of
large, phased subdivisions may plat an entire subdivision and enter into a subdivision agreement for each phase prior to the construction of said phase.
The agreement shall be in force for a period of two (2) years from the date entered into, and may be extended by submitting a letter of request to the
mayor and city council for their decision.
Upon completion of each phase of a subdivision, the city of Nampa engineering department will provide the developer with a final correction notice ("punch
list"). The developer shall have ninety (90) days from issuance of that notice to emplace or correct absent or deficient items. If the developer is unable to
complete the project, the city may, at its discretion, cash any or all bonds and cause those items to be completed. Time extensions may be considered
upon submittal of a written and signed request by a developer to the city engineer.
Prior to the sale or transfer of ownership of any lot(s) within any new subdivision, the developer shall have placed all property pins of those lots being
considered for sale or transfer on the ground in the positions depicted on the pertinent recorded final plat. In all cases, property line locations shall be
defined prior to construction of any structure on a lot(s) within a subdivision. Street signage and a water system sufficient to meet fire department
standards for supplying fire suppression coverage shall be in place as required by plat conditions of approval. (Ord. 3573, 5-1-2006)
10-27-9: POSTPLATTING CONSTRUCTION:
A. Single-Family Detached Residential Subdivision Build Out: The city of Nampa will not issue building permits for construction or emplacement of houses
within any area or upon any property being proposed for development as a residential subdivision once a preliminary plat is filed on that same property
with the city. Building permits may be issued when that subdivision is fully approved by the city (or board of county planning and zoning commissioners
for plans being created within the city's impact area) and recorded with the office of the Canyon County recorder, or the subdivision application is
withdrawn. (Ord. 3573, 5-1-2006)
A developer/owner of a subdivision must provide financial security or the subdivision be completed in accordance with regulations in section 10-27-10
of this chapter. (Ord. 3829, 10-20-2008)
B. Nonsingle-Family Residential, Detached Subdivisions Build Out: The city of Nampa will not issue building permits for construction or emplacement of
structures within any area or upon any property being proposed for development as a nonsingle-family subdivision once a preliminary plat is filed on
that same property with the city.
Exception: Foundation and footing permits may be issued for nonsingle-family (e.g., apartment, commercial or industrial) structures proposed in new
subdivisions once:
1. Final plat approval for the involved property has been given by the city council.
2. Civil engineering plans have been received by the city and approved by the city engineering department, the developer/owner has received DEQ
"will serve" letter and city plan approval letter from engineering.
3. The building department, engineering department, fire department, wastewater department, and planning and zoning department have all expressed
consent that such permits may be issued.
4. Necessary infrastructure improvements (e.g., public water, sewer, pressure irrigation, and access road, fire hydrant emplacement and off site
improvements) for the buildings have been completed to the extent required by the engineering department and fire department of the city and
deemed by them satisfactory. (Final occupancy of any of the structures will be predicated on completion of necessary utility line and fixture
emplacement.)
5. All building permit and plan review fees have been paid and engineering inspection fees, if applicable, have been paid.
6. The developer(s)/owner(s) enters into an indemnification agreement with the city.
The city will not allow further construction to occur past footing and foundations on any building until all utility connection fees are paid in full for that
building.
The city of Nampa will not issue final occupancy permits for apartment or commercial type structures within any area or upon any property for which
a plat has been submitted to the city until the approved final plat has been recorded. (Ord. 3573, 5-1-2006)
10-27-10: FINANCIAL SECURITY AND GUARANTEE:
Final plat signature by the city of Nampa shall not occur in an approved residential, commercial, industrial or other subdivision until such time as the water
lines, fire hydrants, required landscaping, sewer, curb, gutter and sidewalk, property pins, pressure irrigation and stormwater systems are fully constructed
and tested with passing results for and within the entire subdivision and the street(s) within the same subdivision is(are) prepared and fully ready for
paving. The water lines must be fully and completely tested with passing results, activated and provide sufficient water for fire suppression as noted in
subsection 10-27-6K of this chapter. As an exception, security by way of cash deposit or letter of credit may be provided for paving, required common lot
and landscape buffer strips, and other minor miscellaneous improvements.
Regarding outstanding paving: The developer shall provide the city with either an approved one year irrevocable letter of credit or cash deposit at the
percentage listed below of the estimated cost of the required road surfacing which shall be filed with the public works department. The paving so covered
shall be placed within six (6) months from the date of recording of the final plat; provided, the council may extend the period by one month intervals upon
showing of just cause to the council by the subdivider. Landscaping that is integral to the stormwater system (including that necessary to meet best
management practices and the city of Nampa standards/requirements for stormwater collection, transportation, treatment and disposal) is exempt from
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 388/410
financial security requirements and must be substantially complete and functioning for consideration to be given to financial security for the other
landscape features.
Regarding outstanding required common lot landscaping and buffer landscaping: The developer shall provide the city with either an approved one year
irrevocable letter of credit or cash deposit at the percentage listed below of a developer's contract bid for the estimated cost of the required landscaping
which shall be filed or deposited with the city engineering department. The landscaping so covered shall be placed within six (6) months from the date of
recording of the final plat; provided, the council may extend the period by one month intervals upon showing of just cause to the council by the subdivider.
In the event that all landscaping or paving is not complete within the required six (6) month time frame, the city may withhold all remaining building permits
and execute said letter of credit or cash monies to complete any outstanding required improvements.
Once building construction within a subdivision has begun, it shall be halted once twenty five percent (25%) of the lots in that phase have received or been
issued building permits for primary structures (e.g., houses). In order for any further building permits to be issued, remaining street paving and landscaping
pertaining to the subdivision, as required by the city engineering department or fire department, shall be completed.
MINIMUM FINANCIAL SECURITY REQUIRED BY STAGE
Stage
Percentage Of
Remaining Improvements
Prior to final plat signature by the city 150 percent
"Punch list" items 200 percent
All monetary amounts and estimates to complete must be approved by the city engineer or his representative.
The owner and/or subdivider shall guarantee all public subdivision improvements for a one year period following the date of acceptance by the city. Any
defects discovered or repairs required during the one year guarantee period, due to faulty workmanship or materials shall be corrected at the expense of
the owner and/or subdivider, and shall be completed in a timely manner as directed by the city of Nampa, but in no case shall the correction period exceed
ninety (90) days. (Ord. 3829, 10-20-2008)
10-27-11: DEDICATIONS:
All streets, alleys and required easements within the subdivision must be dedicated for public use (unless approved otherwise by the city council). Land
lying in the proposed subdivision's boundaries that abuts a public right of way shall be dedicated as per the city engineer's requirements in consultation
with the city master street plan.
Dedication or provision of easement of and for all other public open/pathway/trailway space within the subdivision will be as required in accordance with
the Comprehensive Plan of the City and per expressed requirement from the City Engineer, Planning and Zoning Commission and/or Council. Where this
plan calls for a larger amount of public space than the subdivider can be reasonably expected to dedicate, the land needed beyond the subdivider's fair
contribution is to be reserved for acquisition by the City, provided such acquisition is made within five (5) years from the date of approval of the subdivision.
The action of the Mayor and Council in exercising this power to compel dedication of public open space shall take place only after a public hearing has
been held. Anyone aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor and Council may have the decision reviewed by a court of competent jurisdiction.
Dedication of right-of-way where it splits one or more existing lots or parcels shall require filing of a subdivision plat. Such plat shall show the proposed
right-of-way together with the leftover parcels/lots to either side along the road's entire length. (Ord. 3573, 5-1-2006)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-27-12: CORRECTING/VACATING/AMENDING PLATS:
A. Re-Plat Or Amended Plat: Hereinafter a re-plat or amended plat are synonymous (i.e., revising a plat or re-platting refers to the
updating/altering/modifying of a preliminary plat).
B. Amending A Preliminary Plat After It Is Approved: An amended plat design, application materials and method of filing shall be executed in accordance
with the regulations established in this chapter in order to have the changes become valid and recognized.
Nevertheless, design changes to approved preliminary plats made prior to final plat approval and recording and incorporated within a final plat design
shall not require rehearing of the original preliminary plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission (or City Council if they already reviewed the
preliminary plat) if the proposed design change(s), does(do) not:
1. Propose lots that are less than the minimum lot size required in the zoning district(s) pertinent to the land within a plat's boundaries; and/or,
2. Reduce the average building lot size of the entire subdivision being platted below the minimum allowed by Code; and/or,
3. Increase the number of building lots by more than ten percent (10%) of the original request; and/or,
4. Substantially alter the alignment of the subdivision's ingress/egress access points and/or connectivity of the subdivision's roadway network and/or realign
the internal street network such that building lots formerly fronting one street now front a different street; and/or,
5. Reduce the lot compatibility of perimeter lots below the minimum allowed by Code; and/or,
6. Alter the position of the exterior boundaries of the preliminary plat as already approved; and/or,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 389/410
7. Violate the terms of a development agreement.
(In order to "lock in" a plat's design, a development agreement should be used at the time of annexation or rezoning when a plat is filed in
conjunction with one of those kinds of requests.)
C. Dividing Platted Property After Final Plat Is Recorded:
1. Splitting Property Into Three Or More Parcels: As iterated in subsection 10-27-4E1 of this chapter, in cases where a subdivision final plat has been
recorded after June 11, 2002, any of the non-common space lots therein may be divided one time into no more than two (2) parcels without necessity
to plat the proposed land division. Any one-time divisions of any of the non-common lots in any recorded subdivision, and/or any lot line adjustments
internal to a subdivision may be executed by filing of a record of survey and associated legal descriptions with the County.
However, further (proposed) divisions of lots as originally platted shall require that a (new) subdivision plat (preliminary and final) be filed for and
approved by the City just as done for the original plat. Such a plat may be processed as a "short plat" if it involves seven (7) or fewer lots unless a
substantive or material change is being proposed to the original plat's notes and/or the plat contemplates changing the original plat's external
boundaries and/or converting one, or both, of the resultant parcels into a common property from a privately held property or vice versa.
D. Correcting Plats:
1. Affidavits Of Correction: Affidavits of Correction may be used to execute corrections to plats that are strictly/truly scriveners errors (i.e., typos, minor
changes to mapping, etc.) and thus do not have the effect of changing a plat's exterior boundaries, a recorded plat's notes, or, the numbering
scheme used for lots and/or blocks in a subdivision.
2. Vacation To Modify Plat: While a vacation request may be used to edit plat notes in accordance with State law, the City of Nampa, having authority,
requires that modification or deletion of plat notes appearing on a final plat be modified only by re-platting once that final plat is recorded unless no
lots in the subdivision to which the plat pertains have been sold/conveyed from the developer (i.e., the developer is still the sole owner of lots in the
subdivision), in which case a vacation process through the City's Council may be used to authorize the proposed note amendment(s).
(Alternatively, a re-plat of a subdivision may also serve to vacate easements and/or rights-of-way when filed, approved by the City, and then
recorded.)
3. Vacation To Erase Easement Or Right-Of-Way: Vacation approval shall be required in order to either erase some or all or part of an easement or
right-of-way. Vacation approval shall be required in order to move the location of all or part of an already platted and recorded right-of-way or
easement. Processing of vacation requests for easements and/or rights-of-way shall be executed in accordance with provisions of Idaho State Code.
Right-of-way vacations shall be done by ordinance of the City Council and approved first by the same during a public hearing.
4. Re-Platting Of Original Plat: Re-platting shall be required in order to execute a material or substantive change to a plat (i.e., to a plat's exterior
boundaries, changes to a recorded plat's notes, or, a change to the numbering scheme used for lots and/or blocks in a subdivision). As allowed by
subsection 10-27-4E of this chapter, property lines internal to a subdivision may be adjusted or receive the effect of being erased, by a record of
survey property line adjustment or density reduction survey. (The City acknowledges that a record of survey line adjustment or density reduction
does not actually move or delete the original subdivision line(s) being affected thereby; however, the City treats the action as if a plat amendment
moving or erasing the lines had been executed.)
a. Land, exclusive of public right-of-way, that has been subdivided and platted in accordance with City law need not be vacated in order to be replatted.
b. Any re-plat(s) shall conform to current engineering plat language requirements in effect at the time of re-platting.
c. A re-plat may be handled as a "short plat" if it involves seven (7) or fewer lots, unless a substantive or material change is being proposed to the
plat notes or conversion of a common lot to or from a privately held lot (e.g., building lot). (Ord. 4340, 9-18-2017)
10-27-13: RESERVED:
(Ord. 3573, 5-1-2006)
10-27-14: FEES:
A. At the time of application, persons filing preliminary and/or final subdivision plats shall pay to the City a fee in an amount to be established by resolution
of the City Council. Also, as elsewhere noted, a separate fee amount to cover the expense of preparing any water or sanitary sewer system model
needed for the development in the preliminary plat stage after the plat has been applied for through the City shall be required. That fee shall also be
established by resolution of the Council.
B. Prior to commencing construction of a subdivision, the developer shall pay a City construction services and observation fee in an amount to be
established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 3573, 5-1-2006)
Chapter 28
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
10-28-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter establishes minimum standards and requirements for the occupation of mobile homes, as well as for the construction of mobile home parks
as they relate to adjacent land uses and the general purposes set forth in chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 2140)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 390/410
10-28-2: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Application: A petition may be filed requesting an exception to any portion of the standards of design or required improvements of this chapter. The
petition shall be filed with the planning and zoning commission and shall state fully the grounds for request.
B. Commission: The commission may approve an exception to any portion of the standards of design or required improvements set forth herein where the
applicant can show that: 1) due to topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such
provisions, and 2) the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare nor injurious to other property in the vicinity. The reasons for
granting any exception shall be stated in writing in the minutes of the commission.
C. Appeal: A decision of the commission may be appealed to the council by the petitioner, the city or other interested party within fifteen (15) calendar days
of the decision. The appeal shall be written and filed with the planning director, who shall notify the appellant of the hearing date scheduled by the
council. If an appeal is not submitted within fifteen (15) calendar days, the decision shall be conclusive, and no further right of appeal to the council
shall exist. (Ord. 2140)
10-28-3: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS FOR MOBILE HOMES:
A. Mobile Home Parks: It shall be unlawful for any person to park a mobile home within the city, whether on private or public premises or streets, for the
purpose of human habitation unless in a mobile home park.
B. Homes Parked Prior To June 1, 1970: An exception shall exist for the following mobile homes used for residential purposes on private property and
parked prior to June 1, 1970:
1. Mobile homes temporarily located in conjunction with a dwelling in accordance with section 10-1-12 of this title, provided all sanitation requirements
are met, and where either the sanitary facilities of a private residence are available to the mobile home occupants, or the individual mobile home has
sanitary facilities of its own which meet city requirements.
C. Caretakers In Industrial Zones: Provided they comply with city sanitary regulations, an exception shall exist for mobile homes used for residential
quarters for watchmen or caretakers located on the premises of an industrial establishment in any industrial zone.
D. One Mobile Home Per Site: It is unlawful for any person to maintain two (2) or more occupied mobile homes on a single legal building site, other than in
a mobile home park. (Ord. 3354, 6-7-2004)
E. Parking On Public Property: Except for emergency purposes, parking mobile homes is prohibited at all times on public premises or streets.
F. Mobile Homes Permitted: All mobile homes moved into the city for installation on spaces within mobile home parks shall conform to the following
standards:
1. No mobile home shall be installed on a space within a mobile home park unless it: a) bears the insignia of approval of the U.S. department of
housing and urban development (HUD) certifying that it was built in compliance with federal mobile home construction and safety standards; or b)
does not bear an insignia of approval of HUD, but has been issued a certificate of compliance from the administrator of the division of building safety
of the state of Idaho certifying that the home has been rehabilitated and meets the rehabilitation requirements of Idaho Code section 44-2503. (Ord.
3805, 7-21-2008)
10-28-4: SKIRTING, ADDITIONS AND ALTERATIONS:
Skirting of mobile homes is required and shall be such as to not create a fire hazard nor provide a harborage for rodents.
No permanent additions, except as provided in this chapter, shall be built onto, or become part of, any mobile home. (Ord. 2140)
10-28-5: GENERAL CONDITIONS AND LIMITATIONS:
A. Area: The minimum land area necessary to establish a mobile home park shall be five (5) acres.
B. Density: Density shall not exceed six (6) mobile homes per gross acre. If it is determined by the commission that a street widening or terminating
dedication is necessary, the amount of land dedicated shall be subtracted from the gross site area when calculating the proposed density.
When a mobile home park is located adjacent to a waterway, gross site area shall not include property behind the edge of the bank. When waterways
are fenced, property behind such fence shall not be included as a part of gross site area.
C. Yard Requirements: The setback required in each instance shall be a line parallel to and measured at right angles from the front, side or rear property
line. The front and rear building setback lines shall extend the full width of the property. No building, structure or mobile home shall be located so that
any part extends into the area between the building setback line and the property line. Fences and signs may be placed within the aforementioned area
as an exception to this subsection.
Mobile homes and other structures within mobile home parks shall set back at least ten feet (10') from any interior property line. The setback from any
abutting public street shall be at least twenty feet (20') from the property line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 391/410
In any required yard through which there is vehicle access between a public or private parking area and a street, no fence, wall, hedge or other
vegetation shall be permitted which materially impedes vision from a public sidewalk to vehicles backing from said parking area(s) across the public
sidewalk.
D. Boundary Development: The commission has authority to require an ornamental, sight obscuring fence or wall of not less than five feet (5') nor more
than six feet (6') in height, and/or earthen berm or evergreen planting of not less than five feet (5') in height, to surround the mobile home park in
instances where it is felt that such requirement will enhance the successful operation of the park and the surrounding area, and/or secure safety of
residents. Such fence, wall, berm or planting may be placed up to the front property line if adequate vision clearance for entrances and exits is
maintained.
E. Signs: The sign provisions of chapter 23 of this title shall apply to mobile home parks.
F. Parking Requirements:
1. There shall be one vehicle parking space at least nine feet by twenty feet (9' x 20') for each mobile home space, with clear and unobstructed access
to an accessway. Any parking spaces in the accessway shall not fulfill this requirement.
2. Guest parking shall be provided on the mobile home parking site (but not in the required accessway if said accessway has less than 32 feet of
surface roadway) at the rate of one vehicle parking space of the dimensions set forth in subsection F1 of this section for each mobile home space.
G. Access To Public Street: A mobile home park shall not be established on any site that does not have access to a public street with less than fifty feet
(50') of right of way. No mobile home space shall be located in such a manner that a public street must be used to maneuver the mobile home into that
space.
H. Emergency Sanitation Facilities: Each mobile home park shall be provided, for emergency purposes, with the sanitation facilities as prescribed by state
law.
I. Service Building: Service buildings which house sanitation facilities shall be permanent structures, complying with all applicable city and state statutes
regulating buildings, electrical installations and plumbing and sanitation systems.
J. Structures: Structures located on any mobile home space shall be limited to a storage building or carport. These structures may be combined as one
structure. No structural additions shall be built onto or become a part of any mobile home, and no mobile home shall support any building in any
manner. The words "structural addition" shall not be construed to exclude the construction of an awning or patio cover adjacent to a mobile home. All
structures shall be of a material, size, color and pattern so as to be compatible with the mobile home to which they are associated.
K. Skirting And Support Structure:
1. All mobile homes shall have compatible skirting of moisture resistant, noncombustible material or fire retardant wood, which must be maintained.
2. All spaces shall be provided with pedestals or blocking supports. Such systems shall ensure adequate support and be in compliance with the HUD
and manufacturer's specifications. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2826)
10-28-6: ACCESS AND INSPECTION:
A. Access: It is the duty of every occupant to give the park owner or his agent access, at reasonable times, to any part of the park or its premises for the
purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effectuate compliance with this chapter or any lawful order issued pursuant thereto.
It is the duty of the owners or occupants of mobile home parks and mobile homes contained therein, or of the person in charge thereof, to give the city
free access to such premises, upon notice to the management, at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection.
B. Inspection: The building official and planning director, or their duly authorized assistants, are authorized and directed to inspect and determine the
condition of mobile home parks within the city to enforce the provisions of this and other applicable requirements. (Ord. 2140)
10-28-7: PERMITTED USES:
No building, structure or land within the boundaries of a mobile home park shall be used for any purpose except as follows:
A. Mobile homes for residential use only, together with the normal accessory uses to residential living such as a patio slab, carport or garage, and a
storage building.
B. Private and public utilities.
C. Community recreation facilities, including swimming pools.
D. One fixed residence per park, to be used by a caretaker or manager responsible for maintaining or operating the property. (Ord. 2140)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 392/410
10-28-8: GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. City Regulations: City regulations regarding the following shall apply within the limits of any mobile home park: refuse disposal; insect, rodent and weed
control; pets and fire protection.
B. Liquefied Petroleum Gas: Liquified petroleum gas for cooking purposes shall not be used at individual mobile home spaces unless the containers are
properly connected by copper or other suitable metallic tubing. Liquified petroleum gas cylinders shall be securely fastened in place, and shall be
adequately protected from the weather. No cylinder containing liquified petroleum gas shall be located in a mobile home, nor within five feet (5') of a
door thereof. (Ord. 2140)
10-28-9: ZONING:
A. Prohibited Districts: No mobile home park shall be located in the following districts: RS, DB, DV, DH and IH.
B. Conditional Use Permit Districts: A building permit may be issued for the construction of a new mobile home park or the expansion of an existing mobile
home park in the following districts, upon the approval of the proposed location and the granting of a conditional use permit, as provided in chapter 25
of this title: AG, RA, RD, RP, RML, RMH and IL.
C. Permitted Districts: A mobile home park is a permitted use in the following districts: BN, BC, BF and IP. (Ord. 4070, 10-7-2013)
10-28-10: PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
Before construction permits are issued for a mobile home park, the preliminary site plan, required documents pertaining to the development, and the final
site plan shall have been approved.
A. Preliminary Site Plan: Four (4) copies of the preliminary plan must be submitted to the planning director at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the
commission meeting at which it is to be considered. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet
(1" = 100'), and shall be designed in accordance with this chapter showing the following information:
1. Name(s) of the person who prepared the plan, of persons owning and managing the land, and the name of the mobile home park and its address.
2. Scale and north point of the plan.
3. Vicinity map showing relationship of mobile home park to adjacent properties.
4. Boundaries and dimensions of the mobile home park.
5. Location and dimension of each mobile home space. Designate each space by number or letter combination.
6. Location and dimensions of each existing or proposed building.
7. Location and width of roadways and walkways.
8. Location of recreation areas and buildings, and area of recreation space in square feet.
9. Location and type of screening materials.
10. Location of point where mobile home park water, sewer and irrigation systems connect with the public system.
11. Location of available fire hydrants.
12. Enlarged plot plan of a typical mobile home space, showing location of the stand, patio, storage space, parking, sidewalk, utility connections and
landscaping.
B. Commission Action: The commission shall review the plan to determine compliance with the regulations contained herein. The commission shall
approve, approve conditionally or disapprove the preliminary site plan within thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the regular meeting at which it
was first formally presented unless an extension of time is agreed upon by all concerned. The reasons for such action by the commission shall be
stated in writing, a copy of which shall be sent to the developer. Approval of the preliminary site plan shall be for a period of one year.
C. Final Site Plan: Upon approval of the preliminary site plan by the commission, the developer shall submit to the planning director four (4) copies of the
final site plan and final copies of the required documents. Review and approval procedures for the final site plan and documents shall be the same as
for the preliminary site plan. Such plan shall be drawn at a scale not smaller than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') and provide in detail the
information required for preliminary site plans. A survey plat of the property shall be submitted in conjunction with the final site plan. In addition, detailed
and complete plans of the following shall be required:
1. Water, sewer, irrigation systems.
2. Garbage disposal provisions.
3. Road and walkway construction.
4. Drainage system, including topography of the park site with contour intervals of not more than fifty feet (50').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 393/410
5. Recreation area improvements.
6. Landscaping.
7. Lighting system for mobile home spaces and grounds.
No construction permits shall be issued for a mobile home park until final site plans have been approved by the commission.
D. Appeals: Any aggrieved person whose preliminary or final site plan has been disapproved by the commission may appeal to the council for a hearing to
review the action of the commission. Such appeal shall be submitted within fifteen (15) calendar days of action by the commission and accompanied by
a nonrefundable fee as established by council resolution.
E. Fees:
1. Persons filing preliminary and/or final site plans for mobile home parks shall pay a nonrefundable plan review fee which is established by council
resolution.
2. Prior to possession or occupancy of a newly constructed mobile home park, the developer shall pay a nonrefundable construction inspection fee.
(Ord. 2140)
10-28-11: SITE IMPROVEMENTS:
The following minimum park improvements shall be required within new or expanding mobile home parks:
A. Roadways And Walkways: Roadways with a minimum surfaced width of twenty four feet (24') shall be provided within mobile home parks if no parking
is allowed. If parking is allowed the minimum surfaced width of the roadway shall be thirty six feet (36'). Walkways of not less than three feet (3') in
width shall be provided along both sides of all roadways, from each mobile home space to the service buildings and recreational area(s) and from the
patio to the roadway. Walkways shall be separately designated and not used as part of the roadway.
Roadways and walkways shall be paved with a crushed rock base and asphalt or concrete surfacing according to structural specifications established
by the city engineer.
B. Patios: Each mobile home shall be provided with a patio having a minimum area of one hundred forty (140) square feet. The patio shall have a
minimum width of seven feet (7') and a minimum length of twenty feet (20') and shall be constructed adjacent and parallel to each mobile home parking
space. Patios shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or suitable hard surfaced material.
C. Electrical And Lighting: Electrical systems within mobile home parks shall comply with part 8 of the national fire protection association code number
501A and the national electrical code as adopted by the city. Wires for service to light poles and mobile home spaces shall be underground. Roadways
and walkways shall be lighted at night to provide a minimum of 1.5 candles of illumination.
D. Drainage: Provisions for drainage shall be made in accordance with plans approved by the city engineer. Existing off site storm drainage facilities or off
site facilities proposed by the developer shall have sufficient capacity to handle the storm water runoff from the park and other tributary areas resulting
from a storm having a 10-year return frequency. If the above condition is not met, the rate of storm water runoff shall not exceed the rate which existed
prior to development.
E. Recreation Areas: A minimum of two hundred (200) square feet of recreation area shall be provided for each mobile home space. This area may be in
one or more locations. At least one area shall have a minimum size of five thousand (5,000) square feet, and be of a shape that will make it usable for
its intended purpose. Recreation areas shall be suitably improved and maintained and shall be the kind necessary for the type of resident for whom the
park is intended. There shall be landscaping within open recreation areas not otherwise used for park purposes. Such open areas and landscaping
shall be continuously maintained.
F. Storage Areas: A fenced area shall be provided for each mobile home park for the storage of accessory items such as boats, vacation trailers, campers
and related equipment owned by park residents. Such items shall be stored in the storage area and not be parked beside the mobile home. The said
storage area shall contain a minimum of sixty (60) square feet per mobile home space. The required fence shall be six feet (6') high, sight obscuring
and contain a lockable gate.
In addition to the above, one permanent storage building containing a minimum of thirty two (32) square feet of floor area shall be provided for each
mobile home space. The building height shall not be less than seven feet (7') nor more than nine feet (9').
G. Sewage Disposal And Water Supply: Sewage and water systems shall comply with part 7 of the National Fire Protection Association code number
501A and the uniform plumbing code as adopted by the city.
H. Fuel Supply: Fuel supply systems shall comply with part 9 of the National Fire Protection Association code number 501A and the uniform mechanical
code as adopted by the city.
I. Utilities: All utilities shall be installed underground. Utility connections serving mobile homes shall be placed in accordance with the currently adopted
edition of ANSFI/NFPA 501A, standard for the installation of mobile homes including mobile home park requirements. (American National Standards
Institute/National Fire Protection Association.) (Ord. 2140)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 394/410
10-28-12: MOBILE HOME SPACES:
The minimum mobile home space requirements for a new or expanding mobile home park are as follows:
A. Average Size: The average size of a mobile home space shall not be less than three thousand (3,000) square feet, and no space shall be smaller than
two thousand two hundred (2,200) square feet. No space shall have a building or mobile home line width of less than thirty feet (30').
B. Setbacks: Mobile homes shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the edge of all accessways and shall observe the setbacks established in
subsection 10-28-5C of this chapter.
C. Adjacent Spaces: Minimum requirements between mobile homes:
1. End to end twenty five feet (25').
2. Side to side fifteen feet (15').
3. Structures situated in one space shall be separated by at least ten feet (10') from structures or mobile homes in adjoining spaces. (Ord. 3354, 6-7-
2004)
10-28-13: COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS AND OCCUPANCY:
A. Inspection: All roadway, utility and other improvements shall be inspected by the city. The park developer shall be responsible for the quality of all
materials and workmanship. Following inspection, if improvements do not meet city specifications and comply with the approved final site plan, the
developer shall be obligated to correct for compliance.
B. Possession Or Occupancy: No possession or occupancy of a mobile home park shall be allowed until all the required improvements are completely and
properly constructed. However, if the developer desires occupancy for a portion of the partially developed park, then he shall post a surety bond written
by a surety company authorized to do business in the state of Idaho in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost for
the completion of all improvements, pedestrianways, curbs, gutters, road surfacing, water and sewer lines and common facilities as shown on the final
site plan. Upon the posting of bond, occupancy may be granted upon a partially constructed mobile home park.
C. Estimates: All estimates of completion costs shall be submitted to the city engineer for his approval.
D. Duration Of Bond: The duration of any bond posted for the completion of improvements and development of mobile home parks shall be for a minimum
of two (2) years from the date of approval of the final site plan by the commission. An extension of time may be granted by the council upon application
by the developer, provided such application is submitted at least sixty (60) calendar days prior to the expiration of the bond and provided the issuer of
the bond is willing to extend the time of the assurance.
E. Default: In the event the developer defaults, fails, or neglects to satisfactorily install the required improvements within the time limitation, the council may
declare the bond forfeited and the city may install or cause to be installed the required improvements using the proceeds from the bond to defray the
expense.
F. Continuing Obligation: The park developer or his assigns shall be responsible for maintaining the mobile home park in accordance with the approved
management policies, covenants, conditions, restrictions and agreements previously approved by the commission. Any neglect to do so will be deemed
a violation and shall be enforced in accordance with section 1-1-7 of this code.
All maintenance of private drives, including, but not limited to, utilities, drainage, roadways and snow removal is the responsibility of the park owner.
(Ord. 2140)
Chapter 29
MANUFACTURED HOME REGULATIONS
10-29-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter establishes the minimum standards for the location and approval of manufactured housing. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2347)
10-29-2: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure attached to or located adjacent to a manufactured home such as awnings, carport, garages, porches or steps.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure that bears the department of housing and urban development certification that it has been constructed in
conformance with the mobile home construction and safety standards in effect at the time of its construction, and is to be used as a permanent residential
dwelling.
PERMANENTLY AFFIXED: A manufactured home which has the running gear and towing hitch, or similar devices, removed and is set up per
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 395/410
manufacturer's instructions on permanent footings with supports having an anchoring system that is totally concealed under the structure and complies
with department of housing and urban development standards. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2787)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-29-3: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The use of a multisectional (e.g., "double" or "triple wide") manufactured home as a permanent residential dwelling on an individual lot shall be permitted in
any zoning district of the chapter which permits installation of a single-family site built dwelling provided the following standards are met:
A. Is multisectional and at least twenty feet (20') wide.
B. Has a minimum floor area of one thousand (1,000) square feet.
C. Has roofing materials which are generally acceptable for site built housing. Any roofing materials may be used provided it has the appearance of a
nonmetallic shingle, shake or tile roof. Roofs shall also have a minimum slope of twenty five percent (25%) (3:12) and overhanging eaves.
D. Has siding materials which are generally acceptable for site built housing. Any siding materials may be used provided it has the appearance of wood,
masonry or horizontal metal siding. Reflection from horizontal metal siding shall be no greater than that from siding coated with white, gloss enamel.
E. Has a foundation of concrete or other material allowed by the uniform building code for site built homes which is aesthetically compatible with the
manufactured home having the appearance of site built construction. This means the fascia shall be an extension of the siding or be of materials
having the appearance of site built foundations such as brick, concrete or concrete block.
F. Is permanently affixed per manufacturer's instructions. Footings shall be of poured masonry extending twenty four inches (24") below grade.
G. Has a crawl space with the following minimum measurements: 1) eighteen inches (18") of clearance; 2) twelve inches (12") of clearance under beams;
and 3) an eighteen inch by twenty four inch (18" x 24") door.
H. Complies with all applicable lot size, setback, and other requirements of the zoning district in which it is to be located.
I. Provides two (2) off street parking spaces.
J. Has a single car garage, or a carport with an attached enclosed storage room.
K. Provides right of way improvements in the same manner as site built construction, in accordance with city policy.
L. Manufactured homes shall not be allowed in subdivisions where they are prohibited by restrictive covenants.
M. Manufactured homeowners or purchasers shall own or be purchasing the land upon which their home is to be placed. The owner or purchaser shall
record with the county recorder a nonrevocable option declaring the manufactured home as real property. These requirements shall not apply within
any duly approved mobile home park or to lands having mobile homes legally placed and resting on them prior to June 7, 2004. Exceptions may also
be granted as a part of a planned unit development approval.
N. Manufactured homes shall meet the requirements of the 1995 edition of the model energy code as adopted in section 4-2-1 of this code, or other
equivalent standard approved by the city.
O. Manufactured homes shall be provided with smoke detectors as required in the uniform building code, section 1210, "smoke detectors and sprinkler
systems", before final inspection and occupancy. Smoke detectors required in addition to those provided for in the department of housing and urban
developments, part 3280 of 24 CFR, "manufactured home construction and safety standards", may be of the battery operated type.
P. Manufactured homes not meeting standards in subsection B, E, J, N or O of this section shall not be allowed. Placement of manufactured homes not
meeting standards in subsection B, E, J, N or O of this section may be considered by the planning commission on a case by case basis in all other
residential use districts in accordance with the conditional use permit provisions of chapter 25 of this title. (Ord. 3354, 6-7-2004)
10-29-4: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
Accessory structures to manufactured housing shall be constructed in compliance with the standards specified by the Nampa comprehensive zoning
ordinance, uniform building code, and the department of housing and urban development standards. Structures shall be aesthetically compatible with the
home to which they are associated. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2347)
10-29-5: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 396/410
A. Application: Application shall be made to the planning director on a prescribed form. The completed application shall be filed with the planning
department. The application shall include all information necessary to determine conformity with required development standards of this chapter,
including: exterior dimensions, siding material, foundation fascia material, roofing material, eave overhang and any other applicable information. The
applicant shall also attach to the application: 1) a copy of the manufacturer's instructions for installation of the home on permanent footings, and 2) a
plot plan showing existing conditions and the proposed location of the home and other improvements at a scale of at least one inch equals twenty feet
(1" = 20').
B. Certificates And Inspection: The applicant shall sign the completed application certifying the manufactured home meets the required development
standards of this chapter and that site development will be in accordance with said standards and the plot plan submitted stating that once the
manufactured home is permanently affixed the applicant will comply with the requirement for the home to be declared as real property for taxation
purposes. These certifications shall be made prior to the moving of the home to the building site.
Following application and plot plan approval by the planning and building departments, the building official may issue a building permit for the footings
and foundation. Upon satisfactory inspection of the footings and foundation for the attachment of the manufactured home, the building official shall
verify, in writing, that all development standards have been met as certified by the applicant. The home may then be attached to the foundation in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and city codes for permanent utility connections and other building requirements.
Prior to occupancy a final inspection shall be made to assure proper attachment of the home to the foundation and placement of a proper foundation
fascia. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 2347)
10-29-6: NONCONFORMING MANUFACTURED HOMES:
A manufactured home which has been placed and maintained upon an individual lot prior to January 2, 1982, shall be a legal nonconforming use. Such
manufactured/mobile homes shall not be relocated within the city without conforming to all applicable provisions contained herein. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord.
2787)
Chapter 30
AREA OF CITY IMPACT
10-30-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of establishing an area of city impact is to identify a logical urban fringe area adjoining the city. The urban fringe area is realizing, or will
realize, development pressure that must be planned for in an orderly manner. (Ord. 2140)
10-30-2: CONSIDERATION:
Trade area, geographic factors, and areas that can reasonably be expected to be annexed to the city in the future were considered in the establishment of
the area of city impact. (Ord. 2140)
10-30-3: GEOGRAPHIC AREA:
The officially adopted geographic area of city impact is shown on exhibit A, attached to ordinance 3452 and adopted by reference. (Ord. 3452, 5-23-2005)
10-30-4: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
The comprehensive plans and subsequent amendments thereto, as officially adopted by Canyon County and the city, shall apply to the area of city impact
within the unincorporated area of the county. (Ord. 2140; amd. Ord. 3151)
10-30-5: ZONING ORDINANCES AND LAND USE:
The zoning ordinances, maps, and subsequent amendments as officially adopted by Canyon County shall apply to the area of city impact within
unincorporated areas of the county.
Rezone requests, conditional use permits, variances and vacations within the area of city impact shall be referred to the city for review and
recommendation in accordance with any adopted area of impact agreement between the county and city. (Ord. 3452, 5-23-2005)
10-30-6: SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE:
The subdivision ordinance and subsequent amendments as officially adopted by the city shall apply to the area of city impact within the unincorporated
area of the county as provided in the area of impact agreement between the county and the city1. (Ord. 3452, 5-23-2005)
Chapter 31
AIRPORT ZONING
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 397/410
10-31-1: DEFINITIONS:
AIRPORT ELEVATION: The established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area.
AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure, tree, or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for, or is otherwise hazardous to, the flight of aircraft in
landing or taking off at the airport.
AIRPORT REFERENCE POINT: The point established, and the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area, and so designated.
DEPARTMENT: The Idaho transportation department1.
DIRECTOR: The director of the Idaho transportation department or his agent.
HEIGHT: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this chapter, the datum shall mean sea level elevation unless otherwise
specified.
LANDING AREA: The area of the airport used for the landing, taking off, or taxiing of aircraft.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any preexisting structure, tree or natural growth or use of land which is inconsistent with the provision of this chapter.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only
horizontal guidance for which a straight in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned and for which nonprecision
approach facilities are planned or indicated on an FAA or military service planning document.
RUNWAY: The paved surface of an airport landing strip.
STRUCTURE: An object constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation to, buildings, towers, smokestacks and overhead transmission
lines.
TREE: Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by aircraft of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds maximum gross
weight and less, excluding turbojet powered aircraft.
VISUAL RUNWAY: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures, with no existing instrument procedure and no
instrument designation indicated on a federal aviation administration or military service approved airport layout plan or by any other FAA or military
planning document. (Ord. 2140)
10-31-2: ZONES:
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby established certain zones which include all of the land lying within the visual approach
zone, transition zone, horizontal zone and conical zone. Such areas and zones are shown on the Nampa municipal airport zoning map prepared by the
city engineer and dated November 15, 1971. The various zones are defined as follows:
A. Nonprecision Approach Zone: This zone is established at each end of all nonprecision runways for noninstrument landings and takeoffs. The precision
approach zone shall have a width of five hundred feet (500') at a distance of two hundred feet (200') beyond each end of the runway, widening
thereafter uniformly to a width of two thousand feet (2,000') at a distance of five thousand feet (5,000') beyond each end of the runway, its centerline
being the continuation of the centerline of the runway, and has a slope of twenty to one (20:1).
B. Visual Approach Zone: This zone shall have a width of five hundred feet (500') at a distance of three hundred feet (300') beyond each end of the runway
widening thereafter uniformly to a width of one thousand two hundred fifty feet (1,250') at a distance of five thousand feet (5,000') beyond each end of
the runway, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway, and has slope of twenty to one (20:1).
C. Transitional Zone: This zone extends outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven to one (7:1) from the
sides of the primary zone and from the sides of the approach zones. Transitional zones for those portions of the precision approach zone which project
through and beyond the limits of the conical zone, extend a distance of five thousand feet (5,000') measured horizontally from the edge of the approach
zone and at right angles to the runway centerline.
D. Horizontal Zone: A horizontal plane one hundred fifty feet (150') above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by
swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of each end of the primary zone of each runway and connecting the adjacent lines tangent to those
arcs. The radius of each arc, is: 1) five thousand feet (5,000') for all runways designated as utility or visual, and 2) ten thousand feet (10,000') for all
runways other than utility designated as nonprecision instrument. The radius of the arc specified for each end of a runway will have the same
arithmetical value. That value will be the highest determined for either end of the runway. When a five thousand foot (5,000') arc is encompassed by
tangents connected to adjacent ten thousand foot (10,000') arcs, the arch shall be disregarded on the construction of the perimeter of the horizontal
zone.
E. Conical Zone: A zone extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal zone at a slope of twenty to one (20:1) for a horizontal
distance of four thousand feet (4,000').
F. Primary Zone: A zone longitudinally centered on a runway. The primary zone extends two hundred feet (200') beyond each end of the runway. The
elevation of any point on the primary zone coincides with the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. The width of a primary zone is: 1)
two hundred fifty feet (250') for utility runways having only visual approaches, and 2) five hundred feet (500') for utility runways having nonprecision
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 398/410
instrument approaches. The width of the primary zone of a runway is that width prescribed in this subsection for the most precise approach existing or
planned for either end of that runway.
G. Approach Zone: A zone longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of the primary
zone. An approach zone is applied to each end of each runway based upon the type of approach available or planned for that runway end.
1. The inner edge of the approach zone is the same width as the primary zone and it expands uniformly to a width of: a) one thousand feet (1,000') for
that end of a utility runway with only visual approaches, and b) two thousand feet (2,000') for that end of a utility runway with a nonprecision
instrument approach.
2. The approach zone for utility runways with a nonprecision instrument approach and/or visual approach extends for a horizontal distance of five
thousand feet (5,000') at a slope of twenty to one (20:1).
3. The outer width of an approach zone to an end of the runway will be that width prescribed in this subsection for the most precise approach existing
or planned for that runway. (Ord. 2140)
10-31-3: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or maintained to a height in excess of the lower
limit for airport zones established in this chapter.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction, or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to thirty feet
(30') above the surface of the land.
B. Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation the more restrictive limitation shall prevail. (Ord. 2140)
10-31-4: USE RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter no use may be made of land within any zones established by this chapter in such a manner as to
create electrical interference with radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for fliers to distinguish between airport lights and
others lights, result in glare in the eyes of fliers using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport or otherwise endanger aircraft. (Ord. 2140)
10-31-5: NONCONFORMING USES:
A. Regulations Not Retroactive: The regulations prescribed by this chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other changes or
alterations of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of November 15, 1971, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any
nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction
or alteration of which was begun prior to November 15, 1971.
B. Marking And Lighting: Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is required to permit the
installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the director to indicate to the operators
of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport, the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the
expense of the owner. (Ord. 2140)
10-31-6: PERMITS:
A. Future Uses: Except as specifically provided in subsections A1, A2 and A3 of this section, no material change shall be made in the use of land and no
structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise established in any zone unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and
granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient information to allow it to be determined
whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit
shall be granted.
1. In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and the conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy
five feet (75') of vertical height above the ground, except when because of terrain, land contour or topographic features such tree or structure would
extend above the height limits prescribed for such zone.
2. In the areas lying within the limits of the instrument and noninstrument approach zones but at a horizontal distance of not less than four thousand
two hundred feet (4,200') from each end of the runways, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy six feet (76') of vertical
height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such instrument or noninstrument
approach zone.
3. In the areas lying within the limits of the transitional zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure less than seventy six feet (76') of vertical height above the ground except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or
topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transitional zones.
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting any construction, alteration or growth of any structure or tree in
excess of any of the height limits established by this chapter except as set forth in section 10-31-3 of this chapter or in violation of any other
ordinances of the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 399/410
B. Existing Uses: No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure,
or tree to be made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on November 15, 1971, or that it is when the application
for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted.
C. Nonconforming Uses Abandoned Or Destroyed: Whenever the director determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more
than eighty percent (80%) torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed
the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
D. Variances: Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his property not in accordance
with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, must obtain a permit from the director authorizing such action. Such variances shall be allowed where
literal application or enforcement of this chapter would result in practical difficulty and unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be
contrary to the public interest or create undue hazards to air flight. Any such special permits may be allowed subject to such reasonable conditions as
the director may deem necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter, including the condition that the owners of the structure or tree in question
permit the city to install, operate and maintain at its own expense such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to fliers the presence of any
airport hazard. (Ord. 2140)
10-31-7: ENFORCEMENT:
It is the duty of the director to administer and enforce these regulations. Application for permits and variances shall be made to the director upon a form
furnished by him. Applications required by this chapter to be submitted to the director shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by him.
Applications for action by the department of transportation shall be transmitted by the director. (Ord. 2140)
10-31-8: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the department may appeal any zoning regulation or order affecting such person or
taxpayer to the district court of the judicial district in which the airport hazard area involved is situated2. (Ord. 2140)
10-31-9: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
When there is a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same area,
whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement
shall govern and prevail. (Ord. 2140)
Chapter 32
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
10-32-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for recreational vehicle parks which are suitably developed for the placement and occupancy of recreational
vehicles for temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes on rented spaces with the necessary amenities.
These regulations are intended to enable the development of unique, well planned projects incorporating a variety of vehicle based housing for temporary
occupancy. It is also the purpose of this chapter to provide adequate regulations to preserve the residential character of the development and to prohibit
inappropriate and incompatible land uses. (Ord. 2244; amd. Ord. 3077)
10-32-2: ZONING:
A. Prohibited Districts: No recreational vehicle parks shall be located in the following districts: RS, DV, DB, and DH.
B. Conditional Use Permit Required: Recreational vehicle parks may be established or expanded in the AG, RA, RD, RP, RML, RMH, BN, BC, IP or IL
zones provided that a conditional use permit is first reviewed and approved by the commission authorizing their establishment or expansion. Public
hearing procedures for recreational vehicle park conditional use permits shall be the same as for mobile home parks. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
10-32-3: PERMITTED USES IN RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS:
A. One recreational vehicle on each approved lot or space. No manufactured homes or dwelling units of conventional construction shall be permitted on a
lot or space for living purposes. No recreational vehicle shall be allowed to occupy a space for more than one-half (1/2) year (180 calendar days).
Persons employed as bona fide construction workers may seek an extension of the one hundred eighty (180) days by filing a temporary use permit
application. The director or his/her designee may assign appropriate conditions to such a request if they approve the same, but in no case shall any
person/party be entitled to residency in an RV park for more than one year (365 calendar days). (Ord. 3805, 7-21-2008)
B. Manager's office and/or residence, which may be of conventional construction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 400/410
C. Recreation and social centers, which may be used for dancing, crafts, hobbies, games, childcare, meetings, banquets, theatrical performances, movie
viewing, and similar entertainment uses which are intended and used primarily as a resident amenity. Such facility may be of conventional construction.
D. Outdoor recreation facilities, such as parks, swimming pools, playground equipment, shuffleboard and tennis courts, putting greens, and similar
recreational uses intended for use by the residents of the park.
E. Common use laundry facilities, maintenance buildings, and security guard houses which may be of conventional construction.
F. Designated areas for boat or trailer storage which are used solely by the residents of the park.
G. Recreation center parking lots and guest parking areas. (Ord. 2244)
10-32-4: DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
A. A maximum density of twenty two (22) recreational vehicle spaces per net acre after deduction of existing and/or proposed public rights of way.
B. Recreational vehicle spaces at least one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet in area.
1. The minimum space width shall be at least twenty four feet (24').
2. The minimum space depth shall be at least forty feet (40').
C. A minimum setback of ten feet (10') from any portion of the recreational vehicle or related awnings to any exterior park boundary.
D. A minimum of seventy five (75) square feet of recreational open space and/or recreational facilities for each recreational vehicle space. Public or private
streets, vehicle storage areas, and exterior boundary landscaping areas shall not be included in calculating recreational open space.
E. A minimum of one automobile parking space for each recreational vehicle space.
F. A minimum of one visitor parking space for each ten (10) recreational vehicle spaces.
G. Visually opaque screening fences or walls surrounding three (3) sides of all canister type refuse collection facilities shall be provided.
H. Perimeter landscaping shall be provided. In addition, all areas within the park which are not hard surfaced shall be landscaped and maintained with
lawns, trees, and shrubs designed to provide privacy and noise containment and shall be equipped with adequate sprinkling or watering devices.
I. Access to lots or spaces shall be from the interior of the park.
J. Private service drives within RV parks shall be at least twenty feet (20') wide and paved (i.e., asphalt or concrete surfaced).
K. All recreational vehicle spaces shall be equipped with individual water, sewer and electrical utility connections. All applicable regulations of the state of
Idaho and city of Nampa shall be met, particularly, but not limited to, compliance with all building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, fire, and flood
damage prevention codes.
L. All utilities, streets, paved areas and landscaping must be completed with one year of the start of construction or as otherwise approved by the planning
and zoning commission. (Ord. 2244)
10-32-5: PROCEDURES FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK APPROVAL:
A. Informal Meeting: The developer shall meet informally with the city planning department staff to review tentative plan sketches and ideas for the
proposed park development and to advise the developer of the necessary procedural steps and requirements which must be complied with.
B. Plan Review And Approval: Before construction permits are issued for a recreational vehicle park, the preliminary site plan, required documents
pertaining to the development, and the final site plan, shall have been approved:
1. Preliminary Site Plan: Four (4) copies of the preliminary plan must be submitted to the planning director at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the
commission meeting at which it is to be considered. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch equals one hundred
feet (1" = 100'), and shall be designed in accordance with this chapter showing the following information:
a. Name(s) of the person who prepared the plan, of persons owning and managing the land, and the name of the recreational vehicle park and its
address.
b. Scale and north point of the plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 401/410
c. Vicinity map showing relationship of recreational vehicle park to adjacent properties.
d. Boundaries and dimensions of the recreational vehicle park.
e. Location and dimension of each recreational vehicle space. Designate each space by number or letter combination.
f. Location and dimensions of each existing or proposed building including service buildings for the recreational vehicle park.
g. Location and width of roadways and walkways.
h. Location of recreation areas, playgrounds and buildings.
i. Location and type of screening materials or other landscaping.
j. Location of point where recreational vehicle park water, sewer and irrigation systems connect with the public system.
k. Location of existing and proposed utility lines and easements, water and sewer lines, fire hydrants, fences, storm drains and facilities, curbs, and
other improvements.
l. Enlarged plot plan of a typical recreational vehicle space, showing location of the stand, utility connections and landscaping.
m. Any other data that the planning and zoning commission may require.
2. Commission Action: The planning and zoning commission shall review the plan to determine compliance with the regulations contained therein. In
considering approval of the development, the commission shall, among other things, make sure that such development will be compatible with the
surrounding area, that it will not produce a volume of traffic beyond the capacity of the surrounding street system, that requirements for utilities, off
street parking, traffic circulation and other public requirements will be adequately met and that the standards and intent of this section shall be
adequately complied with. The commission may require changes to be made in the plan. They may also require additional yards or buffers or other
improvements to be installed along with greater amounts of landscaping or parking spaces. Said changes may be imposed as conditions of approval
where it is determined by the commission that such changes are necessary to ensure that the development will be compatible with adjoining or
nearby uses.
The commission shall approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove the preliminary site plan within thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the
regular meeting at which it was first formally presented unless an extension of time is agreed upon by all concerned. The reasons for such action by
the commission shall be stated in writing, a copy of which shall be sent to the developer. Approval of the preliminary site plan shall be for a period of
one year.
3. Final Site Plan: Upon approval of the preliminary site plan by the commission, the developer shall submit to the planning director four (4) copies of
the final site plan and final copies of the required documents. Review and approval procedures for the final site plan and documents shall be the
same as for the preliminary site plan. Such plan shall be drawn at a scale not smaller than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') and provide in detail
the information required for preliminary site plans. A survey plat of the property shall be submitted in conjunction with the final site plan. In addition,
detailed and complete plans of the following shall be required:
a. Water, sewer, irrigation systems.
b. Garbage disposal provisions.
c. Road and walkway construction.
d. Drainage system, including topography of the park site with contour intervals which reflect the character and drainage of the land.
e. Recreation area improvements.
f. Landscaping.
g. Electrical system for recreational vehicle spaces and grounds.
4. Appeals: Any aggrieved person whose preliminary or final site plan has been disapproved by the commission may appeal to the council for a hearing
to review the action of the commission. Such appeal shall be submitted within fifteen (15) calendar days of the action by the commission and
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as established by council resolution.
5. Fees: Persons filing preliminary and/or final site plans shall pay a nonrefundable plan review fee which is established by council resolution. Prior to
possession or occupancy of a newly constructed recreational vehicle park, the developer shall pay a nonrefundable construction inspection fee. (Ord.
2244)
Chapter 33
CORRIDOR BEAUTIFICATION
10-33-1: DESCRIPTION AND PURPOSE:
Corridor landscaping standards are hereby established to ensure that the general appearance of Nampa's principal thoroughfares present an appealing
image to persons traveling their length. (Ord. 3182, 12-9-2002)
10-33-2: GENERAL LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
The purpose of landscaping is to provide partial relief from heat, noise and glare through proper placement of green plants and trees and to encourage
pleasant and attractive surroundings. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 402/410
A. Landscaping Defined: "Landscaping" means some combination of planted trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, flowers or lawns. The combination or
design may include plant materials as well as rock and such structural features as fountains, pools, artworks, screens, walls, fences or benches, but
such objects alone without natural plant materials shall not meet the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 3182, 12-9-2002)
B. General Scope Of Landscaping Requirements: Landscaping required within required yard/setback areas, according to individual district regulations,
shall comply with the requirements of this section.
Landscaping shall not be required on undeveloped portions of property or on vacant property; nor shall these standards be made to apply to singlefamily
residential dwelling lots/parcels unless by action of the commission and/or council as part of a conditional use permit, development agreement or
planned unit development approval procedure.
1. In zones/districts which require front or street side yards (setbacks), such yards fronting/abutting arterial or collector streets shall be fully (i.e., grass,
shrubs, trees, decorative rock, not gravel or artificial plant materials) landscaped (excepting those areas covered by structures, walkways, driveways
or by off street parking and loading spaces) according to corridor requirements in section 10-33-4 of this chapter.
2. Yards fronting on local public or private streets shall be fully landscaped according to their pertinent district front/street side yard depth regulations
(excepting those areas necessarily covered by buildings, walkways, driveways or by off street parking and loading spaces).
3. Any land between the property line and the developed roadway, within the right of way, shall also be landscaped but only with grass, and/or crushed
rock/gravel, with shrubs and/or flowers as desired. Commercial, industrial and multiple residential uses' interior yards (setbacks) in the various
districts (when required) shall also be landscaped with some combination of grass, shrubs, trees, colored decorative rock or round gravel or
nonartificial plant materials. Exception: Trees are and shall be restricted from being planted in roadway "clear zones" (a.k.a., the "clear way") unless
otherwise approved by the city. (Ord. 3960, 4-4-2011)
C. Maintenance: Landscaping areas shall be maintained by the property owner(s) upon whose property they are placed in a clean, orderly and healthy
("green/living") condition. This is interpreted to include an assumed need to provide mowing of lawns, weeding, removal of litter, elimination and/or
replacement of dead or diseased plants and the regular watering of all plants.
D. Screening Requirements: Where landscaped screening is required and not predefined, the screening shall consist of evergreen shrubs closely spaced
and maintained at substantially the specified height of said required screening. When not otherwise specified, screening shall consist of shrubs that will
grow to a mature height of five (5) to six feet (6'). (Ord. 3182, 12-9-2002)
10-33-3: CORRIDORS DEFINED:
Public roadways within the city of Nampa that are classified as arterials or collectors serve as principal entry and exit routes in, out and through the city.
Those roadways include prominent "gateway" rights of way such as Garrity Boulevard, Nampa Caldwell Boulevard, 12th Avenue South Road (Hwy. 45),
Nampa Boulevard, Franklin Boulevard, Can Ada Road, Karcher Road (Hwy. 55), and 11th Avenue. All Nampa city rights of way identified as major or
minor arterials or major or minor collectors as shown on the currently utilized Nampa urban boundary and functional classification system map, or as so
identified in the Nampa comprehensive plan transportation chapter, or as designated by the city engineer shall be hereafter designated as "corridors"
intended for special landscaping. Future rights of way or extension to existing rights of way may add additional corridor length. (Ord. 3182, 12-9-2002)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 4428 - MISC CODE AMENDMENTS. Go to new ordinance.
10-33-4: CORRIDOR LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS:
A. Landscape Standards:
1. Corridor Buffering: Fifteen foot (15') wide landscaped buffer areas shall be provided/emplaced along arterial and collector street frontages when any
property abutting the same is developed, redeveloped, has a use/building that is expanded beyond twenty five percent (25%) of their existing
building's or use's square footage, or is upon which the current use is proposed to change as stipulated by chapter 1 of this title except as follows:
a. This requirement shall not apply nor be made to apply to properties within the DB, DV, DH zones as properties in those zones shall emplace
landscaping improvements when required by section 10-1-6 of this title in accordance with any/the adopted streetscape plan pertinent to the zone
in which the subject property lies.
b. This requirement shall not apply nor be made to apply to properties in the P-1 and P-2 special parking/landscape overlay districts or the airport
corridor landscape district.
c. This requirement shall not apply nor be made to apply to solitary detached or attached single-family residential properties on a single lot/parcel
that have direct street frontage on an arterial or collector right of way (though they still must landscape their required front yard setback area).
(Ord. 4070, 10-7-2013)
d. This requirement shall not apply when exempted in certain situations by the planning director or his/her designee in accordance with provisions
listed in subsection A4 of this section. (Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
(1) In the P-1 special parking and landscape corridor district, properties that have Nampa/Caldwell Boulevard frontage need only emplace a fifteen
foot (15') wide/deep landscape strip that complies with the provisions of this chapter when they change use, develop or redevelop or expand
beyond twenty five percent (25%) of their existing building or use square footages as specified in chapter 1 of this title. This assumes that after
providing space for the use/building(s) and its associated parking, room remains to emplace all or a portion of the required fifteen foot (15')
wide/deep landscape strip.
(2) In the P-2 special parking and landscape corridor district, properties that have Garrity Boulevard frontage need only emplace a four foot (4')
wide/deep landscape strip when they change use, develop or redevelop or expand beyond twenty five percent (25%) of their existing building or
use square footages as specified in chapter 1 of this title if the city's eleven foot (11') wide/deep landscape strip in the Garrity right of way adjoins
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 403/410
their property. Otherwise, properties shall be required to add/emplace enough landscaping that a fifteen foot (15') wide/deep strip is provided
along their Garrity frontages save where they have approved ingresses and egresses.
(3) Residential subdivisions' corridor landscaping shall be twenty five feet (25') wide as required in and by standards in chapter 27 of this title. (Ord.
4070, 10-7-2013; amd. Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
(4) Nonresidential subdivisions shall provide fifteen foot (15') wide landscape strips adjoining collector or arterial streets and along
nonarterial/collector rights of way, standard setback yards shall be maintained. (Ord. 4189, 7-20-2015)
(5) The buffer area shall be a strip of ground that is on private property that abuts the edge of any right of way adjacent to that property. In limited
form and fashion, subject to the director or his/her designee's approval, the buffer strip may contain curb cuts, signage, fire hydrants,
architectural or artistic elements, mailboxes, telephone poles, light poles and other "nonfence" features, bisecting service drives, short sections
of other service drives and hard surfaced/ramped or at grade vehicle display pads on automobile dealership sales lots. Temporary or permanent
buildings, public sidewalks, and public parking spaces shall not be allowed within the buffer landscape strip. (Ord. 4190, 7-20-2015)
(6) Along arterial and collector status rights of way, the landscape strip is required regardless of what a zoning district may require/allow for a front
parking setback/landscaped yard. In the event that a front yard setback area is required to be wider/deeper than fifteen feet (15') from the street
line (e.g., in U, GB1, GB2 and BC zones, etc.), then the fifteen foot (15') strip shall be contained in the greater front setback strip and shall be
made a part of the overall landscaping of that yard area. (For example, in a commercial zone with 20 foot front setbacks, the 15 foot strip shall
be placed along the road frontage and the 5 feet behind the strip landscaped and blended in with the 15 foot strip.)
(A) Exception: In the downtown historic DH zone, in lieu of the corridor landscape strip requirement being made applicable to development, the
Nampa streetscape plan shall apply when required, based on section 10-1-6 of this title. (Ord. 4189, 7-20-2015)
(7) Any land between the strip and the developed roadway within the right of way shall also be landscaped, but only with grass, crushed
rock/gravel, shrubs and/or flowers, as desired. Any land in a required yard (setback) area lying "behind" (i.e., abutting or closest to the buildable
area/center of a lot/parcel) the required fifteen foot (15') landscape strip shall also be landscaped with two (2) elements.
(A) Exceptions:
(i) Subdivisions shall have their landscaped frontage strips sized in accordance with the table in subsection 10-27-6J1 of this title.
(ii) In the airport corridor district, properties that are adjacent to North Kings Road, and Airport Road, E. Powerline Road and Happy Valley
Road, for a distance of five hundred feet zero inches (500'0") from the center of each intersection; and lie within the runway protection zone
(RPZ) and the building restriction line (BRL) are not allowed to emplace trees within these areas. However, all areas beyond the five
hundred foot (500') distance and outside of the runway protection zone and the building restriction line must meet the requirements of this
code. (Ord. 4159, 1-20-2015)
2. Landscape Buffer Development: Within gateway/arterial/collector corridor landscape strips, one city approved low growing deciduous street tree at
least two inches (2") in caliper (measured 1 foot above root ball) shall be placed every twenty five feet (25') on center, ground cover shall be
provided. The strip shall be at least fifty percent (50%) covered in grass and/or also, optionally, contain up to fifteen (15) shrubs per one hundred
(100) linear feet of frontage, and/or contain decorative rock but not artificial plant materials. A belowground irrigation system shall be emplaced and
utilized within landscape strips. Watershed from the system will be contained as much as possible on site. Trees in the fifteen foot (15') or twenty five
foot (25') landscape strips shall be placed at least five feet (5') from the nearest sidewalk and not be planted in a drainage swale.
3. Landscape Planting Selection:
a. Tree species allowed for inclusion in corridor landscape strips, or parts thereof, are designated as "street trees" and are listed in table 33-4 of this
section.
b. Other plants (e.g., shrubs) available from area landscape nurseries are acceptable for use in conjunction with the street trees.
4. Landscape Strip Development Variation(s):
a. Spacing, strip coverage, and species variations from the fifteen foot (15') landscape strip standards may be granted in limited form and rate
instance by the planning director or his/her designee if the following conditions are met:
(1) The variation is demonstrated to be required in order to provide an area on a lot for required parking and/or backing space (not just extra
parking space and/or backing space) an alternative landscaping plan more suitable to the site based on existing or expected conditions is
proposed; and/or
(2) The variation is demonstrated to be required because there is an existing building or public sidewalk lying within all or a portion of the area that
would normally be devoted to the fifteen foot (15') wide landscape strip. In such cases the planning director or his/her designee may authorize
the emplacement of fifteen foot (15') deep landscape "pods" or planters in lieu of a "strip", after reviewing and approving an alternative
landscape plan more suitable to the site based on conditions present; and/or
(3) The variation is demonstrated to be required in order to provide property vision clearance for vehicles anticipated to be leaving a development
site; and/or
(4) The variation is demonstrated to be required in order to accommodate a future freestanding sign where no other more reasonable site along a
property's frontage is available for its emplacement; and/or
(5) The variation is required to provide functional, nonsetback yard area because without it there would be less than sixty percent (60%) of the
property upon which the landscape strip is required left to use after the strip were emplaced.
(6) A landscape plan showing landscaping that varies from the standards in this section, prepared by an Idaho licensed landscape architect, is
provided in conjunction with an application for a building permit and said plan, while incorporating much of the requirements listed in this section
also provides attractive landscaping treatment.
If the requirement for a part of or all of a landscape strip's emplacement is waived, then the current, pertinent property owner(s) or party may be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 404/410
required to sign a city approved deferral agreement providing that at a future time, should the frontage of the property be redesigned or
developed such that a landscape strip could be emplaced, then the strip will be caused to be required by the city and paid for by the property
owner at said time. The director or his/her designee shall require that any alternative landscape pattern/plan provide, whenever and to the extent
possible, that any landscaping area lost along property's frontage be emplaced elsewhere on the same property.
TABLE 33-4
APPROVED CORRIDOR/PARKING LOT PLANTER
DECIDUOUS TREE LIST
Street Trees (Heights 15 - 25 Feet):
Scientific Name Common Name
Acer campestre Hedge maple
A. cappadocicum Coliseum maple
Gleditsia triacanthos Common honeylocust
A. ginnala 'flame' Flame maple
A. glabrum Rocky mountain maple
A. griseum Paperbark maple
A.p. 'globe' Globe Norway maple
Amelanchier laevis Serviceberry
A. alnifolia Alnifolia serviceberry
A. canadensis Canadian serviceberry
A. cumulus Cumulus serviceberry
A. 'Prince William' Prince William serviceberry
A. 'Princess Diana' Princess Diana serviceberry
A. 'Robin Hill' Robin Hill serviceberry
C. caroliniana American hornbeam
C. lavallei Lavelle hawthorn
C. oxycantha English hawthorn
C.o. 'Paul's scarlet' Paul's scarlet hawthorn
C. phaenopyrum Washington hawthorn
Koelreuteria paniculata Panicled goldenrain tree
L. watereri c.v. vossii Vossii goldenchain laburnum
P.s. 'yedoensis akebono' Akebono cherry
P. virginiana 'Canada red' Canada red chokecherry
P.v. melanocarpa c.v. 'Schubert' Schubert chokecherry
Pyrus callaryana Callery/Cleveland/chanticlair pear
P.c. 'bradford' Bradford pear
P.c. 'redspire' Redspire pear
P.c. 'aristocrat' Aristocrat pear
P. communis Common pear
C. kousa Japanese dogwood
C.x. mordensis 'toba' Toba hawthorn
Cotinus coggygria Smoke tree
C.c. 'green' Green smoke tree
M.a. 'chaparral' Weeping chaparral mulberry
Prunus armeniaca Apricot
Cercis canadensis Eastern redbud
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 405/410
C. occidentalis Western redbud
C.o. 'forest pansy' Forest pansy redbud
S.a. 'black hawk' Blackhawk mountain ash
S.a. fastigiata Dwarf mountain ash
F.o. aureafolia Golden desert ash
S. cashmeriana Kashmir mountain ash
P.c. 'pissard' Pissard myrobalan plum
P.c. 'thundercloud' Thundercloud plum
P.c. 'Krauter vesuvius' Krauter vesuvius plum
P. padus European birdcherry, mayday
P. sargentii Sargent cherry
P.s. 'yedoensis' Yoshino cherry
P.s. 'columnaris' Columnar sargent cherry
P.s. 'rancho' Rancho sargent cherry
P. serrula Birch bark cherry
P. serrulata Oriental cherry
P.s. amanogawa Amanogawa cherry
P. avium Mazzard cherry
P.a. 'plena' Double mazzard cherry
P.a. 'scanlon' Scanlon cherry
P.s. Kwanzan Kwanzan oriental cherry
P.s. 'Mt. Fuji' or 'shirotae' Mt. Fuji cherry
P. subhirtella 'autumnalis' Autumn flowering cherry
P.s. 'rosea' Whitcomb flowering cherry
P.s. 'pendula plena rosea' Double weeping cherry
C. mas Cornelian cherry
Malus species Flowering crabapple
Malus arnoldiana Arnold crabapple
Malus prairiefire Prairie fire crabapple
M. baccata 'columnaris' Columnar Siberian crabapple
M. 'bechtel' Bechtel crabapple
M. 'brandywine' Brandywine crabapple
M. floribunda Floribunda crabapple
M. 'liset' Liset crabapple
M. 'profusion' Profusion crabapple
M. 'royal ruby' Royal ruby crabapple
M. sargentii Sargent crabapple
M. 'snowdrift' Snowdrift crabapple
M. tschonoskii Tschonoskii crabapple
M. zumi 'calocarpa' Calocarpa zumi crabapple
Styrax japonica Japanese snowbell
S. obassia Fragrant snowbell
Syringa reticulata Japanese tree lilac
S. vulgaris Common lilac
B. Landscape Plan:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 406/410
1. A landscape plan is required for all developments.
a. A landscape plan (or set of plans as may be needed and/or required by city staff) shall be submitted in conjunction with an application for a
building permit for a new structure or an off street parking design permit. (Subdivision plat, planned unit development plan and conditional use
permit applications all have their own landscape plan submittal requirements, and, shall also require that landscape stripping be emplaced via
imposing appropriate conditions of approval.)
b. The landscape depict plan shall be drawn to scale (no smaller than 1 inch equals 30 feet) and shall indicate the following:
(1) Boundaries, property lines and dimensions;
(2) Existing trees and vegetation identified by species and size;
(3) The location and design of areas to be landscaped;
(4) Plant lists or schedules with the common name, proposed location(s), quantity, spacing, caliper size, and mature canopy size for trees of all
proposed landscaping material to be emplaced;
(5) Location and description of other landscape improvements, such as earth berms, walls, fences, screens, sculptures, fountains, street furniture,
lights and courts or paved areas;
(6) Planting and installation details as necessary to ensure conformance with all required standards;
(7) Indication of the proposed method of landscape irrigation including depiction of the irrigation system.
C. Existing Vegetation:
1. Retention Of Existing Trees: Existing street trees within fifteen feet (15') of edge of right of way lying along collector and arterial streets shall be
retained (unless removal is approved by the city forester or parks director) save that single-family residential properties are exempt from this
restriction. Where trees are approved by the city to be removed from the fifteen foot (15') landscaping strip, replacement within thirty (30) days with
an acceptable caliper tree is required as follows:
Existing Tree Replacement
Between 1" and 6" in caliper Minimum 2" caliper tree from list in table 33-4 of this section
Between 61/4" and 12" in caliper Minimum 2" caliper tree from list in table 33-4 of this section
121/4" or more in caliper Minimum 2" caliper tree from list in table 33-4 of this section
In all cases, any proposed planting within public rights of way shall require approval from the city parks director and engineer. (Ord. 4010, 3-19-2012)
2. Landscape Corridor Strip Conversion: Any area of land on a property already established as a required landscape corridor beautification strip shall
be retained in a condition compliant with the requirements of this chapter. Conversion of a part of the strip by altering its landscaping treatment (i.e.,
plant variety, plant placement/spacing, replacement of grass with decorative rock, etc.) shall require preapproval by the planning department if the
extent of change affects fifty percent (50%) or more of the land area of the strip. The department shall ensure that the strip is/remains adequately
landscaped per section 10-33-2 of this chapter.
3. Damage During Construction: Existing trees that are retained shall be protected from damage to bark, branches or roots during construction.
(Construction or excavation occurring within the drip line of any public or private, retained tree may severely damage the same.) Any tree severely
damaged while site construction is proceeding, where the damage is readily apparent, shall be replaced in accordance with subsection C1 of this
section.
4. Grade Changes And Impervious Surfaces: Grade changes and impervious surfaces shall be allowed at a distance from the trunk of a retained tree
equal to the diameter of the tree trunk plus six feet (6'), or to the drip line, whichever is farthest from the trunk.
5. Minimum Landscaping: Existing vegetation, which is to be retained, may be used to satisfy the minimum required landscaping requirement. (Ord.
4282, 9-19-2016)
D. Arrangement Considerations:
1. Vision triangles, nonblanketing of signs, and above grade clearance shall be factors affecting actual siting of trees within buffer areas. As noted in
subsection A4 of this section, the planning director, or his/her designee(s) is authorized to review and approve minor species and spacing variations
to landscape plans in order to assure that those factors are accommodated.
2. Landscaping should be used to define specific areas to help focus on entrances to properties and screen any loading, vehicle or material storage
areas.
3. Landscaping should be protected from automobile and pedestrian encroachment by raised planting surfaces, depressed walks or the use of curbing.
A concrete mow strip shall be emplaced on the development side of the landscape strip to separate any parking lot or service drive area from the
strip.
E. Parking Lot Landscaping Development Standards: Shall be developed in accordance with provisions listed in chapter 22 of this title. (Ord. 4010, 3-19-
2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 407/410
Chapter 34
DESIGN REVIEW
10-34-1: PURPOSE - APPROVAL REQUIRED:
"Design review" is a process whereby proposed architectural style for future construction is reviewed for its compliance with Nampa's design standards.
Design review also helps ensure preservation and enhancement of special design or aesthetics of an area within which a project is proposed. All qualifying
project types shall require design review approval by, and through, the City of Nampa, either by administrative approval of City designated staff or by the
Building and Site Design Review Committee created by title 2, chapter 16, of this Code (hereinafter "committee"), before the City will issue a building
permit for said projects. (Ord. 4421, 3-4-2019)
10-34-2: APPLICABILITY:
A. Design review is required in HC, GB1, GB2, BN, BC, DB, DV and DH Zones, for both structures and sites, for the following project types (hereinafter
"qualifying projects"):
1. New commercial structures;
2. New multiple-family (3+ units) residential buildings;
3. Non-single-family buildings that are expanded, which expansion is greater than twenty five percent (25%) of the square footage of the existing
structure; however, design review standards shall only be applicable to the area of new construction or expansion;
4. Repainting or replacing exterior materials on more than fifty percent (50%) of a building's facade, which facade fronts a public right-of-way. (Ord.
4421, 3-4-2019)
10-34-3: APPLICATION REFERRAL:
A. Upon receipt of an application for design review, the Director, or his designee, shall examine the application and assign the review of the application to
staff or to the committee, however, the following applications shall always be assigned to the committee:
1. Newly proposed commercial structure intended to exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet in area; and,
2. Multiple-family residential structure (i.e., 1 containing 5 or more dwelling units).
Additionally, for those projects proposed in the Downtown Historic (DH) Zone, review and a recommendation shall be sought and obtained through
the City's Arts and Historic Preservation Commission before presenting the application to the committee. (Ord. 4421, 3-4-2019)
10-34-4: INCLUSIVE APPROVAL:
Hereinafter, any approval of a project subject to design review by City staff or the committee, or on appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission or City
Council, shall be deemed to constitute the City's approval and may be referred to by that terminology. (Ord. 4421, 3-4-2019)
10-34-5: COMMITTEE REVIEW PROCEDURE:
A. Scheduling Design Committee Review: Upon receipt of an application for design review, or upon the determination of the Director, or his designee, that
an application should be referred directly to the committee, the Director shall schedule the application to be considered at the next committee meeting
following the cutoff date prior to which the application was submitted. The Director may extend the review time for applications that are unusually large
or complicated.
B. Staff Report: At least one week prior to the review before the committee, staff shall prepare and submit a staff report to the committee and the applicant.
The staff report shall summarize the application and set forth which elements of the building meet design criteria and which elements do not.
C. Conducting Review: The Chair of the committee shall ask staff to summarize the application and staff's findings. After the presentation by staff, the
Chair shall ask the applicant to represent the application, respond to the staff report, and answer questions from the committee. Following the
presentation and report, the committee shall deliberate about application. Before or during the course of deliberation, the committee may ask the
applicant to address specific issues, including the applicant's response to any design issues raised by the committee. At the conclusion of its
deliberations, the committee shall render its decision. The committee shall be empowered to interpret design standards and to make exceptions to
standards, provided such exceptions shall not allow variance to other, non-design standards-based Zoning Code regulations, and shall not fail to
maintain overall compliance with the design objectives and goals of the City. (Ord. 4421, 3-4-2019)
10-34-6: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW PROCEDURE:
If the Director assigns an application to staff for review, a decision on the application shall be rendered within thirty (30) days from the date of application.
Staff shall be empowered to interpret design standards and to make exceptions to design standards provided such exceptions shall not allow variance to
other, non-design standards-based Zoning Code regulations, and shall not fail to maintain overall compliance with the design objectives and goals of the
City. The decision shall be in writing and shall set forth any design elements of the building which do not comply with design criteria. (Ord. 4421, 3-4-2019)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 408/410
10-34-7: APPLICATION CONTENT REQUIREMENTS:
A. The form prepared by the City's Planning Department for design review applications shall request, at minimum, the following information:
1. A detailed letter of explanation which describes the aesthetic solutions for the project and the corresponding design elements, including a statement
of the scope of work of the project, and information about the structures, the building uses, and site work;
2. A set of two-dimensional depictions of each elevation being reviewed; and,
3. A detailed site plan drawn to architectural scale. The site plan must include the following details, features and callouts, when applicable:
a. A north arrow, scale of drawing, property line locations;
b. Existing and proposed structures, site amenities, and signage location;
c. Adjoining streets, alleys and private drives;
d. Parking layout depiction including spaces, drives, circulation patterns, and pedestrian connectivity and walkway;
e. Existing and proposed rights-of-way, easements, canals, ditches, etc., that will adjoin, abut or traverse a property under design review
consideration;
f. Locations and sizes of any loading areas, docks, and ramps;
g. Trash storage areas and exterior mechanical equipment with proposed screening methods;
h. Exterior building and property light fixtures;
i. Details on special features such as berming, retaining walls, etc.;
j. A complete set of floor plans and building elevations drawn to scale, including a colored rendering or photograph thereof;
k. A listing of all proposed building materials;
l. Identification of the method of screening and treatment of mechanical equipment (both roof mounted and "at grade");
m. Depiction of future building and sign locations and free-standing sign materials, placement, and height; and
n. If specifically requested by staff, a materials sample board. (Ord. 4421, 3-4-2019)
10-34-8: APPEALS OF APPLICATION DECISIONS:
A. All appeals shall be filed within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date of the decision.
1. Administrative Decision Appeals: An appeal of a decision by staff may be made to the committee by filing a written notice of appeal with the Director.
Said appeal shall be treated as a new application when placed before the committee.
2. Committee Design Review Decision Appeals: An appeal of a committee decision may be made to the Planning and Zoning Commission by filing a
written notice of appeal with the Director. All appeals of committee decisions shall be treated as an original application to the Planning and Zoning
Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission is empowered to approve or deny the application, including modifying any conditions imposed
by staff.
3. Planning And Zoning Commission Design Review Decision Appeals: An appeal of a Planning and Zoning Commission design review decision may
be directed to the City Council for review and action by filing a written notice of appeal with the Director. All appeals of commission decisions shall be
treated the same as an original submission to the City Council. The City Council is empowered to approve or deny the appeal, including modifying
any conditions imposed by the commission.
4. Design Review Permit's Approval Appeal Grounds: The following are all sufficient justifications for the committee, the Planning and Zoning
Commission, or the City Council to overturn or modify a prior design review decision for a given application:
a. Inconsistency with the purpose and objectives of this chapter;
b. Unreasonable economic hardship;
c. Undue interference with the design integrity of the proposal;
d. Discriminatory prevention of an allowed land use;
e. Consideration by the staff or committee of improper or irrelevant information such as the race, ethnic origin, incomes, or other attributes of the
proposed occupants or owners; and,
f. Prohibition or unwarranted restriction of building type, material, or method. (Ord. 4421, 3-4-2019)
10-34-9: PERMIT DURATION:
Design review permits (i.e., approved applications) shall be valid for a period not to exceed two (2) years. Request for an extension, which extension shall
not exceed six (6) months per extension, may be filed with the department. A fee may be imposed by the City to process extension requests.
Substantial alterations to the approved design associated with a development shall require a new application. (Ord. 4421, 3-4-2019)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 409/410
10-34-10: DESIGN STANDARDS/REQUIREMENTS:
A. The following standards apply to qualifying projects in all zones except the Downtown Zones, which standards are in chapter 15 of this title.
1. Structure Exteriors: Wall facades of new buildings or new additions shall be reviewed for the inclusion of architectural characteristics on each
building face as specified hereafter:
a. Facade Change Elements: New buildings or new additions subject to design review shall include and incorporate "facade change elements" that,
in total, are visible over at least fifty percent (50%) of the exterior wall area of any primary facade and thirty percent (30%) of any other facade.
Such architectural facade change elements may comprise of, but are not limited to, one or more of the following treatments: cornices, bases,
fenestration, corbelled masonry, architectural accent walls, exaggerated parapets, horizontal banding, portico or awning faces, wainscoting,
balconies, simulated balconies, arches, louvers, pilasters, faux glazing, color banding, etc.
b. Exterior Structure Finish Materials:
(1) The primary wall facade shall incorporate at least two (2) textures or materials; external wall materials shall be comprised of masonry (e.g.,
brick, stone, concrete with paint or texture coat finish, concrete masonry units, etc.) or exterior stucco, with accents of metal or wood paneling,
cementitious fiber board, or alternate products if approved by the City.
(2) The primary wall materials shall be non-reflective. Accent materials may be reflective upon City approval.
(3) Primary facades shall contain a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) glazing. In the GBE District, if the primary facade faces the Ford Idaho
Center, twenty five percent (25%) glazing shall also be required for the facade facing Idaho Center Boulevard.
c. Exterior Structure Finish Colors:
(1) Black, fluorescent, or bright colors shall only cover twenty five percent (25%) of any wall unless approved otherwise by the City.
(2) The repainting of facades of existing structures shall be submitted for review and approval of color choice by the City of Nampa's design
standards staff.
d. Visual Displacements:
(1) Structure walls, or portions thereof, that exceed one hundred feet (100') in length shall have changes in roof height to break up the flat plane of
such walls.
(2) Public entrances shall be clearly identifiable and distinct from the remainder of the building, either through architectural form or use of color,
material, and texture of the facade.
(3) Overhead doors for service or repair activities, or for loading and unloading, shall be located at the side of a building which lies away from any
residential use or zone, unless some form of screening such as landscaping, a wall, landscape berm, or other barrier is used to separate the
two.
(4) Loading docks shall not face the front of the property, nor the front of any adjacent principal building.
e. Mechanical Units: Mechanical equipment and utilities shall be placed and installed in such a way as to be minimally visible from adjoining
properties, and, shall be screened from public view with either proper landscaping or enclosures which are consistent with the architectural
aesthetics and characteristics of the main building.
(1) Mechanical vents and similar features protruding through the roof shall be painted so as to match the color of the roof. Exposed metal flashing
or trim shall be anodized or painted to blend with the exterior colors of the building. Roof mounted mechanical units shall be screened from
public view from any street abutting the property by a screen wall enclosure consistent in appearance with the architectural treatment of the
main building.
(2) Ground mounted equipment and utilities shall be placed and installed in such a way to have the least impact on adjoining properties and shall
be screened from public view with either landscaping or a screen wall. Landscaping shall include a combination of evergreen and deciduous
bushes and trees, with a minimum of five foot (5') depth continuous around utility. This five foot (5') landscaping buffer shall contain plantings,
irrigation, landscaping fabric and ground cover. Mechanical units may be contained within a screen wall enclosure consistent in its construction
with the architectural aesthetics and characteristics of the main building.
f. Building Lighting Standards:
(1) On buildings: All exterior structure lighting shall be shielded, screened, or shuttered with ninety degree (90°) cutoff luminaries and shall be
directed so as to prevent direct illumination of adjoining properties. Building mounted lights shall not be higher than twenty five feet (25') from
ground level.
(2) The height of a freestanding light fixture (e.g., in a parking lot area) shall not exceed twenty five feet (25'). Parking area lights shall use ninety
degree (90°) cutoff luminaries (i.e., "downlighting").
(3) Lighting to highlight or illuminate architecture and signs shall not have significant spillage of light upward or downward.
(4) Pedestrian circulation routes shall be illuminated.
(5) Floodlights shall not be allowed, except when necessary for security.
2. Certain Property Improvements: The following additional standards shall apply to projects requiring design review:
a. Fencing/Screening: Fencing of anything other than mechanical or maintenance related equipment or stored inventory or trash receptacles is
prohibited. Trash receptacles shall be screened with durable materials as found on the related building's facade.
b. Trash Receptacles: Trash receptacles shall be located in service areas at side or rear yards and not visible from streets abutting a property. Trash
receptacles shall be screened. Such screening shall incorporate a certain amount of material and color associated with the main buildings on the
property which are subject to design review.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=597 410/410
c. Pedestrian Pathways: Pedestrian paths shall be established to enhance a site's character and connections. Developments of one acre or more
shall provide a pedestrian and bicycle circulation plan for the site.
(1) All on-site circulation systems shall incorporate a streetscape which includes sidewalks, pedestrian scale light standards and street trees.
(2) Pedestrian amenities shall include detached sidewalks that provide connectivity of buildings and parking areas to public spaces and rights-ofway.
Public spaces are required for projects over twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet in gross floor space at a ratio of ten (10) square feet
of public space per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor space. The public spaces must include landscaping and seating and must
provide connectivity (either immediate or eventual by linkage as appropriate) to any on-property pedestrian routes.
3. Sign Placeholding: The locations of future wall-mounted or free-standing signs shall be identified on site and elevation drawings provided to the City
as part of a design review application. The materials and colors of any future free-standing sign, where known, shall be shared with the committee.
Just as with trash enclosures, sign superstructures shall have their materials and colors harmonize with the building materials and colors to which
they are associated. (Ord. 4421, 3-4-2019)