6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 1/268
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed, but
have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there
are any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 1354
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE CITY OF POST FALLS, KOOTENAI COUNTY, IDAHO, AMENDING SUBSECTION
18.36.040 D TO ALLOW FOR LARGER FLAGS AND FLAGPOLES IN CERTAIN NONRESIDENTIAL AREAS; REPEALING CONFLICTING ORDINANCES;
PROVIDING SEVERABILITY; PROVIDING FOR THE PUBLICATION OF THIS ORDINANCE BY SUMMARY AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
WHEREAS, after public hearing on the hereinafter provided amendments, and after recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, it is deemed by
the Mayor and City Council to be in the best interests of the City of Post Falls that said amendments be adopted; NOW, THEREFORE,
BE IT ORDAINED, by the Mayor and City Council of the Post Falls:
SECTION 1. That Post Falls Municipal Code Subsection 18.36.040 D is amended to read as follows:
18.36.040: SIGNS AUTHORIZED WITHOUT A SIGN PERMIT:
D. Flags: Flags do not require a sign permit, but are subject to the following limitations:
1. Groupings of more than three (3) flags on a single lot shall require a sign permit.
2. Generally, a A flagpole for such an exempted flag may not exceed thirty feet (30') above ground level in any residential zone or ; and a flagpole for such an
exempted flag may not exceed forty five-feet (45') above ground level in any nonresidential commercial or industrial zone.except that flagpoles in
nonresidential zones may be allowed up to twenty-five feet (25’) above the maximum height for principal structures allowed in the underlying zoning district in
the following locations:
a. Within six hundred feet (600’) of the centerline of I-90 and Highway 41 rights of way.
b. Within three hundred feet (300’) of the centerline of Pleasantview Road right of way.
3. Generally, a Such flag shall not exceed a maximum area of sixty (60) square feet in any the agricultural zone or any residential zone or ; and such flag shall
not exceed one hundred thirty five (135) square feet in any nonresidential commercial or industrial zone except that flags in the nonresidential areas listed above
in subsection 2a and 2b of this section may not exceed a maximum area of four hundred (400) square feet.
SECTION 2. All provisions of the current Post Falls Municipal Code or ordinances of the City of Post Falls and parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are
hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 2/268
SECTION 3. Neither the adoption of this ordinance nor the repeal of any ordinance shall, in any manner, affect the prosecution for violation of such ordinance
committed prior to the effective date of this ordinance or be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty due under any such ordinance or in any manner affect the
validity of any action heretofore taken by the City of Post Falls City Council or the validity of any such action to be taken upon matters pending before the City Council
on the effective date of this ordinance.
SECTION 4. The provisions of this ordinance are severable and if any provision, clause, sentence, subsection, word or part thereof is held illegal, invalid, or
unconstitutional or inapplicable to any person or circumstance, such illegality, invalidity or unconstitutionality or inapplicability shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions, clauses, sentences, subsections, words or parts of this ordinance or their application to other persons or circumstances. It is hereby declared to be
the legislative intent that this ordinance would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional provision, clause sentence, subsection, word, or part had not
been included therein, and if such person or circumstance to which the ordinance or part thereof is held inapplicable had been specifically exempt therefrom.
SECTION 5. After its passage and adoption, a summary of this Ordinance, under the provisions of the Idaho Code, shall be published once in the official newspaper
of the City of Post Falls, and upon such publication shall be in full force and effect.
Passed under suspension of rules upon which a roll call vote was duly taken and duly enacted an Ordinance of the City of Post Falls at a regular session of the
City Council on___January 15_______, 2019.
APPROVED, ADOPTED and SIGNED this 15th day of January, 2019.
________________________________
Ronald G. Jacobson, Mayor
ATTEST:
_____________________________
Shannon Howard, City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 1357
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE CITY OF POST FALLS, KOOTENAI COUNTY, IDAHO, AMENDING SUBSECTION
18.24.020 H 1 TO ALLOW FOR DRIVEWAYS UP TO 20% SLOPE WITH ADDITIONAL ACCESS REQUIREMENTS; REPEALING CONFLICTING
ORDINANCES; PROVIDING SEVERABILITY; PROVIDING FOR THE PUBLICATION OF THIS ORDINANCE BY SUMMARY AND PROVIDING AN
EFFECTIVE DATE.
WHEREAS, after public hearing on the hereinafter provided amendments, and after recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, it is deemed by
the Mayor and City Council to be in the best interests of the City of Post Falls that said amendments be adopted; NOW, THEREFORE,
BE IT ORDAINED, by the Mayor and City Council of the Post Falls:
SECTION 1. That Post Falls Municipal Code Subsection 18.36.040 H 1 is amended to read as follows:
18.24.020: GENERAL STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 3/268
H. Surfacing:
1. Residential: All required residential access drives and parking areas must shall be surfaced with concrete or asphalt paving. Driveways to individual residences may
not exceed shall be a maximum of twenty eight percent (20 8%) slope, provided that any residence with a driveway in excess of fifteen percent (15%) slope must be
provided with a separate access route from the front door to the edge of the paved street or sidewalk that meets the design requirements for a means of egress contained
in the adopted building code applicable to structure. Driveways to individual residences must measure a minimum of fourteen feet (14') in width and twenty feet (20')
in depth including the ; this shall include a city standard drive approach.
SECTION 2. All provisions of the current Post Falls Municipal Code or ordinances of the City of Post Falls and parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are
hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
SECTION 3. Neither the adoption of this ordinance nor the repeal of any ordinance shall, in any manner, affect the prosecution for violation of such ordinance
committed prior to the effective date of this ordinance or be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty due under any such ordinance or in any manner affect the
validity of any action heretofore taken by the City of Post Falls City Council or the validity of any such action to be taken upon matters pending before the City Council
on the effective date of this ordinance.
SECTION 4. The provisions of this ordinance are severable and if any provision, clause, sentence, subsection, word or part thereof is held illegal, invalid, or
unconstitutional or inapplicable to any person or circumstance, such illegality, invalidity or unconstitutionality or inapplicability shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions, clauses, sentences, subsections, words or parts of this ordinance or their application to other persons or circumstances. It is hereby declared to be
the legislative intent that this ordinance would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional provision, clause sentence, subsection, word, or part had not
been included therein, and if such person or circumstance to which the ordinance or part thereof is held inapplicable had been specifically exempt therefrom.
SECTION 5. After its passage and adoption, a summary of this Ordinance, under the provisions of the Idaho Code, shall be published once in the official newspaper
of the City of Post Falls, and upon such publication shall be in full force and effect.
Passed under suspension of rules upon which a roll call vote was duly taken and duly enacted an Ordinance of the City of Post Falls at a regular session of the
City Council on__February 5________, 2019 .
APPROVED, ADOPTED and SIGNED this day of , 20 .
________________________________
Ronald G. Jacobson, Mayor
ATTEST:
_____________________________
Shannon Howard, City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO.1361
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF POST FALLS, A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF THE STATE OF IDAHO, REPEALING TITLE 13, CHAPTER 20
OF THE POST FALLS CITY CODE; ADOPTING A NEW TITLE 13, CHAPTER 20; ESTABLISHING WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS
AND PROVIDING FOR ADMINISTRATION, DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS; ESTABLISHING PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS AND
COMPLIANCE AND DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; AUTHORIZING TRANSFER AND REVOCATION OF DISCHARGE PERMITS;
ESTABLISHING REPORTING AND COMPLIANCE MONITORING REQUIREMENTS; PROVIDING ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES, INCLUDING A
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 4/268
CIVIL ASSESSMENT OF ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS; PROVIDING THAT A VIOLATION IS AS A MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY A FINE NOT
TO EXCEED ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS, SIX MONTHS IN JAIL, OR BOTH; PROVIDING AN APPEAL PROCESS; PROVIDING SEVERABILITY;
PROVIDING REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
WHEREAS, after recommendation of the Public Works Director on the hereinafter provided amendments, it is deemed by the Mayor and City
Council to be in the best interests of the City of Post Falls that said amendments be adopted; NOW, THEREFORE,
BE IT IS ORDAINED, by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Post Falls:
SECTION 1. That Municipal Code Title 13, Chapter 20, entitled Wastewater Discharge Restrictions, is repealed and a new Title 13, chapter 20, entitled
Wastewater Discharge Restrictions, is adopted as follows:
Chapter 13.20
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS
13.20.010: PURPOSE:
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) for the City of Post Falls and enables the City to
comply with all applicable State and Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act and the General Pretreatment Regulations. The objectives of this
chapter are:
A. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with the operation of the POTW;
B. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or
otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;
C. To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with
applicable statutes and regulations;
D. To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public;
and
E. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the POTW.
This chapter shall apply to all Industrial Users of the POTW, as defined in this chapter.
13.20.020: ADMINISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director is authorized to administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any authority
granted to the Director may be delegated by the Director to other City personnel.
13.20.030: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.
Act or "the Act". The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. .
Applicable Pretreatment Standards. For any specified pollutant, City prohibitive standards, City specific pretreatment standards (local limits), State of
Idaho pretreatment standards, or EPA's Categorical Pretreatment Standards (when effective), whichever standard is most stringent.
Approval Authority. Idaho Department of Environmental Quality.
Authorized Representative of the Industrial User.
(1) If the Industrial User is a corporation:
(a) The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person
who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
(b) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make
management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major
capital investment recommendations and initiating and directing other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental
compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
(2) If the Industrial User is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively;
(3) If the Industrial User is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the
operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her designee.
(4) The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3) above may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates
or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the City.
Best Management Practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to
implement the general and specific prohibitions listed in 13.20.050 of this chapter. BMPs may also include, but are not limited to, treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials
storage. BMPs shall be considered local limits and Pretreatment Standards for the purposes of this chapter and 40 CFR 403.5(c)(4).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 5/268
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD).The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for five (5) days at 20 degrees Celsius, usually expressed as a concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/L)].
Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in
accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which applies to a specific category of Industrial Users and which appears in 40
CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 -471.
Categorical Industrial User. An Industrial User regulated by one or more of EPA's Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
Clean Water Act (See definition of Act)
Composite Sample. The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of
either flow or time.
Cooling Water, Non-Contact.Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product. Non-contact cooling water may be generated from any use, such as air conditioning, heat exchangers, cooling or
refrigeration to which the only pollutant added is heat.
Director. The person designated by the City to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this
chapter, the Director of Public Services, or a duly authorized representative.
Domestic Source. A source of domestic (sanitary) waste water from residential sources including but not limited to wastewater from kitchen, bath and
laundry facilities; or wastewater from the personal sanitary conveniences (toilets, showers, bathtubs, drinking fountains, noncommercial sinks and
similar structures) of commercial, industrial or institutional buildings, provided that the wastewater exhibits characteristics that are similar to those of
wastewater from normal residential activities.
General Pretreatment Regulations. The regulations contained in 40 CFR Part 403.
Grab Sample. An individual sample of at least 150 mL collected over a period of time not exceeding 15 minutes.
Indirect Discharge or Discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or
(d) of the Act.
Industrial User. A source of Indirect Discharge.
Interference. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: (1) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its
treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and (2) therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's
NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle
D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act, or more stringent State
or local regulations.
Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit. The maximum concentration or loading of a pollutant allowed under section 13.20.080 of this chapter to be
discharged.
Medical Wastes. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
New Source.
(1) Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after
the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that, provided that:
(a) The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
(b) The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(c) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new
facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the
existing source, should be considered.
(2) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a New Source if the construction does not create a
new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting criteria (1)(b) or (c) above in this definition of New Source, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds
to existing process or production equipment.
(3) Construction of a New Source has commenced if the owner or operator has:
(a) Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program:
(i) any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
(ii) significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(b) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 6/268
feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
Pass Through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation).
Permittee: A person or Industrial User issued a wastewater discharge permit.
Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or
any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all Federal, State, or local governmental entities.
pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units.
Pollutant. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 USC 2011 et seq.)), heat, wrecked or
discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water.
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater
prior to or in lieu of introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological
processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment
standard.
Pretreatment Requirement. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an Industrial User, other than a National
Pretreatment Standard.
Pretreatment Standard, National Pretreatment Standard, or Standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA
in accordance with section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to Industrial Users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5.
Prohibited Discharge Standards or Prohibited Discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances, which appear in
section 13.20.50 of this chapter.
Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW). A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, which is owned by a State or municipality (as
defined by section 502(4) of the Act). The term also means the city having jurisdiction over the Indirect Discharges to and the discharges from such a
treatment works.
Septic Tank and Chemical Toilet Waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, recreational vehicles, campers, trailers,
and septic tanks.
Sewage. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface and storm waters as may be present. "Wastewater" and "sewage" are synonymous and interchangeable.
Sewer. Any pipe, conduit, or other device used to collect and transport sewage from the generating source.
Significant Industrial User.
(1) Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this section, the term Significant Industrial User means:
(a) All Industrial Users subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N; and
(b) Any other Industrial User that: discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding
sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5 percent or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW Treatment plant; or is designated as such by the POTW on the basis that the
Industrial User has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any Pretreatment Standard or requirement
(in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)).
(2) The POTW may determine that an Industrial User subject to categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I,
subchapter N is a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User rather than a Significant Industrial User on a finding that the Industrial User never
discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater, unless specifically included in the Pretreatment Standard) and the following conditions are met:
(a) The Industrial User, prior to the POTW's finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical Pretreatment Standards and
Requirements;
(b) The Industrial User annually submits the certification statement required in 40 CFR 403.12(q) together with any additional information
necessary to support the certification statement; and
(c) The Industrial User never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater.
(3) Upon a finding that an Industrial User meeting the criteria in paragraph (1)(b) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW's operation or for violating any Pretreatment Standards or requirement, the POTW may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a
petition received from an Industrial User or POTW, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such Industrial User is not a Significant
Industrial User.
Slug Load. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the discharge standards in sections 13.20.050 through
13.20.080 of this chapter, or any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch
discharge.
Solid Waste Disposal Act. The regulations in 42 U.S.C 6901, et seq.
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code. A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States
Office of Management and Budget.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 7/268
Storm Water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
Total Suspended Solids (TSS). The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and
which is removable by laboratory filtering in accordance with procedures approved in 40 CFR 136, as amended.
Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
Wastewater Discharge Permit (Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit, Discharge Permit). An authorization or equivalent control document
issued by the City to Industrial Users discharging wastewater to the POTW. The permit may contain appropriate pretreatment standards and
requirements as set forth in this chapter.
Wastewater Treatment Plant or Treatment Plant. That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal wastewater.
The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use.
The use of the term "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
13.20.040: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
ASPP -Accidental Spill Prevention Plan
· BMP -Best Management Practice
· BOD -Biochemical Oxygen Demand
· CFR -Code of Federal Regulations
· EPA -U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
· GPD -gallons per day
· IDEQ -Idaho Department of Environmental Quality
· L -liter
· LEL -Lower Explosive Limit
· mg/L -milligrams per liter
· IPDES -Idaho Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
· O&M -Operation and Maintenance
· POTW -Publicly Owned Treatment Works
· RCRA -Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
· SIC -Standard Industrial Classifications
· SIU – Significant Industrial User
· SWDA -Solid Waste Disposal Act
· TRC - Technical Review Criteria
· TSS -Total Suspended Solids
· USC -United States Code
13.20.050: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
A. General Prohibitions:
(1) No Person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference.
These general prohibitions apply to all Industrial Users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or
any other National, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
(2) Surface water and all other drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to surface water
system components whether private or public in accordance with Title 13, Chapter 44 of this code.
B. Specific Prohibitions: No Person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flash point of less
than 140 degrees F (60 degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
(2) Wastewater having a pH less than 6 or more than 10, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case Industrial
Discharges with solids greater than one-half inch (1/2”) in any dimension;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 8/268
(4) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW;
(5) Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater
which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees F (40 degrees C); (6) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable
cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause Interference or Pass Through;
(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health
and safety problems;
(8) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated in writing by the Director;
(9) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life or health, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
(10) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the Director in compliance with applicable
local, State or Federal regulations;
(11) Industrial User sources of storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool
drainage, condensate, deionized water, non-contact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized in writing by the
Director;
(12) Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes or from industrial processes;
(13) Medical wastes that may cause or contribute to Pass Through, Interference, or violate any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement.;
(14) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a Whole Effluent Toxicity (WET) test
required by the City's NPDES permit;
(15) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which cause excessive foaming, inhibition, or pass through in the POTW;
(16) Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two (2)
successive readings on an explosion meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), be more than five per cent
(5%) nor any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.
(17) Grease, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent
lime, stone or marble dusts, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar
asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
(18) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or other disposal system permits.
(19) The contents of any tank or other vessel owned or used by any person in the business of collecting or pumping sewage, effluent, septic tank
and chemical toilet waste, or other wastewater unless said person has first obtained written authorization from the Director and complied with the
testing and other requirements specified by the Director.
(20) Pesticides in concentrations exceeding the water quality standards of the State of Idaho, IDAPA 58.01.02.
(21) Sewage sludge, except in accordance with the City’s NPDES permit, providing that it specifically allows the discharge to surface waters of
sewage sludge pollutants.
(22) A Slug Load as defined in section 13.20.030 of this chapter.
(23) Any pollutant directly into a manhole or other opening in the POTW unless specifically authorized by the Director or otherwise permitted
under this chapter.
(24) Water containing PCBs in excess of 3 µg/L.
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the
POTW.
13.20.060: FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
All Industrial Users subject to a Categorical Pretreatment Standard shall comply with all requirements of such Standard, and shall also comply with any
limitations contained in this chapter. Where the same pollutant is limited by more than one Pretreatment Standard, the limitations which are more
stringent shall prevail. Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall be in the timeframe specified in the applicable Categorical
Pretreatment Standard.
13.20.070: STATE REQUIREMENTS:
All Industrial Users shall meet the applicable State requirements and limitations, if any, on discharges to the POTW when those limitations are more
stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this chapter.
13.20.080: LOCAL LIMITS:
The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No Industrial User shall discharge wastewater containing
pollutant levels in excess of the following daily maximum allowable discharge limits. No permit shall be issued which causes the net permitted Industrial
User loading to exceed the Maximum Allowable Industrial Loading (MAIL).
Parameter Concentration (mg/L)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 9/268
Daily Maximum Limit
Ammonia, monthly average Case-by-Case
Ammonia, daily maximum Case-by-Case
CBOD, monthly average Case-by-Case
CBOD, daily maximum Case-by-Case
TSS, monthly average Case-by-Case
TSS, daily maximum Case-by-Case
Phosphorus, monthly average Case-by-Case
Phosphorus, daily maximum Case-by-Case
Arsenic 0.123
Cadmium 0.066
Chromium 1.953
Copper 0.651
Cyanide 0.768
Lead 0.088
Mercury 0.070
Silver 0.149
Zinc 0.251
The local limits in the above section apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW (end of the pipe). All concentrations for metallic
substances are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. The Director may impose mass limitations in addition to (or in place of) the concentrationbased
limitations above upon a written finding by the Director that such mass limitations are warranted to meet the purpose of this chapter or as
provided in section 13.20.100. Where an Industrial User is subject to a categorical pretreatment standard and a local limit for a given pollutant, the
more stringent limit or applicable pretreatment standard shall apply.
Whenever determined appropriate, the Director may develop best management practices (BMPs) for general application, in individual discharge permits
or general discharge permits, to implement local limits and the requirements of this chapter and require documentation of compliance. Failure to follow
such requirements is a violation of this chapter.
13.20.090: SPECIAL AGREEMENT:
The Director is authorized to enter into special agreements with Industrial Users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the
POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard or federal pretreatment requirement. However,
Industrial Users may request a net/gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. They may also request a deviation
from the categorical pretreatment standard from the Approval Authority in accordance with 40 CFR 403.13 or any superseding amendments thereto.
13.20.100: DILUTION:
No Industrial User shall increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment
standard or requirement. The Director may impose mass limitations on Industrial Users which, based on facility inspections, records or other evidence,
he finds are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate.
13.20.110: PRETREATMENT FACILITIES:
Industrial Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements set out in this chapter within the time limitations specified by the EPA or the City, whichever is more stringent.
Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the City shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the Industrial User's
expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the City for review and must be acceptable
to the City before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the Industrial User from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the City under the provisions of this chapter.
13.20.120: DEADLINE FOR COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS:
Compliance by existing sources covered by Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall be within three (3) years of the date the Standard is effective
unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate Standard. The City shall establish a final compliance deadline date for any existing
Industrial User not covered by Categorical Pretreatment Standards or for any categorical Industrial User when the local limits for said Industrial User are
more restrictive than the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
New Sources and new Industrial Users are required to comply with applicable pretreatment standards within the shortest feasible time, not to exceed
ninety (90) days from the beginning of discharge. New Sources and new Industrial Users shall install, have in operating condition, and shall start up all
pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 10/268
Any wastewater discharge permit issued to a Categorical Industrial User will include a compliance date consistent with any deadline date established in
EPA's Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Any other existing Industrial User or a Categorical Industrial User that must comply with a more stringent
local limit which is in non-compliance with any local limits shall be provided with a compliance schedule with milestones not to exceed 12 months for a
total of 5 years placed in an industrial wastewater permit to ensure compliance within the shortest time feasible.
13.20.130: ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES:
A. Whenever deemed necessary to protect the POTW from interference, pass through, slug load, or other potentially harmful effects, the City may
require Industrial Users to apply for and obtain a discharge permit, restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial
wastestreams, install treatment including storage or flow-equalization facilities, submit timely and factual reports from the Industrial User responsible
for such discharge, pay any additional cost or expense incurred by the City for handling, treating, disposing or remediation as a result of wastes
discharged to the wastewater treatment system, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the Industrial
User's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. The Industrial User shall provide grease, oil, or sand interceptors when the POTW has notified the Industrial User that such interceptors are
necessary to protect the POTW from interference, pass through, slug load, or other potentially harmful effects of excessive discharges of grease, oil
or sand, except that such interceptors are not required of Domestic Sources. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City
and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as
needed to protect the POTW, by the Industrial User at its expense.
C. Industrial Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas
detection meter.
13.20.140: ACCIDENTAL SPILL PREVENTION PLANS:
The City may require any Industrial User to develop and implement an accidental spill prevention plan (ASPP) or slug control plan. Where deemed
necessary by the City based on a technical evaluation of the Industrial User's discharge or process, facilities to prevent accidental discharge or slug
discharges of pollutants shall be provided and maintained at the Industrial User's cost and expense. An accidental spill prevention plan or slug control
plan showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the City for review and approval before implementation.
Industrial Users that have been notified by the City to develop an ASPP or slug control plan shall submit said plan to the City within ninety (90) days
after notification. Each Industrial User shall implement its ASPP and slug control plan as submitted or as modified after such plan has been reviewed
and approved by the City. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by the City shall not relieve the Industrial User from the
responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
A. Any Industrial User required to develop and implement an accidental spill prevention and/or slug control plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at
a minimum, the following:
1) Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges;
2) Description of stored chemicals;
3) Procedures for notifying the POTW within 24 hours of any accidental or slug discharges. Such notification must also be given for any
discharge which would violate any of the standards in sections 13.20.050 through 13.20.080 of this chapter; and
4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker
training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic chemicals (including solvents), and/or
measures and equipment for emergency response.
B. Industrial Users shall notify the POTW immediately but no later than twenty four (24) hours after the discovery of a slug or accidental discharge of
substances regulated by this chapter. The notification shall include location of discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and
volume, and corrective actions. Any affected Industrial User shall be liable for any expense, loss, or damage to the POTW, in addition to the amount
of any fines imposed on the City on account thereof under state or federal law. Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the Industrial
User shall submit to the Director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the Industrial User
to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the Industrial User of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may
be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property nor shall such notification relieve the Industrial
User of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.
C. Industrial Users shall resample within thirty (30) days of a slug or accidental discharge to demonstrate compliance with the local limits and permitted
discharge parameters.
D. Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on the Industrial User's premises advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug
or accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who may cause or discover such a discharge with respect to emergency notification
procedures.
13.20.150: SEPTIC TANK WASTES:
It is unlawful to discharge septic tank and chemical toilet waste into the City’s wastewater collection system without written authorization by the Director.
13.20.160: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS:
No Significant Industrial User shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the City. Other
Industrial Users do not need to apply for a permit unless required to do so by the City based on a technical review of the potential for the discharge to
exceed a Pretreatment Standard or Pretreatment Requirement, or cause or contribute to Pass Through or Interference of the POTW.
13.20.170: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING, EXISTING SIU:
Any SIU that was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this chapter and that wishes to continue such discharges in the
future shall, within ninety (90) days after notification by the Director, submit a permit application to the City in accordance with this chapter and shall not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 11/268
cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of this chapter except in accordance with
a wastewater discharge permit issued by the City.
13.20.180: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING, NEW SOURCE AND NEW USER:
At least ninety (90) days prior to the anticipated start-up, any new SIU and any New Source so required by the City shall apply for a wastewater
discharge permit and will be required to submit to the City at least the information listed in paragraphs A. through E. of section 13.20.190. Such New
Sources or new SIUs shall not discharge without first receiving a wastewater discharge permit from the City. Such New Sources and new SIUs shall
also be required to include in their application information on the method of pretreatment they intend to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards.
Such New Sources and new SIUs shall give estimates of the information requested in paragraphs D. and E. of section 13.20.190 of this chapter.
13.20.190: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS:
All Industrial Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit an application in a form provided by the City and shall include the
following information. Categorical Industrial Users shall also comply with the baseline report requirements pursuant to 40 CFR 403.12(b), or any
superseding amendments thereto.
A. Identifying information. The name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners;
B. Permits. A list of all environmental control permits held by or for the facility;
C. Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and Standard Industrial Classification of the operation(s)
carried out by such Industrial User, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are or could accidentally or
intentionally be discharged to the POTW; a review of the Categorical Industrial User criteria and analysis of whether the user falls into one or more
categories, number and type of employees; hours of operation; each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of
production; the on- or off-site storage capacity for wastewater; any planned process changes for the next 3 years; type and amount of raw materials
processed (average and maximum per day) and the time and duration of discharges. This description should also include a schematic process
diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated or manufacturing processes; site plans; floor plans; mechanical and
plumbing plans; and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location
and elevation.
D. Flow Measurement.
(1) Categorical Industrial User:
Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the following:
(i) Regulated or manufacturing process streams; and
(ii) Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula pursuant to 40 CFR 403.6(e), or any superseding
amendments thereto.
(2) Non-Categorical Industrial User
Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the following:
(i) Total process flow, wastewater treatment plant flow, total plant flow or individual manufacturing process flow as required by the Director.
Verifiable estimates of these flows may be allowed where it is justified by cost or feasibility considerations.
E. Measurements of pollutants.
(1) Categorical Industrial User:
(i) Identify the applicable pretreatment standards for each regulated or manufacturing process.
(ii) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass where required by the Categorical Pretreatment
Standard or as required by the City) of regulated pollutants (including standards contained in 13.20.050 through 13.20.080, as appropriate) in the
discharge from each regulated or manufacturing process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be
reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall conform to sampling and analytical procedures in sections 13.20.380
and 13.20.390 of this chapter.
(iii) A minimum of one representative sample shall be taken to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph.
Additional samples may be required by the City as necessary to accurately characterize the waste stream.
(iv) Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), or any superseding amendment
thereto, for a categorical Industrial User, this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted as part of the application.
(2) Non-Categorical Industrial User
(i) Identify the applicable pretreatment standards for its wastewater discharge.
(ii) Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration in the discharge (or mass where required by the City) of
regulated pollutants contained in 13.20.050 through 13.20.080, as appropriate. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where
required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall conform to sampling and analytical procedures
outlined in sections 13.20.380 and 13.20.390.
(iii) The Industrial User shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this
paragraph.
(iv) Where the Director developed alternate concentration or mass limits because of dilution, this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be
submitted as part of the application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 12/268
F. Ability to Meet Pretreatment Standards. Submit a statement indicating whether the applicable Pretreatment Standards are being met on a consistent
basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the Industrial User to meet the
applicable Pretreatment Standards and Requirements.
G. Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or operations and maintenance (O&M) will be required to meet the applicable Pretreatment
Standards, the Industrial User shall submit the shortest schedule by which the Industrial User will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M.
The Industrial User's schedule shall conform to the requirements of section 13.20.300. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than
the compliance date established pursuant to 13.20.120 of this chapter.
1) Where the Industrial User's categorical Pretreatment Standard has been modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7 or any superseding
amendments thereto), the combined wastestream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e) or any superseding amendments thereto), and/or a
Fundamentally Different Factors variance (40 CFR 403.13 or any superseding amendments thereto) at the time the Industrial User submits
the report required by this paragraph, the information required by paragraphs F. and G. of this section shall pertain to the modified limits.
2) If the categorical Pretreatment Standard is modified by a removal allowance, the combined wastestream formula, and/or a Fundamentally
Different Factors variance after the Industrial User submits the report required by paragraphs F. and G. of this section, then a report containing
modified information shall be submitted by the Industrial User within sixty (60) days after the new limit is approved.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the Industrial User for revision.
13.20.200: SIGNATORY AND CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENT:
All wastewater discharge permit applications and Industrial User reports must be signed by a responsible officer or manager, or sole proprietor or
general partner as applicable, or duly authorized representative.
A. For the purpose of this section, a responsible officer or manager means:
1. a president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policyor
decision-making functions for the corporation, or
2. the manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern
the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations and initiating and
directing other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary
systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents
has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. This authorization must be made in writing by the principal executive
officer or ranking elected official and submitted to the City prior to or together with the report being submitted of the Industrial User.
B. A duly authorized representative is an individual designated by the responsible officer, manager, sole proprietor or general partner in writing. The
written authorization must be submitted to the City and also specifies either an individual or a position having the responsibility of the overall
operation of the facility from with the Industrial Discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field
superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company. If an
authorization in this section is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to
the City prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
C. Every application, report and designation of responsible officer must contain the following certification statement signed and dated by the
responsible officer:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted
is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations."
13.20.210: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS:
The City will evaluate the data furnished by the Industrial User and may require additional information needed to evaluate a complete application. Within
ninety (90) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the Director will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater
discharge permit. If a permit is to be issued, it will be issued within the ninety (90) day window. The City may deny any application for a wastewater
discharge permit or approve a permit subject to conditions.
13.20.220: RECONSIDERATION OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT:
Any affected person, including the Industrial User, may petition the Director to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within ninety (90)
days of its issuance.
A. Failure to submit a timely petition for reconsideration of permit shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal pursuant to 13.20.570.
B. In its petition, the requesting party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.
C. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the City's decision.
Failure of the Director to act within ninety (90) days on a request for reconsideration shall be deemed a denial of the request.
13.20.230: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS:
Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the City to prevent pass through or interference,
protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and
disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
A. Wastewater discharge permits will contain the following conditions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 13/268
1) A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years, and a specific date upon
which the permit will expire.
2) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is non-transferable without prior notification to and approval from the City, and provisions
for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
3) Applicable pretreatment standards (including local limits) and requirements, including effluent limits;
4) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, submittal of technical reports, compliance schedules, and record-keeping requirements.
These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type
based on Federal, State, and local law;
5) Requirement to report the results of monitoring of any regulated pollutant that is conducted more frequently than required by the permit;
6) Requirement for immediate notification to the City where self-monitoring results indicate non-compliance;
7) Requirement to report a bypass or upset of a pretreatment facility;
8) Requirement to report immediately to the City all discharges, including slug loadings, that could cause problems to the POTW;
9) Requirement for the SIU who reports non-compliance to repeat the sampling and analysis and submit results to the City within thirty (30)
days after becoming aware of the violation.
10) A statement of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule.
11) Requirements to control Slug discharges, if determined by the Director to be necessary.
B. Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:
1) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
2) Requirements for the installation and proper operation and maintenance of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of
appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;
3) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges;
4) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
5) The unit charge or schedule of Industrial User charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
6) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;
7) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable Federal and State pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge
permit;
8) Any special agreements the City chooses to continue or develop between the City and Industrial User;
9) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City to ensure compliance with this chapter, and State and Federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
13.20.240: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT MODIFICATION:
The Director may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following:
A. To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements;
B. To address significant alterations or additions to the Industrial User's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance;
C. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
D. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the City's POTW, City personnel, or the receiving waters;
E. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
F. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required report;
G. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
H. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or
I. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator.
13.20.250: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER:
Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least one hundred twenty
(120) days advance notice to the City and the City approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the City must include a written
certification by the new owner and/or operator which:
A. States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 14/268
B. Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
C. Assumes full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit beginning on the date of the transfer.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit voidable as of the date of facility transfer.
Provided that the notice required above occurred and that there were no significant changes to the manufacturing operation or wastewater discharge,
the new owner will be considered an existing Industrial User and will be covered by the existing limits and requirements in the previous owner's permit.
13.20.260: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE:
An Industrial User who is required to have a wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a
complete wastewater discharge permit application, in accordance with section 13.20.190, a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the
expiration of the Industrial User's existing wastewater discharge permit An Industrial User whose existing wastewater discharge permit has expired and
who failed to submit its re-application in the time period specified herein will be deemed to be discharging without a wastewater discharge permit. An
existing wastewater discharge permit issued to a particular Industrial User is void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that
Industrial User.
13.20.270: BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS:
A. Within either one hundred and eighty (180) days after the effective date of a Categorical Pretreatment Standard or the final administrative decision
on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), or any superseding amendment thereto, (whichever is later) existing Categorical Industrial
Users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW, shall be required to submit to the City a report which contains the information
listed in paragraph B., below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, New Sources, and sources that become
Categorical Industrial Users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the City a report
which contains the information listed in paragraph B., below. A New Source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to
use to meet applicable categorical standards. A New Source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.
B. Industrial Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
1) Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner.
2) Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
3) Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such Industrial User. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of
discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
4) Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e), or
any superseding amendment thereto.
5) Measurement of Pollutants.
a) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
b) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the
City) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long term average
concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be
analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 13.20.390.
6) Certification. A statement, reviewed by the Industrial User's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating
whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional Operation and Maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment, is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
7) Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by
which the Industrial User will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than
the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the
requirements set out in section 13.20.300 of this chapter.
8) Signature and Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 13.20.200 of this chapter.
9) Sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in sections 13.20.380 and 13.20.090 of this chapter.
13.20.280: FINAL COMPLIANCE REPORT (INITIAL COMPLIANCE REPORT):
A. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance of an existing Significant Industrial User with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements set forth in this chapter, in federal categorical standards, or in a wastewater discharge permit, or, in the case of a New Source or a new
SIU, within ninety (90) days following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, the affected Industrial User shall submit to
the City a report containing the information outlined in paragraphs D. through F. of section13.20.190 of this chapter..
B. For Industrial Users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the City in accordance with procedures established in 40 CFR
403.6 (c), or any superseding amendments thereto, this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the Industrial User's long term production
rate. For all other Industrial Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the Industrial User's actual production during the appropriate sampling period.
13.20.290: PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 15/268
A. Any Industrial User that is required to have an industrial waste discharge permit and performs self-monitoring shall comply with all applicable
requirements under 40 CFR 403.12, or any superseding amendments thereto, and submit to the City during the months specified in the permit,
unless required on other dates or more frequently by the City, a report indicating the nature of the effluent over the previous reporting period. The
frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed within the industrial waste discharge permit. At a minimum, Industrial Users shall sample their
discharge at least twice per year.
B. The report shall include a record of the concentrations (and mass if specified in the wastewater discharge permit) of the pollutants listed in the
wastewater discharge permit that were measured and a record of all flow measurements (average and maximum) taken at the designated sampling
locations and shall also include any additional information required by this chapter or the wastewater discharge permit. Production data shall be
reported if required by the wastewater discharge permit. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be
reported. If an Industrial User sampled and analyzed more frequently than what was required by the City or by this chapter, using methodologies in
40 CFR Part 136, it must submit all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge during the reporting period.
C. Any Industrial User subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the City or by unit production limits specified in the applicable
categorical standards shall report production data as outlined in section 13.20.280.B of this chapter.
D. If the City calculated limits to factor out dilution flows or non-regulated flows, the Industrial User will be responsible for providing flows from the
regulated process flows, dilution flows and non-regulated flows.
E. Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement, provided, however, that the City may accept reports of average and maximum flows
estimated by verifiable techniques if the City determines that an actual measurement is not feasible.
F. Discharges sampled shall be representative of the Industrial User's daily operations and samples shall be taken in accordance with the
requirements specified in section 13.20.380 of this chapter.
G. The City may require reporting by Industrial Users that are not required to have an industrial wastewater discharge permit if information or data is
needed to establish a sewer charge, determine the treatability of the effluent, or determine any other factor which is related to the operation and
maintenance of the sewer system.
H. The City may require self-monitoring by the Industrial User or, if requested by the Industrial User, may agree to perform the periodic compliance
monitoring needed to prepare the periodic compliance report required under this section. If the City agrees to perform such periodic compliance
monitoring, it may charge the Industrial User for such monitoring, based upon the costs incurred by the City for the sampling and analyses. Any such
charges shall be added to the normal sewer charge and shall be payable as part of the sewer bills. The City is under no obligation to perform
periodic compliance monitoring for an Industrial User.
13.20.300: COMPLIANCE SCHEDULES FOR MEETING APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
A. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of milestones leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the Industrial User to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction, etc.).
B. No increment referred to in paragraph A. of this section shall exceed nine (9) months, unless an alternate schedule has been approved in writing by
the Director.
C. Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the Industrial User shall submit a progress
report to the City including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on
which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the Industrial User to return the
construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than one hundred eighty (180) days elapse between such progress reports.
13.20.310: HAZARDOUS WASTE NOTIFICATION:
Any Industrial User that is discharging more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes as defined in 40 CFR 261 (listed or characteristic wastes) in
a calendar month or any facility discharging any amount of acutely hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), or any
superseding amendments thereto, is required to provide written notification to the City, to the EPA Region 10 Office of Air, Waste, and Toxics Director,
and to the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality Division of Waste Management. Any existing Industrial User exempt from this notification shall
comply with the requirements contained herein within 30 days of becoming aware of a discharge of fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes in a
calendar month or any discharge of acutely hazardous wastes to the City sewer system.
Such notification shall include:
A. The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, or any superseding amendments thereto,
B. The EPA Hazardous waste number, and
C. The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).
D. If an Industrial User discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the sewer system, the notification shall
also contain the following information to the extent it is known or readily available to the Industrial User:
1) an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes,
2) an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestreams discharged during that calendar month, and
3) an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestreams expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months.
These notification requirements do not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements.
Whenever the EPA publishes final rules identifying additional hazardous wastes or new characteristics of hazardous waste, an Industrial User shall
notify the City of the discharge of such a substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 16/268
In the case of any notification made under this paragraph, an Industrial User shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical.
13.20.320: NOTICE OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS, INCLUDING ACCIDENTAL SPILLS, SLUG LOADS:
Any User shall notify the POTW immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, including any Slug Loads, as defined in section
13.20.030. The notification shall include the concentration and volume, and the corrective actions and steps being taken by the Industrial User to reduce
any adverse impact to the POTW. Any Industrial User who discharges a slug load of pollutants shall be liable for any expense, loss, or damage to the
POTW, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the City under state or federal law.
13.20.330: BYPASS:
A. For the purposes of this section,
1. "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an Industrial User's treatment facility.
2. "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
B. An Industrial User may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause applicable pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if
it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs C. and D. of this
section.
C. Notice of Bypass
1. If an Industrial User knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass,
if possible.
2. An Industrial User shall submit oral notice to the City of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24)
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the Industrial User becomes
aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and
times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
recurrence of the bypass. The POTW may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours.
D. Bypass Conditions
1. Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take an enforcement action against an Industrial User for a bypass, unless:
a. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;
b. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
c. The Industrial User submitted notices as required under paragraph C. of this section.
2. The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in paragraph D.1. of this section.
13.20.340: NON-COMPLIANCE REPORTING:
If sampling performed by an Industrial User indicates a violation, the Industrial User shall notify the POTW within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming
aware of the violation. The Industrial User shall also repeat the sampling within five (5) days and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW
within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. Where the POTW has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the Industrial User, the
POTW must perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the Industrial User of the violation and requires the Industrial User to perform the
repeat analysis. Resampling is not required if:
A. The POTW performs sampling at the Industrial User at a frequency of at least once per month, or
B. The POTW performs sampling at the Industrial User between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the Industrial
User or the POTW receives the results of this sampling.
13.20.350: NOTIFICATION OF CHANGED DISCHARGE:
A. All Significant Industrial Users shall promptly notify the POTW in advance of a change in the average monthly volume greater than twenty (20)
percent or a significant change in the character of pollutants in their discharge, including significant manufacturing process changes, pretreatment
modifications, and the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the Industrial User has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12
(p).
B. Any Industrial User operating under a wastewater discharge permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits shall notify the City within
two (2) business days after the Industrial User has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next
calendar month. Any Industrial User not providing a notice of such anticipated change will be required to comply with the existing limits contained in
its wastewater discharge permit.
13.20.360: REPORTS FROM UN-PERMITTED INDUSTRIAL USERS:
All Industrial Users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the City as the City may require.
13.20.370: RECORD KEEPING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 17/268
Industrial Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain and make available for inspection and copying all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring
activities undertaken by the Industrial User independent of such requirements. Records shall include the chain-of-custody forms and the date, exact
place, method, and time of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the
analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses including documentation associated with Best Management
Practices. These records shall remain available for a period of at least five (5) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any
litigation concerning the Industrial User or POTW, or where the Industrial User has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Director.
13.20.380: SAMPLING REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUSTRIAL USERS:
A. Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds. For all other pollutants, twentyfour
(24)-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite
sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the POTW, the samples must be representative of the Discharge and the decision to allow the alternative
sampling must be documented in the Industrial User file for that facility or facilities. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in
40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during the twenty-four (24)-hour period may be composited prior to
the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other
parameters unaffected by compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the POTW, as appropriate.
B. For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety (90)-day compliance reports, a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used
for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for
facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the POTW may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by 40 CFR 403.12 (e)
and (h), or any superseding amendment thereto, the POTW shall require the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance
by Industrial Users with Applicable Pretreatment Standards and Requirements.
C. Samples shall be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist, immediately downstream from the regulated or
manufacturing process if no pretreatment exists, or at a location determined by the City and specified in the Industrial User's wastewater discharge
permit. For Categorical Industrial Users, if other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the Industrial User shall
measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e), or any superseding
amendment thereto, in order to evaluate compliance with the Applicable Categorical Pretreatment Standards. For other SIUs, for which the City has
adjusted its local limits to factor out dilution flows, the Industrial User shall measure the flows and concentrations necessary to evaluate compliance
with the adjusted pretreatment standard(s).
D. All sample results shall indicate the time, date and exact place of sampling, and methods of analysis and shall certify that the wastestream sampled
is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges from the Industrial User. If an Industrial User sampled and analyzed more
frequently than what was required in its wastewater discharge permit, using methodologies in 40 CFR Part 136, or any superseding amendment
thereto, it must submit all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge as part of its self-monitoring report.
13.20.390: ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS:
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 unless
otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
13.20.400: CITY MONITORING OF INDUSTRIAL USER'S WASTEWATER:
The City will follow the same procedures as outlined in sections 13.20.380 and 13.20.390.
13.20.410: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
Industrial Users shall allow the Director ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying, and the performance of any additional duties necessary to ascertain whether the Industrial User complies with this chapter.
A. Where an Industrial User has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
Industrial User shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the Director will be
permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
B. Industrial Users shall allow the Director to set up on the Industrial User's property, and the Director is authorized to require installation of such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the Industrial User's operations.
C. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
Industrial User at the written or verbal request of the Director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
Industrial User.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director access to the Industrial User's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
13.20.420: MONITORING FACILITIES:
Each Industrial User shall provide and operate at its own expense a monitoring facility to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurements of each
sewer discharge to the City. Each monitoring facility shall be situated on the Industrial User's premises, except, where such a location would be
impractical or cause undue hardship on the Industrial User, the City may concur with the facility being constructed in the public street or sidewalk area,
providing that the facility is located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. The Director, whenever applicable, may require
the construction and maintenance of sampling facilities at other locations (for example, at the end of a manufacturing line or a wastewater treatment
system).
There shall be ample room in or near such sampling facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, including
the sampling and measuring equipment, shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the Industrial User.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 18/268
The Director may require the Industrial User to install monitoring equipment as necessary. All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained
in accordance with all applicable local construction standards and specifications. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
13.20.430: SEARCH WARRANTS:
If the Director has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that
there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the City designed to verify
compliance with this chapter or any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of
the community, then the Director is authorized to seek issuance of a search and/or seizure warrant.
13.20.440: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
A. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from city inspections and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically
requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city, that the methods of production are entitled to protection as trade secrets under
applicable state law.
B. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which
might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made immediately upon
request to governmental agencies for uses related to the Idaho Pollution Discharge Elimination System (IPDES) program or pretreatment program,
and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as
defined by federal regulations will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. Any information
and data submitted by the Industrial User which is desired to be considered a trade secret shall have the words "Confidential Business Information"
stamped on each page containing such information.
13.20.450: PUBLICATION OF INDUSTRIAL USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE:
A list of Industrial Users determined by the City to be in significant non-compliance will be published annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that
provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the POTW. The list will include the Industrial Users which, during the previous twelve
(12) months, were in significant non-compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. For the purposes of this provision, a
Significant Industrial User is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria, and a permitted Industrial User that is
not a Significant Industrial User is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of criteria C., D. or H. below:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of wastewater measurements
taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l);
B. Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken
for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) multiplied by the TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all
other pollutants except pH);
C. Any other discharge violation of a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l), (daily maximum, longer-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative Standard) that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
D. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the City's exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report non-compliance; or
H. Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of Best Management Practices, which the POTW determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local Pretreatment program.
13.20.460: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION:
Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for, but not limited to, the following reasons:
A. Failure to notify the City of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
B. Failure to provide prior notification to the City of changed conditions;
C. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;
D. Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
E. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
F. Refusing to allow the City timely access to the facility premises and records for the purposes of inspection, monitoring or sampling;
G. Failure to meet discharge limitations;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 19/268
H. Failure to pay fines;
I. Failure to pay sewer charges;
J. Failure to meet compliance schedules;
K. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;
L. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility;
M. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
The City will notify Industrial User of a proposed revocation of permit and offer an opportunity to show cause why the proposed action should not be
taken.
13.20.470: DISCHARGE SUSPENSION; EMERGENCY:
The city may immediately suspend a user's discharge (after informal notice to the user) whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons or to
the integrity of operation of the water reclamation system. The city may also immediately suspend a user's discharge that presents or may present a
danger to the environment. Notice of suspension shall be provided by whatever effective means may be possible.
A. Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the water reclamation system, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The city may
allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment has passed,
unless the termination proceedings for nonemergency set forth in this chapter are initiated against the user. Any costs of disconnection and reconnection
shall be borne by the user.
B. A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the cause of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the city prior to the date of any show cause
or termination hearing provided for in this chapter.
13.20.480: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE (NON-EMERGENCY):
In addition to the provisions in section 13.20.460 of this chapter, any Industrial User that violates the following conditions is subject to discharge and/or
water service termination:
A. Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
B. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
C. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
D. Refusal of reasonable access to the Industrial User's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
E. Violation of the pretreatment standards in sections 13.20.050 through 13.20.080 of this chapter.
Such Industrial User will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and/or water service and be offered an opportunity to show cause under
section 13.20.510 of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken.
13.20.490: VIOLATIONS: NOTICE:
When the city finds that a user has violated (or continues to violate) any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may serve upon that user a written notice of violation (via personal service or
certified mail, return receipt). Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction
and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the city. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user
of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the city to take any
action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
13.20.500: VIOLATIONS; CONSENT ORDERS:
The city may enter into consent orders, assurances or voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user
responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period
specified by the document.
13.20. 510: VIOLATIONS; SHOW CAUSE HEARING:
The city may order a user which has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the city administrator and show cause why proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. Notice shall be served for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the
user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by regular and
certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) working days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative
of the user or left attached to the door at the entrance. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user.
A. The city administrator may conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate a hearing officer to issue in the name of the city
administrator notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter
involved in the hearing; take the evidence; transmit a report of the evidence and hearing; and, together with recommendations to the city
administrator for action thereon.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 20/268
B. At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded. The transcript, so recorded, may be made available
to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges therefore.
C. After the city administrator has reviewed the evidence, testimony and recommendations, he may issue a compliance order to the user responsible for
the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, sewer service will be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or
other related appurtenances shall have been installed or that existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly
operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the compliance, including additional self-monitoring and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer.
13.20. 520: VIOLATION; ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
A. When the city finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may fine such user in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per violation. Such fines may be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of the monthly or other long term average
discharge limits, fines may be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
B. Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of twelve percent (12%) of the unpaid
balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum.
C. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the city to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within thirty
(30) days of being notified of the fine. Where a reconsideration request has potential merit, the city administrator may convene a hearing on the
matter promptly after receiving the request from the user. In the event the user's reconsideration request is determined to have merit, the penalty
payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, may be returned to the user. The city may add the costs of preparing administrative
enforcement actions, such as notices and order, to the civil fine.
13.20. 530: VIOLATION; INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
When the city finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may petition the first judicial district court, through the city's attorney, for the
issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge
permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The city may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal
and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation.
13.20.540: VIOLATIONS; CIVIL PENALTIES:
A. A user which has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, may be assessed a maximum civil penalty to be paid to the city of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
violation per day. Penalties may accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
B. In addition to civil penalties assessed by the court, the city may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with
enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.
C. In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances including, but not limited to, the extent of harm
caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the
compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
13.20.550: VIOLATIONS; CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
A user which has willfully or negligently violated any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement; a user which has willfully or negligently introduced any substance into the water reclamation system which
causes personal injury or property damage; or a user which, or employee who, knowingly made any false statements, representations or certifications in
any application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit
or order issued hereunder, or who has falsified, tampered with or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this
chapter, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this code for each violation.
13.20.560: VIOLATIONS; REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of this chapter which provide a remedy or penalty for a violation are not exclusive. The city reserves the right to take any, or all, or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant user when the circumstances warrant. Further the city is empowered to take more than one
enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently. Pursuing one type of remedy shall not be a bar against, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
13.20.570: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Any party affected by any decision, action, fine or other determination of the Director, may appeal that decision or action to the City Administrator by
filing with the City Clerk an appeal within ten (10) business days of receipt of decision of the Director. The appeal shall be in writing and include a
statement of the factual basis for the appeal. Upon timely receipt of the appeal, the City Administrator will schedule the appeal for hearing. The burden in
the appeal shall be on the Industrial User to show that the decision was made unlawfully or that that the violation did not occur. The decision of the City
Administrator shall be a final decision.
13.20.580: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
In addition to any enforcement actions set out in this chapter, a violation of any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the
City. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the Post Falls City Code or state law governing public nuisances.
13.20.590: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS:
A. Upset
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 21/268
1. For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary non-compliance with
applicable pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the Industrial User. An upset does not include noncompliance
to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
2. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for non-compliance with applicable pretreatment standards if the
requirements of paragraph 3. of this section are met.
3. An Industrial User who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
a. An upset occurred and the Industrial User can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
b. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures;
c. The Industrial User controlled production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of their treatment facility until the facility was restored or an alternative method of treatment
was provided; and
d. The Industrial User has submitted the following information to the POTW and treatment plant operator within twenty-four (24) hours of
becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days):
i. A description of the indirect discharge and cause of non-compliance;
ii. The period of non-compliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the non-compliance
is expected to continue; and
iii. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the non-compliance.
4. In any enforcement proceeding, the Industrial User seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
5. Industrial Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with applicable pretreatment standards.
B. Prohibited Discharge Standards
An Industrial User shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for non-compliance with the prohibitions in section
13.20.050, A. and B.3. through B.7., if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: (a) a local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the
Industrial User was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or (b) no local limit exists, but the
discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the Industrial User's prior discharge when the City was regularly in compliance
with its IPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
13.20.600: PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES:
The City may adopt by resolution of the city council reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the City's Pretreatment
Program which may include:
A. Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications;
B. Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing an Industrial User's discharge, and
reviewing monitoring reports submitted by Industrial Users;
C. Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction;
D. Fees for filing appeals; and
E. Other fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the City.
SECTION 2. All provisions of the current Post Falls Municipal Code or ordinances of the City of Post Falls and parts of ordinances in conflict with this
ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
SECTION 3. Neither the adoption of this ordinance nor the repeal of any ordinance shall, in any manner, affect the prosecution for violation of such
ordinance committed prior to the effective date of this ordinance or be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty due under any such ordinance or
in any manner affect the validity of any action heretofore taken by the City of Post Falls City Council or the validity of any such action to be taken upon
matters pending before the City Council on the effective date of this ordinance.
SECTION 4. The provisions of this ordinance are severable and if any provision, clause, sentence, subsection, word or part thereof is held illegal,
invalid, or unconstitutional or inapplicable to any person or circumstance, such illegality, invalidity or unconstitutionality or inapplicability shall not affect
or impair any of the remaining provisions, clauses, sentences, subsections, words or parts of this ordinance or their application to other persons or
circumstances. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that this ordinance would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional
provision, clause sentence, subsection, word, or part had not been included therein, and if such person or circumstance to which the ordinance or part
thereof is held inapplicable had been specifically exempt therefrom.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 22/268
SECTION 5. After its passage and adoption, a summary of this Ordinance, under the provisions of the Idaho Code, shall be published once in the
official newspaper of the City of Post Falls, and upon such publication shall be in full force and effect.
Passed under suspension of rules upon which a roll call vote was duly taken and duly enacted an Ordinance of the City of Post Falls at a regular
session of the City Council on__________, 20 .
APPROVED, ADOPTED and SIGNED this__19___day of March 2019.
________________________________
Ronald G. Jacobson, Mayor
ATTEST:
_____________________________
Shannon Howard, City Clerk
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Post Falls, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 1343, passed July 17, 2018. Ordinances of
the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult
the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
Title 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01
CODE ADOPTION
1.01.010: ADOPTION:
There is adopted the "Post Falls Municipal Code", as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. (Ord. 539 § 1,
1987)
1.01.020: TITLE; CITATION; REFERENCE:
This code shall be known as the POST FALLS MUNICIPAL CODE and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the "Post Falls municipal code" in any
prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to,
amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Post Falls municipal code".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 23/268
Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "Post Falls municipal code" and such references shall apply to that
numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 539 § 2, 1987)
1.01.030: REFERENCE APPLIES TO ALL AMENDMENTS:
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Post Falls municipal code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Post Falls,
Idaho, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 539 § 3, 1987)
1.01.040: TITLE, CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS:
Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or
intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section of this code. (Ord. 539 § 4, 1987)
1.01.050: REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES:
The provisions of this code shall not, in any manner, affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are
therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the
corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 539 § 5, 1987)
1.01.060: ORDINANCES PASSED PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF THE CODE:
The last ordinance included in this code was ordinance 524, passed October 21, 1986. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to ordinance 524,
but prior to adoption of this code, are hereby adopted and made a part of this code: ordinances 526, 527, 529, 530, 531, 532, 533, 535 and 537. (Ord.
539 § 6, 1987)
1.01.070: EFFECT OF CODE ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS:
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any
manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as
affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any
violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance,
and all rights and obligations thereunder shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 539 § 7, 1987)
1.01.080: CONSTITUTIONALITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence,
clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid
or unconstitutional, and if, for any reason, this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in
full force and effect. (Ord. 539 § 8, 1987)
Chapter 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.04.010: CONSTRUCTION OF PROVISIONS:
In the construction of the official code and all ordinances amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto the rules set forth in this chapter shall be
observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the legislative body or repugnant to the context. (Prior code § 1-1-3)
1.04.020: INTENT TO DEFRAUD DESIGNATED:
Whenever, by any of the provisions of the official code, an intent to defraud is required in order to constitute an offense, it is sufficient if an intent appears
to defraud any person, association or body politic, or any combination of persons. (Prior code § 1-1-3(A))
1.04.030: ACT BY AGENT DEEMED ACT BY PRINCIPAL:
When the provisions contained in this code prohibit the commission or omission of an act, not only the person actually doing the prohibited thing or
omitting the directed act, but also the employee and all other persons concerned or aiding or abetting the person shall be guilty of the offense described
and liable to the penalty set forth. (Prior code § 1-1-3(B))
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 24/268
1.04.040: EFFECT OF HEADINGS:
The title of any section or subsection of this official code shall be deemed in no wise to restrict, qualify or to limit the effect of the provisions set forth and
contained in such section or subsection. (Prior code § 1-1-3(C))
1.04.050: SEVERABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
Should any portion of this official code be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or void, such adjudication shall in no way
affect the remaining portion of this code. (Prior code § 1-1-3(D))
1.04.060: DEFINITIONS:
A. The singular number includes the plural.
B. Words used in the present include the future.
C. Words used in the masculine gender comprehend as well, the feminine and neuter.
DAY: Any twenty four (24) hour period from twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight; and the word "month" means a
calendar month unless otherwise expressed; and the word "quarter" means any three (3) month period ending with the last day of March, June,
September and December; the word "year" means any one calendar year unless otherwise expressed.
GOVERNING BODY: The city council, or the city council and the mayor, as the case may be applicable.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or omission within the provisions of these chapters. It does not
require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LAND, REAL ESTATE AND REAL PROPERTY: Lands, tenements, hereditaments, water rights, possessory rights and claims.
NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE, NEGLIGENT AND NEGLIGENTLY: Import a want of such attention to the nature or probable consequences of the act
or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
OATH: Includes "affirmation" and the word "swear" includes the word "affirm". Every mode of oral statement under oath or affirmation is embraced
in the term "testify" and every written one in the term "depose".
OFFICER: Officers and boards in charge of departments and the members of such boards and such reference as use of the word "municipality"
means this city, "clerk" or "treasurer" and others mean the city clerk or city treasurer as the case may be applicable.
OFFICIAL TIME: Standard time or daylight savings time as may be in current use within the municipality.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land includes any part owner, joint owners, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Bodies politic and corporate, partnerships, associations and corporations.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Every description of money, goods,chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action, and all written instruments by which
any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished, and every
right or interest therein.
PROPERTY: Includes both real and personal property.
PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE: Streets, alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
SHALL: Is mandatory; "may" is discretionary.
SIGNATURE: Any name, mark or sign written with the intent to authenticate any instrument of writing.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land includes any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the
omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law or to injure another or to acquire an advantage.
WRITING: Includes printing, writing and typewriting.
D. Words prohibiting anything being done, except in accordance with a license or permit or authority from a board or officers, shall be construed as
giving such board or officer power to license or permit or authorize such thing to be done.
E. Whenever in this code it is provided that anything must be done, to the approval of or subject to the direction of the enforcing officer, this shall be
construed to give such officer only the power to determine whether the rules and regulations established in this code have been complied with and
shall not be construed as giving such officer discretionary powers. (Ord. 506 § 1, 1986: prior code § 1-1-3(E))
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 25/268
Chapter 1.08
CITY LIMITS
1.08.010: ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The Post Falls city limit boundary shall be as set forth on the exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein, incorporated herein by reference as if
set forth in full. (Ord. 605 § 1, 1990)
Chapter 1.12
CITY SEAL
1.12.010: DESIGNATED:
The corporate seal of the city of Post Falls, Idaho, shall be circular in form with inner and outer circles of rope design. The outer circle shall be one and
seven-eighths inches (17/8") in diameter and the inner circle shall be one and one-fourth inches (11/4") in diameter. It shall bear upon the upper and
outer portion the words: "CITY OF POST FALLS" in Gothic style type, and upon the lower and outer portion the word: "IDAHO" in Gothic style type. In
the center of the seal it shall bear a silhouette of a mountain, below which shall be the words "POST FALLS" in staggered and stair step designs, the
right border of the words Post Falls shall be the silhouette of a river fall and rapids, and above the silhouetted mountain shall be the word: "incorporated"
and below the word "FALLS" shall be the words "May 28, 1891".
A facsimile of the above described seal is as follows:
(Prior code § 1-4-1)
1.12.020: ADOPTED:
The seal described in section 1.12.010 of this chapter is adopted as the corporate seal of the city of Post Falls, Idaho, November 4, 1981. (Prior code
§ 1-4-2)
1.12.030: CUSTODY:
The clerk shall be the custodian of the seal and shall affix the seal's imprint upon all official documents, records, licenses, warrants and/or checks. (Prior
code § 1-4-3)
Chapter 1.16
OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER
1.16.010: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER DESIGNATED:
Pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-213, the "Coeur d'Alene Press", a daily newspaper of general circulation published in accordance with state law
requirements, is appointed, designated and constituted the official newspaper of the city. (Ord. 1246, 2013)
Chapter 1.20
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 26/268
(Rep. by Ord. 1310, 2017)
Chapter 1.24
GENERAL PENALTY
1.24.010: GENERALLY:
Except as otherwise provided by statute or ordinance, any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code and/or any other law of the city
shall be fined in a sum not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any one offense and such person may be confined in the county jail for a
period of not more than six (6) months, either or both such fine or imprisonment may be imposed. (Ord. 1152 § 1, 2008)
1.24.020: DEFAULT; IMPRISONMENT:
Any person in default of payment of any fine imposed may be imprisoned in the county jail for a period of not more than one day for each five dollars
($5.00) of such fine. (Ord. 509 § 1, 1986: prior code § 1-8-2)
1.24.030: PRISONER LABOR:
A. Any person imprisoned under the provisions of this chapter may be put to work for the benefit of the municipality for the term of his imprisonment.
B. No prisoner shall be required to work on Sunday. (Ord. 506 § 1, 1986: prior code § 1-8-4)
1.24.040: LICENSE REVOCATION:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code any license previously issued to him by the municipality may be revoked by the
court or by the municipal governing body. (Prior code § 1-8-5)
1.24.050: APPLICABILITY:
Except as is otherwise provided by statute or ordinance, the penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this code the same
as though it were a part of each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code, where any duty is
prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues,
unless otherwise specifically provided in this code. (Ord. 509 § 1, 1986: prior code § 1-8-6)
Title 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04
ELECTED OFFICIALS AND ELECTIONS
2.04.010: FORM OF GOVERNMENT:
The city of Post Falls shall be governed by a mayor and city council in accord with Idaho Code title 50, chapters 6 and 7, respectively. Provisions of this
chapter shall be revised to conform to requirements of state law appropriate to the form in effect. The form of government may be changed as provided
by provisions of the Idaho Code. In the event of conflict between the provisions of this title and applicable provisions of Idaho Code, the provisions of
Idaho Code shall prevail and be applied. (Ord. 994 § 2, 2002)
2.04.020: ELECTION OF MAYOR:
There shall be elected at every other regular city election, to be held as required by state law, a mayor to serve for a term of four (4) years. At
intervening municipal elections the mayor's position may be subject to election as required by state law. (Ord. 994 § 2, 2002)
2.04.030: SALARY OF MAYOR:
The mayor shall receive a monthly salary in the amount of one thousand seven hundred eighty eight dollars twenty five cents ($1,788.25) commencing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 27/268
January 1, 2012. The mayor shall be entitled to receive employee benefit offerings available to regular employees of the city. (Ord. 1223, 2011)
2.04.040: ELECTION OF CITY COUNCIL:
A. Election Of Members: There shall be elected at each regular city election, to be held as required by state law, three (3) council members to serve for
a term of four (4) years; and at each succeeding general city election, there shall be elected three (3) council members, each to serve a term of four
(4) years. At any such election additional council seats may fill as required by state law to fill the remainder of unexpired terms or to meet other
election law requirements.
B. Designation Of Council Seats:
1. Pursuant to subsection A of this section, three (3) council members are to be elected at each biennial election for a term of four (4) years and thus
there are six (6) council seats on the city council. Beginning with the city council election in November 2003, each council seat shall be numbered
as allowed by Idaho Code section 50-707. The city clerk shall assign the following numbers to each seat: seat 1, seat 2, seat 3, seat 4, seat 5, and
seat 6.
2. Any candidate seeking election to the city council shall designate the seat he is seeking on his petition for candidacy or upon his filing for
candidacy for one, and only one, council seat. The candidate shall meet all other qualifications for the office of city council member, as required by
law.
3. Commencing at the general city election to be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November 2011, seats 1, 3, and 5 shall be the
council seats for which city council candidates may file. Commencing at the general city election held in November 2009, seats 2, 4, and 6 shall be
elected. Henceforth, the odd numbered council seats and the even numbered council seats shall be elected in alternate general city elections in
the same rotation pattern. (Ord. 1144 § 1, 2008)
2.04.050: SALARY OF CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS:
Each member of the city council shall receive a monthly salary in the amount of eight hundred sixteen dollars ($816.00) commencing January 1, 2012.
Each city council member shall be entitled to receive employee benefit offerings available to regular employees of the city. (Ord. 1223, 2011)
2.04.060: CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS:
The city council shall meet regularly on the first and third Tuesday of each month at six o'clock (6:00) P.M. at city hall. Special meetings of the city
council may be convened and the dates of regular meetings may be changed to avoid scheduling conflicts by majority vote of the city council or as
otherwise provided in Idaho Code. Notice and conduct of all meetings of the city council shall comply with the provisions of the Idaho open meetings act
found in Idaho Code title 67, chapter 23, or its successor. In the event of an emergency circumstance, open meetings of the city council may be
conducted by telephone conference call including one or more of the otherwise unavailable city council members. In this event, a telephone with
speaker system will be made available in the city council chambers for the public to audit such meeting. (Ord. 994 § 2, 2002)
2.04.070: ELECTION PROCEDURES:
The city clerk shall conduct city elections in keeping with the requirements of Idaho law. The polls for all general and special city elections shall be open
from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. until eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. on election day. Any qualified elector who presents himself/herself to election officials at the
appropriate precinct prior to closure of the polls at eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. shall be allowed to vote as provided by state law. Absentee voting shall be
conducted as provided by state law. (Ord. 994 § 2, 2002)
2.04.080: ESTABLISHMENT OF VOTING PRECINCTS BY RESOLUTION:
Election precincts for city elections shall be established by resolution of the city council. Each precinct shall have a designated polling place in
accordance with provisions of Idaho law. The city clerk shall prepare and maintain voter registration rolls and election materials to conduct general and
special municipal elections at the polling places established as required by law. (Ord. 994 § 2, 2002)
Chapter 2.08
APPOINTED OFFICERS
2.08.010: APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS:
The Mayor shall appoint as officers of the City, subject to approval of the City Council as provided by State law, a City Administrator, City Clerk, Finance
Director, City Attorney, Chief of Police, Public Works Director, Human Resources Director, Community Development Director and a Parks and
Recreation Director. Any officer appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council may serve in such position until removed in accordance with
State law or by resignation. Appointed officers are generally subject to the City's adopted personnel rules, other than those provisions regarding
appointment and removal, unless otherwise provided in an employment contract between the officer and the City or otherwise in conflict with City
ordinances or State law. The duties of the appointed officers are established by the adopted position description for each position. Any contract between
the City and an appointed officer shall serve the sole purpose of memorializing terms and conditions of employment and shall not establish employment
of any particular duration, nor shall it modify any procedures for removal of an appointed Municipal officer established by provisions of Idaho law. (Ord.
1343, 2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 28/268
Chapter 2.12
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
2.12.010: ESTABLISHMENT OF PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
A. There is hereby established the Post Falls planning and zoning commission, which shall consist of seven (7) members. The mayor shall appoint
these members, with the consent of the city council as provided by state law. Appointed members may be removed as provided by state law.
Commission members shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years, or until a successor is appointed and qualified. Terms shall expire on the last
day of February of the last year of the designated term. Vacancies on the commission occurring other than by expiration of the term shall be filled by
appointment by the mayor with the consent of the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. The planning and zoning commission shall be
responsible for carrying out duties assigned by relevant provisions of this code in the manner directed by state law and provisions of this code, and
other duties as may be assigned by the mayor, city council and city administration pertaining to land use, planning and development. The city clerk
shall approve and designate a recording secretary to create and maintain records for the commission.
B. At its first meeting following the seating of new members by mayoral appointment and city council confirmation of members filling expired terms of
service during any year, commission members shall meet and organize by electing one member chairman and choosing such other officers as may
be necessary. (Ord. 1259, 2014)
2.12.020: ESTABLISHMENT OF LIBRARY BOARD:
(Rep. by Ord. 1203, 2010)
2.12.030: ESTABLISHMENT, ORGANIZATION AND DUTIES OF PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION:
A. There is hereby established the Post Falls parks and recreation commission, which shall consist of seven (7) members. The mayor shall appoint
these members with the consent of the city council in a manner consistent with Idaho Code section 50-210, or its successor. Members may be
removed in a manner consistent with Idaho Code section 50-210, or its successor. Commission members shall be appointed for a term of four (4)
years, or until a successor is appointed and qualified. Terms shall expire on the last day of February of the last year of the designated term or until a
successor is appointed and qualified. Vacancies on the commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of the term shall be filled by the mayor for
the remainder of the unexpired term.
B. At its first meeting following the seating of new members by mayoral appointment and city council confirmation of members filling expired terms of
service during any year, commission members shall meet and organize by electing one member chairman and choosing such other officers as may
be necessary.
C. The commission may recommend rules and regulations for the proper conduct of park use and recreation program operation in and for the city. Such
proposed rules and regulations are subject to approval by the mayor and city council.
D. The commission shall meet regularly at a time and place determined by resolution of the commission. All meetings shall be open to the public and
notice of such meetings shall be provided to allow and promote public participation in the subject matter considered by the commission. The city
clerk shall approve and designate a recording secretary to create and maintain records for the commission.
E. The commission may, with prior consent of the city council, solicit gifts and/or bequests of money and other property for parks and recreation
purposes.
F. The commission shall advise city staff and the mayor and city council concerning the conduct of, and the supervision of, public parks and public
playgrounds, athletic fields, and recreation activities on any of the properties owned or controlled by the city, or on other sites used for recreation
purposes by the city with the consent of the city council. (Ord. 1259, 2014)
2.12.040: ESTABLISHMENT, ORGANIZATION AND DUTIES OF URBAN FORESTRY COMMISSION:
(Rep. by Ord. 1259, 2014)
2.12.050: ESTABLISHMENT, ORGANIZATION AND DUTIES OF BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS:
A. There is hereby established a Post Falls building code board of appeals, which shall consist of seven (7) members, each meeting one of the following
qualifications:
1. Registered design professional with architectural experience or a builder or superintendent of building construction with at least ten (10) years'
experience, five (5) of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.
2. Registered design professional with structural engineering experience.
3. Registered design professional with mechanical and plumbing engineering experience or a mechanical contractor with at least ten (10) years'
experience, five (5) of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 29/268
4. Registered design professional with electrical engineering experience or an electrical contractor with at least ten (10) years' experience, five (5) of
which shall have been in responsible charge of work.
5. Registered design professional with fire protection engineering experience or a fire protection contractor with at least ten (10) years' experience,
five (5) of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.
6. Certified building code inspector, with a minimum of three (3) years of building inspection experience.
The mayor shall appoint these members with the consent of the city council. Members shall serve at the pleasure of the governing board and may
be removed upon majority vote of the city council. Cause for removal shall include, but not be limited to, neglect of public duties by lack of
preparation or diligence, being disruptive of meetings or board procedures, being discourteous to the public served by the board or failing to work
cooperatively with other board members, the public or city staff. Members shall be residents of Kootenai County, but shall not be employees of the
city of Post Falls.
B. The term of service of each member when the board is initially established shall be two (2) for five (5) years, two (2) for four (4) years, two (2) for
three (3) years and one for two (2) years. Thereafter, each new member shall serve for four (4) years or until a successor has been appointed. Terms
shall expire on the last day of February of the last year of the term of appointment, or until a successor is appointed and qualified. Vacancies on the
building code board of appeals, occurring otherwise than by expiration of the term, shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired remainder of the
term. No unexpired term shall exceed a length of four (4) years. The building official of the city shall provide information for the board as requested
and shall have no vote thereon.
C. At its first meeting following the seating of new members by mayoral appointment and city council confirmation of members filling expired terms of
service during any year, members of the building code board of appeals shall meet and organize by electing one member chairman and choosing
such other officers as may be necessary. The city clerk shall approve and designate a recording secretary to create and maintain records for the
board.
D. The duties and authority of the building code board of appeals shall include, but are not limited to:
1. To hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official of the city of Post Falls in accordance with
operative provisions of the adopted international building code, international residential code, international mechanical code, international fuel gas
code, international property maintenance code, international existing building code, international energy conservation code, and any other building
or construction codes adopted by the city of Post Falls;
2. To adopt rules and procedures for conducting its business. Hearing procedures will, at a minimum, allow the appellant and the building official to
be heard and allow for the presentation of relevant information without compliance with rules of evidence;
3. To render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant, with a duplicate copy to the building official.
E. The building code board of appeals shall have no authority regarding interpretation of the administrative provisions of the adopted building code nor
shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of the adopted building code.
F. Members of the board shall not hear an appeal in which that member has a personal, professional or financial interest.
G. Appeals shall be heard by five (5) members of the board and the board may only overrule or reverse the decision of the building official by a vote of
two-thirds (2/3) of its members. If five (5) members are not present, the hearing will be postponed until five (5) members are available to hear the
appeal.
H. Applications for an appeal before the board must be filed on a form obtained from the building official and be received within twenty (20) days after
the notice, order or decision appealed from was posted, deposited in the United States mail postage prepaid, e-mailed or hand delivered. The
hearing on the appeal will be heard within twenty (20) days of the filing of the appeal. (Ord. 1293, 2016)
2.12.055: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION ESTABLISHED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1212, 2011)
2.12.060: REMOVAL FROM BOARDS OR COMMISSIONS FOR CAUSE:
Individuals appointed to serve on boards or commissions may be removed from their position by the mayor with concurrence of a majority of the then
seated city council or by unanimous action of the entire city council without action by the mayor after receiving notice of the grounds for removal and
being accorded an opportunity to be heard in executive session, unless otherwise provided by applicable provisions of state law. Just cause for removal
shall include neglect of public duties by lack of preparation or diligence, being disruptive of meetings or board/commission procedures, being
discourteous to the public served by the board or commission or failing to work cooperatively with other board/commission members, the public or city
staff. Failure to attend three (3) or more regular meetings during a twelve (12) month period shall be grounds for removal from a board or commission by
the mayor without need for concurrence by the city council. (Ord. 994 § 2, 2002)
Title 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE (Rep. by Ord. 1067 § 1, 2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 30/268
Title 4
RESERVED
Title 5
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
5.04.010: AUTHORIZATION:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the city's general police power and the authority granted to cities by article 12, section 2 of the Idaho constitution,
title 23, chapters 9 and 10 and sections 50-302 and 50-307 of the Idaho Code. (Ord. 1308, 2017)
5.04.020: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the general health, safety and public welfare of the city of Post Falls' residents and visitors by regulating the
hours, places and conditions of the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city of Post Falls. (Ord. 1308, 2017)
5.04.030: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context indicates otherwise, the following terms are defined as follows:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE(S): Beer, liquor and wine.
BEER: Has the same meaning as "beer" as defined in Idaho Code 23-1001.
LIQUOR: Has the same meaning as "alcoholic liquor" as defined in Idaho Code 23-105.
RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages to a consumer.
WINE: Has the same meaning as "wine" as defined in Idaho Code 23-1303. (Ord. 1308, 2017)
5.04.040: POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:
The city clerk is authorized to establish and update, from time to time, written policies and procedures to implement the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
1308, 2017)
5.04.050: FEES SET BY RESOLUTION:
All license and other fees authorized by this chapter will be established by resolution of the city council. The fee established for the sale of beer must be
consistent with Idaho Code 23-1016 and the fee for the sale of liquor must be consistent with Idaho Code 23-916. The catering permit fee must be
consistent with Idaho Code 23-934A. (Ord. 1308, 2017)
5.04.060: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages without first obtaining a license from the city, except as provided in Idaho Code 23-1007A for the
purpose of donating the proceeds to a benevolent, charitable or public purpose. (Ord. 1308, 2017)
5.04.070: LICENSE APPLICATION:
A. A completed application for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or beer and wine to be consumed off the premises must be filed with the
city clerk along with the required fee. The application must provide for the name of the applicant, the location of the proposed business, information
required to show that the applicant meets the qualifications required by this chapter, and such other information as may be required on the
application. At the time the application is filed the applicant must also present copies of a license to sell beer, wine or liquor, whichever is applicable,
obtained from both the state and the county, and a copy of the premises layout submitted with the application submitted to the state.
B. All applications received by the city clerk will be reviewed and a final decision to grant or deny the license will be made within thirty (30) days of
receipt of a completed application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 31/268
C. Licenses will be for a period of no longer than one year and expire at two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on the first day of the renewal month for a state license
as determined by the director of Idaho state police.
D. The licensed premises will be limited to the area designated in the premises layout submitted with the application, which may not be expanded
without submitting an amended application and obtaining approval of the city.
E. A licensed premises may only sell the type(s) of alcoholic beverages that it is licensed to sell. (Ord. 1308, 2017)
5.04.080: GENERAL APPLICANT/LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
A. No retail license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink will be issued to any applicant who:
1. Has, or any partner who has, or actual manager or officer of whom has:
a. Been convicted of the violation of any law of the state, or of the United States regulations, governing or prohibiting the sale of alcoholic
beverages or intoxicating liquor within three (3) years or within three (3) years forfeited or suffered the forfeiture of a bond for their appearance to
answer charges for such violation.
b. Been convicted of driving a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol, drugs or any other intoxicating substances as defined in the jurisdiction
in which the judgment was entered within three (3) years prior to the date of the making of the application for license and/or has not paid a fine,
completed a sentence and/or parole for such conviction.
c. Engaged in the operation of, or has interest in, any house or place for the purpose of prostitution, or has engaged in the operation of any house
or premises within the city limits of Post Falls which has been declared and found to have been a moral nuisance as defined by city ordinances
or state law.
d. Been convicted in any jurisdiction or received a withheld judgment for any crime concerning the possession of any controlled substance within
five (5) years.
2. Has had a similar license revoked by any jurisdiction granting the license and/or had their license revoked by the state of Idaho or Kootenai
County.
3. Allows conduct to occur on the premises which is a moral nuisance as defined by the laws of the state of Idaho and/or the ordinances of the city of
Post Falls.
4. Allows the licensed premises to be frequented by disorderly persons, or if licensed premises is frequented by persons convicted of violence and/or
controlled substances, and/or lewd and lascivious conduct.
5. Manages and/or operates the licensed premises in such a way as to be a nuisance to surrounding businesses by reason of the conduct of
employees or clientele of the licensed premises, where said employees or clientele engage in lewd and/or violent and/or disorderly behavior.
B. No license shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages upon the premises in locations where such sale is prohibited by Idaho Code 23-913.
(Ord. 1308, 2017)
5.04.090: LICENSE REVOCATION/SUSPENSION:
A. The city retains the right at all times to suspend, revoke and cancel any alcoholic beverage license.
B. If any licensee or employee of a business licensed to sell alcoholic beverages violates any of the provisions of this chapter, provides false information
on the application, or is convicted of violation of any of the provisions of the laws of the state of Idaho relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages or
the terms of this chapter, the license may be revoked or suspended.
C. If the city determines that a license issued under this chapter should be suspended, the licensee, prior to the effective date of the suspension, may
request that a monetary penalty be allowed in lieu of the license suspension. If the city clerk determines that such payment be consistent with the
purpose of the laws of the state of Idaho and the city of Post Falls and is in the public interest, the clerk will charge a monetary penalty not to exceed
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The licensee may reject the payment amount and instead be subject to the suspension. Upon payment of the
amount established, the suspension shall be canceled.
D. In the event that the city determines that a license should be revoked or suspended, a written notice of revocation or suspension must be provided to
the licensee setting forth the grounds for such action. The revocation or suspension will become effective ten (10) days after the notice is provided
unless the licensee appeals the revocation to the city council. The licensee must request an appeal in writing addressed to the city clerk. The appeal
must be received within ten (10) days of notice and set forth the basis of the appeal. Upon receipt of an appeal, the city council will set a time and
place for hearing the appeal. A revocation or suspension of the state license by the director of the department of law enforcement or a revocation of
the county license shall be deemed prima facie evidence for revocation or suspension of the license issued in this chapter. (Ord. 1308, 2017)
5.04.100: LICENSE RENEWAL:
An application for renewal of a license to sell alcoholic beverages must be submitted on the same form as the application for the initial license and
submitted to the city clerk along with the required fee. A final decision on the issuance of a renewal license will be made within the same time limits
required by this chapter for the issuance of new licenses. (Ord. 1308, 2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 32/268
5.04.110: LICENSE TRANSFER:
A. An application for the transfer of a license to sell alcoholic beverages must be submitted on the form provided by the city clerk along with the required
fee.
B. No license will be transferred to any applicant that does not meet the requirements for a license set out in this chapter.
C. A final decision on the issuance of a license transfer will be made within the same time limits required by this chapter for the issuance of new
licenses. (Ord. 1308, 2017)
5.04.120: SALES TO PROHIBITED PERSONS:
It is unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages to any person to whom the sale of the same is prohibited by the laws of the state of Idaho. Any
such sale by a person licensed to sell or a person working at a business licensed to sell any alcoholic beverages is cause for cancellation of such
license or licenses as such person may be issued. (Ord. 1308, 2017)
5.04.130: HOURS OF SALE:
A. It is unlawful for any licensee to sell or dispense beer or wine between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
B. It is unlawful for any licensee to sell liquor to be consumed on the premises between the following hours:
1. Between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
2. All day on Christmas. (Ord. 1308, 2017)
5.04.140: CATERING PERMITS:
Holders of a permit to sell any alcoholic beverage to be consumed on the premises may serve and sell alcoholic beverages by the drink at a party or
convention off the licensed premises with a catering permit.
A. Application: Application for a catering permit must be filed with the city clerk, along with the required fee, in such form and manner as provided herein.
The application must provide for:
1. The name and address of the applicant;
2. The number of the applicant's state liquor, beer or wine license;
3. The dates and hours during which the permit is to be effective;
4. The name of the organization, groups or persons sponsoring the event;
5. The address at which the alcoholic beverages are to be served, with a description of the area within the building or at the location where the
alcoholic beverages will be served.
B. Permit Limitations: The catering permit will be limited to authorization to sell liquor or beer or wine, or any combination thereof, based upon the type of
license which the applicant possesses.
C. Length Of Permit: Catering permits issued for festivals or conventions cannot exceed five (5) consecutive days. Permits for parties cannot exceed two
(2) consecutive days. Upon application by the permittee, catering permits for festivals or conventions can be extended for one additional period on
the same terms and conditions of the original permit. The decision to authorize the extension is at the sole and absolute discretion of the city. (Ord.
1308, 2017)
5.04.150: ENFORCEMENT:
Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by section 1.24.010 of this code. (Ord. 1308, 2017)
Chapter 5.08
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
5.08.010: PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 33/268
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials which are not deemed obscene. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of this
chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and
exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene material. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.08.020: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be applicable to all sexually oriented businesses, except as otherwise provided in title 18, chapters 15 and 41 of the Idaho Code.
(Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.08.030: DEFINITIONS:
ADULT ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin operated, slug operated, or for any form of consideration, or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image producing
devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished
or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes,
offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
A. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or
other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas";
or
B. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities".
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or
describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult
video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for
consideration the specified materials which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas".
ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
A. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminude; or
B. Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or
C. Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT MOTEL: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
A. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right of way which advertises the availability of this adult type of
photographic reproductions; or
B. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or
C. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides,
or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas".
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of
nudity or seminude, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities".
EMPLOYEE: A person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full time, part time or contract basis, whether or
not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 34/268
compensation by the operator of said business. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
ESCORT: A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately
model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
ESCORT AGENCY: A person or business association which furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any of the following:
A. The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
B. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
C. The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
LICENSEE: A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant
on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a
sexually oriented business.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO: Any place where a person who appears seminude, in a state of nudity, or who displays "specified anatomical areas" and is
provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration. Nude model studio shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the state of Idaho or a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable
to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
A. That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person is available for
viewing; and
B. Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
C. Where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at any one time.
NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a
fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
SEMINUDE OR IN A SEMINUDE CONDITION: The showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point
or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any
portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the
areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
A. Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
B. Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or
B. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: Any of the following offenses:
A. Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance
by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized
criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling; or distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 35/268
described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries;
B. For which:
1. Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
2. Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
3. Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any twenty four (24) month period.
C. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following:
A. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
B. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
C. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections A and B of this definition.
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT: Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business
by more than twenty five percent (25%), as the floor areas exist on the date this chapter takes effect.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL: Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following:
A. The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
B. The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
C. The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal devise which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.08.040: CLASSIFICATION:
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
Adult arcades;
Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores;
Adult cabarets;
Adult motels;
Adult motion picture theaters;
Adult theaters;
Escort agencies;
Nude model studios; and
Sexual encounter centers. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.08.050: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. It is unlawful:
1. For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to this
chapter, or
2. For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a
sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to this chapter, or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 36/268
3. For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license
pursuant to this chapter.
B. An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the city.
C. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such
information (including fingerprints) as to enable the city to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter.
D. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, the person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a
person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a twenty percent (20%) or greater
interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under the following section and each
applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
E. The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following
documents:
1. If the applicant is:
a. An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he/she is eighteen (18) years of age;
b. A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a
copy of the partnership agreement, if any;
c. A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing
under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the name of the
registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process.
2. If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must: a) state the
sexually oriented business's fictitious name, and b) submit the required registration documents.
3. Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in this chapter, and,
if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each.
4. Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous license under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented
business ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business
for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant, or
a person residing with the applicant, has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is
licensed under this chapter whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually
oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
5. Whether the applicant, or a person regularly residing with the applicant, holds any other licenses under this chapter or other similar sexually
oriented business ordinance from another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses.
6. The single classification of license for which the applicant is filing.
7. The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s), if
any.
8. The applicant's mailing address and residential address.
9. A recent color photograph of the applicant(s).
10. The applicant's driver's license number, social security number, and/or his/her state or federally issued tax identification number.
11. A diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The diagram need not
be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6").
12. A current certificate and straight line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to application by a licensed land surveyor depicting the
property lines and the structures containing any existing sexually oriented businesses within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property to be
certified; the property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, school, or public park or recreation area within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time
an application is submitted.
13. If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room
or booth of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, films, videocassettes, other video reproductions, or live entertainment
which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with the application requirements set forth in
this chapter.
14. Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the
city the following information:
a. The applicant's name or any other name (including "stage" names) or aliases used by the individual;
b. Age, date, and place of birth;
c. Height, weight, hair and eye color;
d. Present residence address and telephone number;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 37/268
e. Present business address and telephone number;
f. Date, issuing state and number of driver's permit or other identification card information;
g. Social security number; and
h. Proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
F. Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business employee license as provided above, shall be the following:
1. A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the police
department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.
2. A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application,
including whether such applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state, or country; has ever had a
license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended; or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied,
revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction,
and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached
to the application.
3. A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in this chapter and, if so, the specified criminal
activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.08.060: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. Upon the filing of said application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the city shall issue a temporary license to said applicant. The
application shall then be referred to the appropriate city departments for an investigation to be made on such information as is contained on the
application. The application process shall be completed within forty two (42) days from the date the completed application is filed. After the
investigation, the city shall issue a license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is
true:
1. The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form;
2. The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years;
3. The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" as defined in this chapter;
4. The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or
regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter; or
5. The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the city within two (2) years of the date of the current application.
If the sexually oriented business employee license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null and void. Denial,
suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to appeal as set forth in this chapter.
B. A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the city that
the applicant has not been convicted of any "specified criminal activity" as defined in this chapter or committed any act during the existence of the
previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the fee
as authorized in this chapter.
C. Within forty two (42) days after receipt of a completed sexually oriented business application, the city shall approve or deny the issuance of a license
to an applicant. The city shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one
or more of the following findings is true:
1. An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
2. An applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or
imposed upon him/her in relation to any business.
3. An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form.
4. An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been denied a license by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within
the preceding twelve (12) months or whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12)
months.
5. An applicant, or a person with whom the applicant is residing, has been convicted of a "specified criminal activity" defined in this chapter.
6. The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business has not been approved by the health department, fire department, and the building
official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
7. The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
8. An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
D. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually
oriented business and the classification for which the license is issued pursuant to this chapter. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 38/268
or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time.
E. The health department, fire department, and the building official shall complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or not in
compliance within twenty eight (28) days of receipt of the application by the city.
F. A sexually oriented business license shall be issued for only one classification as found in this chapter. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.08.070: FEES:
A. Every application for a sexually oriented business license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application and investigation fee, which fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.
B. In addition to the application and investigation fee required above, every sexually oriented business that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall
pay to the city an annual nonrefundable license within thirty (30) days of license issuance or renewal, which fee shall be set by resolution of the city
council.
C. Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by an annual nonrefundable application, investigation, and license fee, which fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.
D. All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the clerk of the city. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.08.080: INSPECTION:
A. An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, Panhandle health district, Post Falls fire district, planning and building
department, or other city departments or independent agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.
B. A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits a misdemeanor if he refuses to permit such lawful inspection
of the premises at any time it is open for business. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.08.090: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
A. Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in this chapter. Application
for renewal shall be made at least forty two (42) days before the expiration date. When made less than forty two (42) days before the expiration date,
the continuation of the license may be affected by such failure by the licensee.
B. If the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the city
finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety one (91)
days have elapsed since the date denial became final. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.08.100: SUSPENSION:
A. The city may suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
1. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;
2. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter. Continued refusal to allow inspection may
serve as a basis for continued license suspension. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.08.110: REVOCATION:
A. The city may revoke a license if a cause of suspension in subsection B of this section occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding twelve (12) months.
B. The city may revoke a license if it determines that:
1. A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process;
2. A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
3. A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution or solicitation therefor on the premises;
4. A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 39/268
5. Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or
other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises; or
6. A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city, county, or state for any taxes or fees past due.
C. When the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license
for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the basis for the revocation has been
corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety one (91) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became
effective.
D. After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may seek
prompt review of such administrative action before the Post Falls city council at the next meeting at which such matter can be accommodated. (Ord.
1054 § 1, 2004)
5.08.120: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address designated in the application. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.08.130: LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS:
A. A person commits a misdemeanor if that person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in any zoning district other than as
expressly allowed in the zoning title of this code.
B. A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand feet (1,000') of:
1. A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities;
2. A public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, child daycare facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary
schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools,
continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities; school includes the school grounds, but does not include
facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school;
3. A boundary of a residential district as defined in the Post Falls zoning code;
4. A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park, playground,
nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar public
land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the city park and recreation authorities;
5. The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in the Post Falls zoning code;
6. An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children or family entertainment; or
7. A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations of the state.
C. A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or
control of a sexually oriented business within one thousand feet (1,000') of another sexually oriented business.
D. A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented
business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure,
or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
E. For the purpose of subsection B of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects,
from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of the premises of a use listed in subsection B of this section. Presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be
irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section.
F. For purposes of subsection C of this section, the distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is
located.
G. Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the day of passage hereof, that is in violation of subsections B1 through B6 of this section shall
be deemed a nonconforming enterprise. The nonconforming enterprise will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one year, unless
sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming enterprises shall not be
increased, enlarged, extended, or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses
are within one thousand feet (1,000') of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first
established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming enterprise and the later established business(es) is/are
nonconforming. Such determinations may be appealed to the Post Falls city council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 40/268
H. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming enterprise is not rendered a nonconforming enterprise by the location, subsequent to
the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a use listed in subsection B of this section within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
sexually oriented business. This "grandfathering" provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for
a license is submitted after a license has expired or been revoked. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.08.140: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS:
A. Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period
of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an "adult motel" as that term is defined in this
chapter.
B. A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not
have a sexually oriented license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he
rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.
C. For purposes of subsection B of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.08.150: REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS, VIDEOS OR LIVE
ENTERTAINMENT IN VIEWING ROOMS:
A. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing
room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, live entertainment or other video reproduction which
depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof
specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall
also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an
engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or
object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6"). The city may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the
applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was
prepared.
2. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
3. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city.
4. It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all
times that any patron is present inside the premises.
5. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction
equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one
of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight, unimpaired by any obstruction, from the manager's
station.
6. It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in subsection A5 of this section remains unobstructed by any doors,
curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area
of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection A1 of
this section.
7. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
8. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access at an illumination of not less than five (5.0) foot-candles as measured at the floor level.
9. It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the
premises.
10. No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths.
11. No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms.
12. The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist.
13. The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
14. The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous,
easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within forty eight inches (48") of the floor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 41/268
B. A person having a duty under subsections A1 through A14 of this section commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. (Ord. 1054
§ 1, 2004)
5.08.160: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ESCORT AGENCIES:
A. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
B. A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord.
1054 § 1, 2004)
5.08.170: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR NUDE MODEL STUDIOS:
A. A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
B. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if the person appears seminude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a
nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open to public
view or visible to any other person.
C. A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state of nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude
model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right of way.
D. A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception
room open to the public. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.08.180: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING PUBLIC NUDITY:
A. It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appears in a state of complete nudity or
depicts specified sexual activities.
B. It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly or intentionally in a sexually oriented business appears in a seminude condition unless the
person is an employee who, while seminude, shall be at least ten feet (10') from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet (2') from the
floor.
C. It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while seminude in a sexually oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer
or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to any employee, while said employee is seminude in a sexually oriented business.
D. It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while seminude, to touch a customer or the clothing of a customer. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.08.190: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. on weekdays and Saturdays, and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.08.200: EXEMPTIONS:
A. It is a defense to prosecution under section 5.08.170 of this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
1. By a proprietary school, licensed by the state, a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
2. By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college,
or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
3. In a structure:
a. Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
b. Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
c. Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.08.210: INJUNCTION AND PENALTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 42/268
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of section 5.08.130 of this chapter is
subject to a suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of the provisions or prohibitions of this chapter shall be
punishable as a misdemeanor as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this code. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates or each time a person
violates the requirements or prohibitions of this chapter is a separate offense or violation. (Ord. 1152 § 2, 2008)
Chapter 5.12
SECONDHAND AND JUNK DEALERS
5.12.010: DEFINITIONS:
AUCTIONEER: A person who sells goods at public auction for another on commission, or for recompense.
JUNK DEALER: A person who regularly buys or collects old lead, old metals, bottles, broken glass, old paper, rope, rags, rubber and other odds and
ends of every nature and description whether or not included in or similar to any of the classes previously specified for resale, including the sale in the
municipality of any such articles bought or collected elsewhere.
PAWNBROKER: Every person, firm, association or corporation engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of loaning or advancing
money on deposit of personal property or deals in the purchase or possession of personal property on condition of selling the same back to the pledgor
or depositor, or who loans or advances money on personal property by taking chattel mortgage security thereon, and takes or receives such personal
property into his possession.
RECYCLER: A person who extracts useful material from property that no longer is usable for its intended purpose.
SECONDHAND DEALER: A person who conducts a business, which business wholly or in part, consists of buying used or secondhand articles, goods,
wares or merchandise, including antique dealers. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.12.020: PROHIBITED TRANSACTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person regulated by the provisions of this chapter to knowingly receive any personal property in any form of transaction from any
person under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs, or from any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.12.030: RECORD KEEPING:
A. Every secondhand dealer, junk dealer, pawnbroker, recycler and auctioneer shall keep a substantial and well bound register in which the dealer shall
enter at the time of making every purchase at the dealer's place of business such a record of the following:
1. The date, hour and place of purchase;
2. A true and accurate description of each article purchased, including the serial number and the name of the manufacturer, if any, as disclosed upon
the article;
3. The amount paid for each such article;
4. The name, age, residence and occupation of the vendor.
B. All entries shall be made in the English language in a legible manner and with ink or typewritten. The register shall be open to the inspection of the
police, city officials, the sheriff and other law enforcement officers of the state, at any and all times. Whenever any such secondhand dealer, junk
dealer, pawnbroker, recycler and auctioneer abandons his occupation as such, he should deliver in good condition to the chief of police a register of
the transactions he has kept during the time he has pursued such occupation dealing in used or secondhand goods, wares or merchandise in the
city. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.12.040: REPORT REQUIRED:
In addition to the record provided to be kept, every secondhand dealer, junk dealer, pawnbroker, recycler and auctioneer shall each week render a
written report to the chief of police of all the used or secondhand property purchased or consigned to him during the preceding week, furnishing in such
written report the information which the dealer has entered upon the register. Upon written notice from the chief of police that the police department has
implemented a different method of reporting, every secondhand dealer, junk dealer, pawnbroker, recycler and auctioneer receiving such written notice
shall report transactions following the method designated in the notice within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.12.050: SEPARATE PAWN TICKET FOR EACH ITEM:
Every pawnbroker shall prepare and deliver to the pledgor at the time of the pledge, a separate pawn ticket for each and every item pledged. (Ord. 1054
§ 1, 2004)
5.12.060: RECEIPT FOR PAYMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 43/268
Upon redemption of any pledge, the pawnbroker shall furnish to the pledgor at the time of redemption a written signed receipt indicating the exact
amount paid on principal and interest. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.12.070: INSPECTION:
Upon request of a city police officer designated by the police chief to make inspections of such businesses, the business owner, or anyone acting on the
owner's behalf, shall produce any records required to be kept, pursuant to this chapter, and shall permit said officer to examine them and shall permit an
inspection of the business premises and all property kept and stored therein. Any such inspection shall be conducted during the business's regular and
usual business hours. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.12.080: RESTRAINMENT OF SALES; NOTICE FROM POLICE DEPARTMENT:
A. Whenever the chief of police or any law enforcement officer shall notify any secondhand dealer, junk dealer, pawnbroker, recycler and auctioneer in
writing or verbally that certain property is alleged to be stolen, such property shall not be sold or permitted to be redeemed or otherwise released to
anyone other than a law enforcement officer for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of such notice, but such notice may be renewed for an
additional thirty (30) day period or periods. Verbal notice will be followed by a written notice.
B. Written notice of hold shall bear the date, accurate description of held property, requesting agency case number, name of business where questioned
item is held, amount owed to secondhand dealer, junk dealer, pawnbroker, recycler and auctioneer, name of person property was received from and
the requesting officer's name and agency. A duplicate copy of this information shall be left with the secondhand dealer, junk dealer, pawnbroker,
recycler and auctioneer at the time an item is placed on hold or, in the event of verbal notice, when the written notice is given. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.12.090: STOLEN PROPERTY; RETURN TO TRUE OWNER:
A. Any property, article or other valuable thing purchased by, pledged to, traded with, consigned or sold to any secondhand dealer, junk dealer,
pawnbroker, recycler or auctioneer which is subsequently determined by a law enforcement agency to have been stolen or otherwise unlawfully
obtained shall be transferred to the custody of such agency upon the agency's request, or shall be returned by the secondhand dealer, junk dealer,
pawnbroker, recycler or auctioneer to the true owner. The true owner shall not be liable to the secondhand dealer, junk dealer, pawnbroker, recycler
or auctioneer with respect to an article deemed stolen.
B. Upon the return of stolen property to the true owner, the secondhand dealer, junk dealer, pawnbroker, recycler or auctioneer shall complete such
documentation as may be necessary or required to effect the transfer of the property including such documentation pertaining to the title, or
registration of vehicles or firearms as may be required by local, state or federal authorities. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.12.100: PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions or prohibitions of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this code. Each
day a secondhand dealer, junk dealer, pawnbroker, recycler or auctioneer violates the requirements or prohibitions of this chapter is a separate offense
or violation. (Ord. 1152 § 3, 2008)
5.12.110: LICENSE REVOCATION:
A. The city shall retain the right at all times to revoke and cancel any secondhand dealer, junk dealer, pawnbroker, recycler or auctioneer license for
failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. In the event it is brought to the attention of the city administrator that a violation has taken place, before revoking such license, the city administrator
shall cause notice to be served upon the licensee, setting forth in general terms the violation or violations claimed to have been committed and such
notice shall provide a time for hearing thereon by the city administrator which date of hearing shall not be less than five (5) days nor more than ten
(10) days from the date of the service of the notice, and upon or following the hearing, if the city administrator shall find that the provisions of this
chapter have been violated, the city administrator is authorized to revoke such license theretofore issued and no refund of any unused portion of the
license fee shall be made to the licensee. (Ord. 1210, 2011)
Chapter 5.16
HOTEL AND MOTEL REGISTERS
5.16.010: OPERATOR SHALL MAINTAIN REGISTER:
Every operator of a motel or hotel shall maintain a register in which each guest shall register his name, home address and license number of the vehicle
in which he is traveling. The date of his arrival and departure shall also be recorded. Such register shall be available to and open for inspection by any
law enforcement officer and shall be preserved for a period of not less than five (5) years. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 44/268
Chapter 5.20
DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION
5.20.010: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to solicit door to door without first registering with the city of Post Falls, unless exempt by state or federal law. "Door to door
solicitation" shall mean any unsolicited contact by a person with any person at a residence or dwelling in the city of Post Falls for the purpose of selling
any product or service, or soliciting orders for any product or service. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.20.020: REGISTRATION FEE:
A registration fee in the amount set by the city council by resolution shall be tendered at the time of submitting a registration application. (Ord. 1054 § 1,
2004)
5.20.030: REQUIRED INFORMATION:
Persons registering with the city clerk shall present current and valid government issued photo identification and shall fill out a registration application to
be provided by the city clerk, which shall give the following information:
A. Name and permanent home address of the applicant;
B. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods or services to be sold or provided;
C. Name and address of the person's employer, together with an explanation of the exact relationship between the person and the employer;
D. Length of time for which the door to door solicitation will occur;
E. A statement as to whether or not the person has been convicted of any crime or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and
where the offense was committed. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.20.040: TERM:
A. A new registration shall be filed with the city clerk every one hundred eighty (180) days for solicitation of sales of the same product or service by the
same person.
B. A new registration shall be required when a person who has previously registered within the last one hundred eighty (180) days desires to sell door to
door any products or services not listed on the original registration application. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.20.050: NUISANCE PROHIBITED:
A. No person, registered or not, shall solicit business at any home or business when such location has clearly posted any sign indicating that solicitation
or peddling is prohibited.
B. No person, registered or not, shall continue with door to door solicitation at any home or business when requested to leave by the owner, authorized
agent of the owner, or any other person that resides or works on the premises. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.20.060: FALSE INFORMATION PROHIBITED:
Providing false information on a registration application shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.20.070: EXEMPTIONS:
The fee provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons qualifying as a nonprofit business, including charitable activities, within the meaning of
section 503 of the United States internal revenue code. Possession of a certificate of such status from the internal revenue service shall be required to
qualify for this exemption. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
Chapter 5.24
MERCHANT AND SECURITY POLICE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 45/268
5.24.010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to own or operate a merchant or security police business or engage in business as a merchant or security policeman,
regardless of whether the person is employed by a licensed merchant or security police business or self-employed, as provided in and authorized in this
chapter without first obtaining a license from the city. A license will be required for the business which lists each licensed employee associated with the
business. Licenses shall be renewed annually. (Ord. 1207, 2011)
5.24.020: DEFINITION:
"Merchant or security police" means any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation engaged in the business of watching, guarding or
protecting any premises, property or persons, or who patrols streets, districts or territories within the city for such purposes, but shall not apply to any
individual who as an employee guards the property of only one employer. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.24.030: LICENSE APPLICATION:
A. All applications for a license by a business and/or its employees shall be submitted to the police department in writing on a form provided by the city
and shall contain the following information:
1. Name, age and address of the applicant. In the case of a business applicant the name of the business and the owner of the business will be
required.
2. Fingerprints of the individual applicant and the fingerprints of the owner if the applicant is a business and the owner is not otherwise required to
register.
3. Full name, age and address of all employees of any business applicant.
4. Name and address of the person's employer, together with an explanation of the exact relationship between the person and the employer.
5. A statement as to whether or not the person has been convicted of any crime or of any violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the
offense and where the offense was committed.
6. A copy of a certificate of insurance for a standard form liability insurance policy (personal injury and property damage) in a coverage amount of not
less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) which covers the actions of the applicant while working as a merchant or security police.
B. An incomplete application will not be accepted. (Ord. 1207, 2011)
5.24.040: GENERAL APPLICANT/LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
A. No merchant or security police license shall be issued to any business or individual applicant, or any partner, or manager, employee or officer of the
business who:
1. Has been convicted in any jurisdiction or received a withheld judgment for a misdemeanor not related to a crime against a person within the last
three (3) years or a misdemeanor crime against a person or a felony within the last fifteen (15) years.
2. Has had a similar license revoked by any jurisdiction.
3. Has been charged with a misdemeanor or felony which is pending trial or determination on appeal.
B. If the applicant is under active criminal investigation by a law enforcement agency, the city has the right to withhold processing the application until
the investigation is concluded and a determination has been made as to whether the applicant will be charged. (Ord. 1207, 2011)
5.24.050: LICENSE FEE:
Every applicant shall submit with the license application a license fee in the amount set by the city council by resolution. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.24.060: DISTINGUISHABLE IDENTIFICATION:
A. Any badge to be used and any uniform to be worn by merchant or security policemen shall be easily distinguishable from the badge and uniform used
by a law enforcement officer employed by either Post Falls, Kootenai County or state of Idaho.
B. All cars used by merchant or security police in pursuant of their occupation as such shall be plainly marked on both sides thereof with the name
"merchant or security police". (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.24.070: REQUIREMENTS:
A. Together with the application for a license, the applicant shall submit for approval the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 46/268
1. Photo of the badge, uniform and identifying insignia to be used by the employees in the business;
2. Photo of automobile identification insignias and license plate number of the vehicle to be used in the business.
B. Upon approval by the police department, the identifying insignia, uniform or badge may not be changed without first obtaining approval of the police
department.
C. Badges, insignia and identification shall be worn and/or displayed at all times while in the performance of the duties of merchant or security police.
D. Merchant or security police having knowledge of a crime committed within the city limits shall notify the police department and stand by until a regular
officer arrives. At no time shall merchant or security police conduct an investigation before calling the police department.
E. Merchant and security police shall follow the lawful orders of the police department. (Ord. 1207, 2011)
5.24.080: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
In the event it is brought to the attention of the police department that a violation has taken place, or a licensee is under active investigation or has been
charged with a crime against a person, before revoking or suspending such license, the police department shall cause notice to be served upon the
licensee. The notice shall set forth in general terms the violation or violations claimed to have been committed and such notice shall provide a time for
hearing thereon by the chief of police which date of hearing shall not be less than five (5) days nor more than ten (10) days from the date of the service
of the notice. Upon or following the hearing, if the chief of police finds that the provisions of this chapter have been violated, the chief is authorized to
revoke such license theretofore issued and no refund of any unused portion of the license fee shall be made to the licensee. If the chief of police finds
that the licensee is under active investigation or has been charged of a crime against a person, the chief is authorized to suspend the license pending
the completion of the investigation and a final determination regarding any pending charge. (Ord. 1207, 2011)
5.24.090: APPEAL:
Any applicant who has made application for a license under the provisions of this chapter and who has been denied such a license, or any person
holding a license which is revoked or suspended under the provisions of this chapter, may request a hearing before the city administrator. (Ord. 1207,
2011)
5.24.100: VIOLATIONS:
Any person in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in title 1, chapter
1.24 of this code. (Ord. 1152 § 4, 2008)
Chapter 5.28
BATHHOUSES AND MASSAGE PARLORS
5.28.010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to conduct, operate or maintain a massage parlor or bathhouse or cause a massage parlor or bathhouse to be conducted,
operated or maintained or to perform massages without first obtaining a current and valid massage parlor or bathhouse license or a massage parlor or
bathhouse employee license issued pursuant to the provisions contained herein. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.28.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
BATHHOUSE: Means and includes any place or portion thereof where baths by water, steam, vapor or hot air, hot tub, whirlpool, sauna, or like
treatments are made available for any fee, compensation, consideration or the expectation thereof; provided, however, that such term shall not include
any place providing only ordinary tub or shower baths where no attendant is provided.
MASSAGE: Treating the human body for hygienic, remedial or relaxational purposes by any method of manual manipulation of, pressure on or friction
against, or rubbing, stroking, kneading, slapping, pounding, tapping, vibrating or stimulating the external parts of the human body with or without the aid
of any mechanical or electrical apparatus, instrument or appliance with or without such supplementary aids as oils, rubbing alcohol, liniments,
antiseptics, powders, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage. The definition of massage
shall not be deemed to authorize any activity which is lewd, disorderly or dissolute.
MASSAGE PARLOR: Any place or portion thereof where any person engages in or carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the
activities mentioned in the definition of "massage".
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or any organization of any kind. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.28.030: EXCEPTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 47/268
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following persons and circumstances:
A. An individual giving a massage or bath in his home to members of the individual's immediate family;
B. Licensed physical therapists, licensed athletic trainers, licensed cosmetologists or licensed barbers performing functions authorized under the license
held, licensed physicians or chiropractors, or any individual working under the direct supervision of a licensed physician or chiropractor while
engaged in practicing the healing arts;
C. Administration of massage or baths for therapeutic purposes in a hospital, nursing home, or other healthcare facility;
D. Massages or baths given at the athletic department of any school or college accredited by the state of Idaho;
E. Massages or baths given by licensed physical therapists, practitioners of sports medicine, or graduates of an accredited school of massage. (Ord.
1054 § 1, 2004)
5.28.040: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of every person to whom a license has been issued under this chapter to prominently display such license in a conspicuous manner
at all times in the place of business to which the license relates. One license shall be required hereby for the premises of each establishment operating
as a massage parlor or bathhouse and such license shall permit the giving of massages or baths or both on such premises. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.28.050: APPLICATION:
Application for a massage parlor license or bathhouse license or a massage parlor or bathhouse employee license shall be made to the police chief of
the city of Post Falls on the form provided and shall contain the following information:
A. The exact nature of the massage or bath to be administered;
B. The location and mailing address of the proposed establishment;
C. The name and residence address of the applicant;
D. If applicant is a corporation, the names and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors and manager of said corporation and of each
stockholder owning more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation, and the address of the proposed massage establishment. Said
persons shall be construed as joint applicants for a massage parlor or bathhouse establishment license;
E. If applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of each of the partners including limited partners, and the address of the partnership
itself, if different from the address of the proposed massage establishment. Said persons shall be construed as joint applicants for massage parlor or
bathhouse establishment license;
F. Written proof that the applicant is over the age of eighteen (18) years;
G. The height, weight, color of hair and eyes of each applicant or joint applicant;
H. One photograph of each applicant taken within thirty (30) days of the date of application at least two inches by two inches (2" x 2"). If the applicant is
a corporation, one photograph at least two inches by two inches (2" x 2") of each officer or managing agent(s) of said corporation. If the applicant is a
partnership, one portrait photograph taken within thirty (30) days of the date of application at least two inches by two inches (2" x 2") in size of each
partner, including a limited partner in said partnership;
I. The business, occupation, or employment of the applicant, including the name, dates, location and nature of same;
J. The history of the applicant in the operation of a massage parlor or bathhouse establishment or performance of massage or other similar business or
occupation, including, but not limited to, whether or not such person, in previously operating in this or another city within or without the state has had
a massage or bathhouse or similar license or application therefor, denied, revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor, within five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of application, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation;
K. Whether the applicant (including the officer, directors and managers of a corporation, and partners and managers of a partnership) within five (5)
years prior to making application has been convicted of, paid any fine, been placed on probation, received a deferred sentence, received a withheld
judgment, suffered the forfeiture of a bond for failure to appear or completed any sentence of confinement for any felony or nontraffic misdemeanor;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 48/268
L. If the license is for a massage parlor or bathhouse establishment, the name and address of each employee who is or will be employed in said
establishment;
M. The prior residences of the applicant and all persons named under subsections D, E and F of this section for the past five (5) years, together with the
period of residence at each address;
N. The assumed names or aliases which have been used by the applicant or by all persons under subsections D, E, and F of this section;
O. Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the
application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit; and
P. An applicant who was not licensed by this chapter for the year immediately preceding the current application shall be required to be fingerprinted by
an appropriate agency designated by the licensing officer. Cost of taking and processing such fingerprints shall be borne by the applicant. (Ord. 1054
§ 1, 2004)
5.28.060: LICENSE FEE:
The application shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount to be set by the city council by resolution. In the event that the owner of the
establishment is the sole employee, only one license fee will be required. The license fee will be the same, regardless of what time of year the
application is submitted. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.28.070: LICENSE TERM:
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid only until the first day of the calendar year following issuance of the license. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.28.080: LICENSE RENEWAL:
Any person wishing to renew a license issued under this chapter shall submit an application for renewal and pay a renewal fee in the amount set by the
city council by resolution. The renewal application shall contain a statement that the information contained in the original application is still true and
correct, or provide amendments to any of the information that has changed since the last application. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.28.090: LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
The police chief of the city of Post Falls may refuse issuance of any license covered by this chapter or suspension or revocation of such license upon a
finding that:
A. The license was issued illegally or procured by fraud, misrepresentation, false or misleading statements, evasions of suppression of material facts or
that any of the material facts contained in the application for such license are false;
B. The person owning an interest in or sharing stock in the business, officers or directors of the business, or persons acting as proprietor, manager or
person in charge of any business holding or making application for such a license:
1. Has been convicted within the past five (5) years of any felony relating to sex offenses or to the possession, use or sale of drugs or controlled
substances, or any act or omission in violation of this chapter.
2. Has been convicted of any offense relating to wrongful behavior relating to the giving of massages or baths or the management of massage
parlors or bathhouses.
3. Was previously sharing in the profits of any massage parlor or bathhouse or was acting as an officer or director, proprietor, manager, or person in
charge, or an employee of such business at a time when any license issued pursuant to this chapter for such business was revoked.
C. Any employee of the business has been guilty of any act or omission while on the premises of such business which is in violation of this chapter if the
facts surrounding such acts establish that employee was negligently supervised, or that such act was knowingly allowed by a person sharing in the
profits of the business or having control of the business or supervision of the employee, or if three (3) or more such acts or omissions has occurred
on the premises of such business within a two (2) year period.
D. The employee making application or holding an employee license has acted in a manner which endangers the public health, safety, morals or welfare
while on the premises of any massage parlor or bathhouse, or that issuance of such license would be detrimental thereto. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.28.100: OPERATION AND SANITATION:
A. Minimum Sanitation Requirements: Unless otherwise ordered or approved by the local health district, each establishment shall be constructed,
operated, and maintained to meet the following minimum requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 49/268
1. Physical Facilities:
a. Steam rooms, shower compartments, steam compartments, tub compartments, toilet rooms, and adjacent exits shall have smooth,
nonabsorbent, and easily cleanable floors and walls.
b. Floors of wet and dry heat rooms shall be adequately sloped to one or more floor drains properly connected to an approved sewer system,
except that dry heat rooms with wooden floors need not be provided with sloped floors and floor drains.
c. A source of water approved by the health district shall be available within the immediate area of the dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate
cleaning.
d. The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting or sanitized nondisposable instruments and materials used to administer
massages.
e. Massage tables, exercise tables, and benches shall have easily cleanable upholstery or other approved material covering the entire top surface.
f. Pools, tubs, and similar equipment designed for multiple use without the water being changed, shall comply with state and other laws. Tubs,
baths, and similar equipment designed for single use shall be emptied after each use, thoroughly cleaned, and properly sanitized.
g. No owner or operator shall use an establishment for housing, sheltering, or harboring or cause or permit the same to be used as living or
sleeping quarters by employees or other persons.
h. Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations separate from other facilities, to provide privacy to the occupant(s).
i. Each hand washing facility shall be provided with hot and cold running water, soap or detergent, and sanitary single service towels or blow
dryer(s) at all times. A common towel(s) shall not be used.
2. Cleaning And Maintenance:
a. Every portion of the establishment, including appliances, exercise tables, and equipment and apparatus, shall be kept clean, in good repair, and
maintained in a sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet
facilities and rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the establishment is in operation. Bathtubs and massage tables shall be cleaned and
disinfected after each patron's use.
b. Each establishment shall have clean, sanitized sheets, towels, or other linen in sufficient quantity and said towels and linen shall be cleaned and
sanitized after each use.
c. Massage table(s) and each patron shall be provided with clean and sanitary sheets, towels, or other linen. No common use of sheets, towels, or
other linens shall be permitted.
d. All instruments, apparatus, equipment, or appliances used more than once shall be disinfected after use on each patron.
3. Operators And Personnel:
a. All massages or treatments in an establishment shall be in a room designed for this purpose.
b. All employees, patrons, and operators shall be clean and wear clean outer garments. All employees and operators shall maintain a high degree
of personal cleanliness and conform to hygienic practices while on duty.
c. Each operator shall wash their hands thoroughly before and after administering a massage or treatment on each patron, and as often as
necessary to remove soil and contamination. An operator or employee of an establishment shall thoroughly wash their hands after using the
toilet, smoking, or eating.
d. No operator shall administer a massage or give treatment if he or she knows or should know that he or she has any contagious or
communicable disease. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.28.110: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or employee of any massage establishment:
A. To permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to come in or remain on the premises of any massage establishment as a patron without
approval of the parent or legal guardian of such minor person.
B. To sell, give, dispense, or provide, cause or knowingly permit to be sold, given, dispensed, or provided, any alcoholic beverage or liquor to any
massage patron in conjunction with the performance of massage or offering a massage.
C. To knowingly cause, allow, permit, or engage in any acts prohibited by law while at the location listed in the licensee's application, or in conjunction
with the performance of massage or the offering of services as a massage therapist.
D. To violate any of the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.28.120: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
In the event it is brought to the attention of the city administrator that a violation has taken place, before revoking or suspending such license, the city
administrator shall cause notice to be served upon the licensee. The notice shall set forth in general terms the violation or violations claimed to have
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 50/268
been committed and such notice shall provide a time for hearing thereon by the city administrator which date of hearing shall not be less than five (5)
days nor more than ten (10) days from the date of the service of the notice. Upon or following the hearing, if the city administrator shall find that the
provisions of this chapter have been violated, the city administrator is authorized to revoke such license theretofore issued and no refund of any unused
portion of the license fee shall be made to the licensee. (Ord. 1210, 2011)
5.28.130: APPEAL:
Any applicant who has made application for a license under the provisions of this chapter and who has been denied such a license, or any person
holding a license which is revoked or suspended under the provisions of this chapter, may request a hearing before the city council. (Ord. 1054 § 1,
2004)
Chapter 5.32
GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE
5.32.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide personnel charged with the responsibility of protecting the health and safety of the public and the environment
with information relating to business operations within the city that will aid them in providing police, fire, and environmental protection as well as
information regarding contact persons in the event of an emergency. It is the further purpose of this chapter to provide the city with information regarding
the types of businesses operating within the community in order to facilitate recruitment and retention of businesses and to further the economic
development of the community. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.32.020: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all wholesale and retail businesses and all activities, occupational callings, trades, pursuits or
professions that conduct business from a location within the city of Post Falls with the object of gain, profit, benefit or advantage or that operate a
business at a special event, or uses the public right of way for a special event, on a temporary basis, including mobile food vendors. Each business
location shall be deemed a separate business unless it is a specific annex to the main location of the business. The license is not intended to repeal any
license or franchise provisions of any other ordinance of the city of Post Falls, nor is the license to be considered a waiver of any other requirements of
compliance with any federal, state and local laws. (Ord. 1210, 2011)
5.32.030: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. No person shall engage in any business within the city of Post Falls for which licensing is required by this chapter, without having submitted a license
application to the community development department or a designee and receiving a general business license in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. This license shall be in addition to any other license required by other chapters of this title. Such license shall be valid for one calendar
year so long as the ownership, management, nature of the business or location of the business remains unchanged.
B. No person shall engage in any temporary business within the city of Post Falls for which licensing is required by this chapter, without having
submitted a temporary license application to the community development department or a designee and receiving a general business license in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such license shall be valid for no more than three (3) days. Persons having a city of Post Falls
general business license are exempt from obtaining a temporary business license when engaging in business at a special event. (Ord. 1210, 2011)
5.32.040: EXEMPTIONS:
A. The fee provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
1. Persons qualifying as a nonprofit business, including charitable activities, within the meaning of section 503 of the United States internal revenue
code. Possession of a certificate of such status from the internal revenue service shall be required to qualify for this exemption.
2. Any agency of the United States government and any political subdivision of the state of Idaho.
3. Persons who occupy space at a flea market, but shall apply to the operator of the flea market.
B. In addition, both the fee and license provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
1. Persons who make occasional sales of their own household property not more than twice each calendar year;
2. Domestic servants, newspaper carriers or casual labor not included as temporary employees of a regularly conducted business;
3. Lessors of any residential property having one or two (2) family units. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.32.050: LICENSE APPLICATION:
A general or temporary license application shall be provided by the community development department or a designee and the application shall contain
information including, but not limited to, the name, residence address and residence phone number of the owner and manager of the business, the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 51/268
street and mailing address of the place of business, the business phone number, and the nature of the business to be conducted at such address or
special event, and any other information deemed necessary by the city for the health and safety of emergency service personnel or utility service
providers. Every application shall be personally signed by the owner or his agent. The application shall be submitted no less than ten (10) business days
prior to the date on which business will be commenced. (Ord. 1210, 2011)
5.32.060: LICENSE FEE:
A license fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council has to be paid at the time the application is submitted to the community development
department or a designee and/or prior to the issuance of a general or temporary business license. (Ord. 1210, 2011)
5.32.070: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every business required under this chapter to obtain a general or temporary business license shall display such license in a prominent location upon the
business premises or the event location in the case of a temporary business. No business shall loan, sell, give or assign to any other person or allow
any other person to use or display, or to destroy, damage or remove, or to have in his possession any license which has been issued to said business.
(Ord. 1210, 2011)
5.32.080: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT, NATURE OF BUSINESS OR LOCATION OF BUSINESS:
A. Whenever the ownership, nature of the business or location of any business within the city is changed, a new license application reflecting the
change shall be presented to the community development department or a designee within ten (10) days of said change. The date of the issuance of
the new license shall be the new anniversary date for license renewal.
B. Whenever the management of the business changes, the community development department or a designee shall be notified in writing of the name
of the new manager, residence address and residence phone number of the new manager. (Ord. 1171 § 5, 2009)
5.32.090: COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS:
Licensees shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. (Ord. 1054 § 1, 2004)
5.32.100: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
A general business license may be denied, suspended or revoked for failure of the applicant to comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1054
§ 1, 2004)
5.32.110: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
In the event it is brought to the attention of the city administrator that a violation has taken place, before revoking or suspending such license, the city
administrator shall cause notice to be served upon the licensee, setting forth in general terms the violation or violations claimed to have been committed
and such notice shall provide a time for hearing thereon by the city administrator which date shall not be less than five (5) days or more than ten (10)
days from the date of the service of the notice, and upon or following the hearing, if the city administrator shall find that the provisions of this chapter
have been violated or the license was issued in error, the city administrator is authorized to revoke or suspend such license and no refund of any unused
portion of the license fee shall be made to the licensee. (Ord. 1210, 2011)
5.32.120: APPEAL:
Any applicant who has made application for a license under the provisions of this chapter and who has been denied such a license, or any person
holding a license which is revoked or suspended under the provisions of this chapter, may request a hearing before the city council. (Ord. 1054 § 1,
2004)
Title 6
ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
6.04.010: AUTHORIZATION:
This title is enacted pursuant to the general police power and the authority granted to cities by article 12, section 2 of the Idaho constitution and Idaho
Code section 50-319. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 52/268
6.04.020: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this title is to promote the public health, safety and the general welfare of the residents of the city and to foster the humane treatment of
animals by regulating the care and control of animals within the city. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6.04.030: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this title, the following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ANIMAL: Any live creature, either domestic or wild, except humans or plants. Animal includes fowl and reptiles, but shall exclude fish.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of animal diseases and
injuries.
ANIMAL NUISANCE: Any nuisance arising out of the keeping, maintaining or owning of, or failure to exercise sufficient control of, an animal or animals.
ANIMAL SAFETY OFFICER: Any employee or agent of the city, designated by the chief of police to administer and enforce the licensing, inspection and
compliance requirements established by this title.
ANIMAL SHELTER: Any facility operated for the temporary care, confinement and detention of animals and for the humane euthanizing and other
disposition of animals or any facility authorized by the chief of police or his designee to impound, confine, detain, care for or destroy any animal.
AT LARGE ANIMAL: An animal, excluding cats, that is off the premises of its owner, or if on the premises of its owner or of another, with permission, is
not on a leash or otherwise suitably contained within a fenced enclosure such that it is under the immediate control of a person physically capable of
restraining the animal.
CRUELTY: Any act or omission whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death of an animal is caused or permitted, including failure to provide
proper drink, air, space, shelter or protection from the elements, a sanitary and safe living environment, veterinary care or nutritious food in a sufficient
quantity. In the case of activities where physical pain is necessarily caused, such as medical and scientific research, food processing, customary and
normal veterinary and agricultural husbandry practices, pest elimination, and animal training and hunting, "cruelty" shall mean a failure to employ the
most humane method reasonably available.
DISPOSITION: Adoption, quarantine, voluntary or involuntary custodianship or placement, or euthanasia humanely administered to an animal.
"Disposition" includes placement or sale of an animal to the general public.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL: Includes dogs, cats, domesticated sheep, horses, pigs (excluding potbellied pig), cattle, goats, sheep, nonpoisonous snakes less
than three feet (3') in length, pigeons, ducks, geese, turkeys, chickens, confined domestic hares and rabbits, pheasants, guinea pig, hamster, gerbil,
frog, ferret, mouse, rat, and other birds and animals raised and/or maintained in confinement.
EXOTIC ANIMAL: Any live monkey, alligator, crocodile, cayman, raccoon, skunk, fox, bear, sea mammal, poisonous snake, nonpoisonous snakes more
than three feet (3') in length, members of the feline species other than domestic cat (Felis domesticus), members of the canine species other than
domestic dog (Canis familiaris) or any other animal that by virtue of strength or inherent temperament or disposition would require a standard of care
and control greater than that required for customary household pets sold by commercial pet shops or domestic farm animals.
GUARD OR ATTACK DOG: A dog trained to attack on command or to protect persons or property.
IMPOUNDMENT: The taking into custody of an animal by any police officer, animal safety officer, or any authorized representative thereof.
KENNEL: Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or as such term
might otherwise be defined by the zoning ordinance1 of the city.
MUZZLE: A device constructed of strong material designed to fasten over the mouth of an animal to prevent the animal from barking or biting.
OWNER: Any person having temporary or permanent custody of, sheltering or having charge of, harboring, exercising control over, or having property
rights to, any animal covered by this title. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered by any person or if the person purported to
be harboring claims to have custody or responsibility for the care of any animal.
POTBELLIED PIG: A Vietnamese or Chinese potbellied pig kept for the sole purpose of providing human companionship.
SANITARY: A condition of good order and cleanliness to minimize the possibility of disease transmission and not producing adverse health or sensory
conditions for adjoining property owners.
UNDER RESTRAINT: An animal is secured by a leash or lead under the control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal, or securely
enclosed within the real property limits of the owner's premises.
VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Any animal that attacks, bites, or physically injures human beings, domestic animals, or livestock without
adequate provocation, or which, because of temperament or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite, or physically injure human beings,
domestic animals, or livestock. Any wild animal or any animal that without adequate provocation has bitten or attacked a human being or other animal
shall be prima facie presumed vicious or dangerous.
WILD ANIMAL: Any live, nonhuman primate, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other warm blooded animal that can normally be found in the wild
state. The term "wild animal" does not include: domestic dogs (excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals), domestic cats (excluding hybrids with
ocelots or margays), farm animals, rodents, any hybrid animal that is part wild, and captive bred species of common cage birds. (Ord. 1228, 2011)
6.04.040: ENFORCEMENT; INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED; AUTHORITY GRANTED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 53/268
Animal safety officers and police officers of the city shall be the enforcement officials for this title. These officials shall have the authority to act on behalf
of the city in investigating complaints, impounding and destroying animals, issuing citations, and taking other lawful actions as required to enforce the
provisions of this title. It shall be a violation of this title to interfere with an animal safety officer or other enforcement official in the performance of his
duties. Animal safety officers are hereby authorized to take such actions as they deem appropriate to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public,
whether expressly authorized by this section, or not. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
Chapter 6.08
MISCELLANEOUS ANIMAL REGULATIONS
6.08.010: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal on any property located within the corporate limits of the city when the keeping of such animal,
or the manner thereof, violates the provisions of this title, or when the owner neglects a duty established by this title or carries out conduct which this
title labels as unlawful, or engages in activities, actions or behavior which violates a rule of conduct or requirement of this title or which creates a
menace to public health or safety so as to create a nuisance to neighboring property owners or the public at large.
B. Behavior and/or conditions which violate this title shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the rights
of citizens, other than its owner, to enjoyment of life or property;
2. Any animal other than domestic cats found running at large;
3. Any animal that makes disturbing or grunting noises, including, but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other
utterances which cause annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to reasonable neighbors or reasonable others in close proximity to the premises
where the animal is kept or harbored;
4. Any animal, or owner thereof, that causes fouling of the air by noxious or offensive odors and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or
discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored inclusive of conduct which neglects to
maintain, clean or otherwise eliminate the waste which results from the containment of an animal;
5. Any animal in heat (estrus) that is not confined so as to prevent attraction or contact with other animals;
6. Any animal, whether or not on the property of its owner, that without provocation, molests, attacks, bites, menaces or otherwise interferes with the
freedom or movement of persons in a public right of way;
7. Any animal that chases motor vehicles on a public right of way;
8. Any animal that attacks domestic animals;
9. Any owner or harborer of animals who causes or allows conditions offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare by virtue of the
number of animals maintained at a single residence or premises or because of the inadequacy of the facilities. (Ord. 1228, 2011)
6.08.020: KEEPING OF WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to own, harbor, or permit at large any wild or exotic animal without the express written authorization of the Post Falls city
council. Such authorization may be given only if it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the council that the animal will not constitute a threat to public
health or safety. The city council may conduct a public hearing to obtain the opinions of adjoining residents and property owners when considering such
requests. The city council may charge an applicant for such authorization an appropriate fee to recover the authorization processing costs incurred by
the city. Public educational institutions shall be exempt from the foregoing authorization requirement. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6.08.030: KEEPING OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any household to own, harbor, or possess more domestic animals than authorized by this section or in accordance with
limitations and licensing requirements established by this title:
1. Dogs and cats, not exceeding the number limitations as set forth in subsection 6.08.040A of this title.
2. For the sole purpose of a family pet or for educational purposes at an educational institution, rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, gerbils, frogs, ferrets,
mice, rats, snakes and/or birds (except fowl, pigeons, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys) can be kept, so long as the number limitations as set forth
in subsection 6.08.040A of this chapter are not exceeded. It shall be the duty of all persons owning or harboring such animals to keep and
maintain such animals in a clean and sanitary condition.
3. The animals listed in the following table may be kept on properties containing a minimum of three-fourths (3/4) acre of securely fenced, irrigated
open space, exclusive of a home site, and containing at least one acre in total, maintained in compliance with this title. Said fenced area shall be
irrigated during the growing season to sustain vegetation. The number of listed animals allowed on the original one acre parcel and per acre on
each succeeding acre of contiguous site is limited to a total of ten (10) points (per acre) using the point system in the following table, where the
points are calculated per animal.
Animals Points
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 54/268
Cow 5
Horse, pony, donkey, mule, llama 4
Goat, lamb, alpaca, miniature horse 3
Duck, goose, rabbit 1
4. Chickens are permitted on any detached single-family lot in the city. Each property is permitted a maximum of ten (10) hens. Roosters are
prohibited within the city limits. Coops and feed shall be secured to prevent problems with mice and other pests. Coops, hutches or similar
containment structures must be kept at least thirty feet (30') from the front property line, five feet (5') from the side and rear property lines where
the chickens are being kept, at least fifteen feet (15') from the on site residence and at least twenty five feet (25') from any neighboring residences.
Additionally, the coop shall not be attached to a shared fence. All other title 18, "Zoning", of this code setbacks and restrictions shall also apply.
B. It shall be the duty of all persons owning or harboring such animals to keep them in secure confinement to prevent them from roaming onto adjacent
lands and to maintain such animals, and the grounds upon, and facilities within, which they are housed, in a clean and sanitary condition.
Additionally, all persons owning and harboring animals shall follow industry best management practices in raising and caring for their animals.
C. Animal owners are also required to comply with all requirements regarding sanitation, nuisance and fencing/wall height as set forth elsewhere in this
code. (Ord. 1228, 2011)
6.08.040: LIMITS ON NUMBERS OF ANIMALS ON RESIDENTIAL PREMISES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any household or educational institution to keep more than three (3) dogs and more than a total of seven (7) permitted animals
(not including the 10 permitted chickens or the number and types of animals permitted under subsection 6.08.030A3 of this chapter) as defined by
subsections 6.08.030A1 and A2 of this chapter, unless otherwise specified in subsections 6.08.030A2, A3 and A4 of this chapter; except that a litter
of pups, kittens or other young animals may be kept for a period of time not exceeding five (5) months from birth. The restrictions of this subsection
shall not apply to any commercial establishment where such animals are legally kept for breeding, sale, sporting purposes, or boarding.
B. Kennels shall be permitted only when allowed by the zoning ordinance1 of the city, in compliance with all applicable zoning restrictions.
C. In order to exceed these maximum number limits and/or have any more types/breeds of animals, the lot size must exceed forty thousand (40,000)
gross square feet and the individual must obtain an administrative permit per subsection 6.08.110A of this chapter. (Ord. 1228, 2011)
6.08.050: CARING FOR ANIMALS:
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to refuse or fail to provide such animal with sufficient wholesome and nutritious food,
water, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, humane care and treatment, or to unnecessarily expose any such animal to intolerably hot,
stormy, cold or inclement weather without adequate shelter.
B. No owner or custodian of any animal shall abandon such animal on any street, road, highway or public place, or on private property when not in the
care of another responsible person. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6.08.060: SANITATION:
A. It shall be unlawful and no owner or custodian of any dog shall allow the owner/custodian's dog to soil, defile or defecate on any public property,
street, sidewalk, public way, public play area or upon private property other than that which is exclusively owned by the dog owner, unless such
owner or custodian immediately removes and disposes of all feces deposited by such dog by the following method:
1. Collection of the feces by appropriate implement and placement in a paper or plastic bag or other container; and
2. Removal of such bag or container to a waste disposal container lawfully available to the owner for sanitary disposal of waste as permitted by law.
B. It shall be unlawful and no person owning, harboring or keeping an animal within the city shall permit any waste matter from the animal to collect and
remain on the property of the owner or custodian, or on the property of others so as to cause or create an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous or
offensive living condition on the owner's or custodian's property, or upon the abutting or nearby property of others.
C. It shall be unlawful and no person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any animal shall cause or allow the existence or maintenance of
unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions by virtue of the size or number of animals maintained at a single location or due to the inadequacy of
the facilities. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6.08.070: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to strike, beat, abuse, or intentionally run down with a vehicle any animal, or otherwise engage in any act to cause
or inflict unnecessary pain, injury, suffering or death to such animal; except that reasonable force may be used to drive away vicious or trespassing
animals.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 55/268
B. No person, except a licensed veterinarian, or animal safety officer (for humanitarian purposes) shall administer poison to any animal, or knowingly
leave any poisonous or harmful substance of any kind or ground glass in any place with the intent to injure any animal. The provisions of this section
are not applicable to licensed exterminators using poisons as part of a pest control program or the use of commercial insecticides and rodent baits
used to control insects and/or wild rodents. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6.08.080: RESTRAINT AND CONFINEMENT:
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to fail to keep such animal under restraint or permit such animal to run at large upon the streets and
public ways of the city or upon private property without consent of the owner or present occupant. It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section when an animal is found by an animal safety officer or police officer while it is away from its owner (or responsible person).
B. Any dog, while on a street, sidewalk, public way, or other public space, or upon private property without the consent of the owner, shall be secured by
a leash or chain of sufficient tensile strength to restrain the particular dog and be controlled by a person of sufficient age and strength to control the
animal. This shall not apply to animals prescribed by a doctor for medical reasons or other properly trained assist dog.
C. No owner or custodian of any animal shall fail to exercise proper care and control of such animal to prevent the same from becoming a private or
public nuisance.
D. Every female dog in heat shall be confined in a building or other enclosed area in such a manner that such female dog cannot come into contact with
another animal except for planned breeding. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6.08.090: RESTRAINT OF GUARD DOGS:
A. Every owner of a guard or attack dog shall keep such dog confined in a building, compartment or other enclosure. Any such enclosure shall be
completely surrounded by a fence at least six feet (6') in height and shall be topped with an anticlimbing device to prevent the animal from exiting the
top of the enclosure.
B. Such areas of confinement shall all have gates and entrances thereto securely closed and locked, and all fences shall be properly maintained and
escape proof. Such premises shall be clearly posted to warn of the presence of guard dogs.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs owned or controlled by government law enforcement agencies. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6.08.100: HARBORING OR POSSESSING POTBELLIED PIG:
A. No person shall possess, own, or harbor a "potbellied pig" as defined in this title unless and until obtaining a license from the chief of police for such
animal in accordance with this chapter. Only one potbellied pig may be maintained or licensed at any single address or premises. Said license may
be issued upon payment of the license fee established by the city council by resolution and upon proving compliance with the standards established
by this code. Any such potbellied pig shall be subject to the care and control requirements established for dogs by this title.
B. Each person desiring to license a potbellied pig for keeping in the city shall obtain a certificate of health and qualification from a veterinarian and allow
an inspection of the animal and premises by the chief of police as detailed below:
1. A certificate from a licensed veterinarian certifying that the animal in question is a potbellied pig, measuring no more than twenty three inches (23")
in height at the shoulders when in a normal stance, weighing no more than one hundred twenty five (125) pounds and kept solely for human
companionship shall be obtained and submitted to the city. Further said veterinarian shall certify in writing that the animal in question has been
inoculated against and/or been blood tested, with negative results, for pseudorabies and brucellosis, or any other disease or animal malady which
the USDA or the Idaho department of agriculture deems necessary to prevent health, safety or general welfare concerns.
2. Prior to issuance of a license to possess a potbellied pig, the license applicant shall submit plans showing the size and location of the yard in
which the potbellied pig will be allowed to exercise when not in the home where it lives. Said plans shall include sufficient detail to indicate that
fencing materials and installation methods are sufficient to protect neighboring land uses from intrusion. No potbellied pig, nor the maintenance
practices affecting care of such animal, shall be allowed to interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of adjoining land uses by reason of noise, odor or
otherwise. Violation of these requirements shall be deemed a violation of the requirements of this code.
3. Any person seeking to license a potbellied pig shall allow reasonable opportunity for inspection of the animal and of the premises where it will be
housed, prior to action by the chief of police.
4. Any person denied a license by the chief of police may appeal said denial by filing a written notice of appeal with the city administrator setting forth
the basis of the appeal and stating concisely why the appeal should be granted. The city administrator may investigate the appeal as appropriate,
including meeting with the applicant or any objectors and render a written decision concerning the requested license denial. (Ord. 1228, 2011)
6.08.110: PERMIT; APPLICATION:
A. An administrative permit must be obtained from the planning administrator in the community development department in order to exceed the
maximum number limits and types/breeds of animals permitted in the city as described in section 6.08.030 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 56/268
1. An application for an administrative permit shall include a written description of the requested number and types of animals, lot size information, a
site plan showing where and how the animals will be contained, and a description of the purpose for acquiring and keeping the requested animals.
This information will allow the administrator to evaluate the proposed exception.
2. An administrative permit may be issued by the planning administrator if the following conditions have been met:
a. The lot size exceeds forty thousand (40,000) gross square feet.
b. The administrative permit for the proposed exception to the number and type of animals permitted in the city would be consistent with the
general intent of this code.
c. If an animal is injured or ill, or if the animal is being kept for 4-H, educational purposes, or therapy.
d. Granting the administrative permit has not been demonstrated to be detrimental to neighboring development. (Ord. 1228, 2011)
Chapter 6.12
RABIES AND ANIMAL DISEASE CONTROL
6.12.010: DOG BITES, REPORT NOTICE:
A. Any person owning, possessing or harboring any animal that bites any person, any person bitten by such animal or physician attending such, shall
report the same to the animal safety officer or police officer, immediately but in no case longer than within eight (8) hours of the time of the bite or of
learning of the bite, giving his/her full name, age, and address, the circumstances surrounding the bite and the extent of the bite, the medical
treatment given and the name and address of the owner or person having custody or possession of the animal. The owner of the animal in question
shall release, to the animal safety officer or police officer upon request, all information about the animal needed to complete the investigation.
B. It shall be the duty of every person having knowledge of the existence of an animal apparently afflicted with rabies to report immediately to the animal
safety officer the existence and description of such animal, the place where sent, the name of the owner or persons having custody of the animal, if
known, and the symptoms suggesting rabies. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6.12.020: ANIMAL BITE; QUARANTINE REQUIRED:
No person owning or having custody or possession of any animal shall fail, refuse or neglect to isolate and quarantine an animal that has bitten a human
or other animal for at least ten (10) days in such manner as may be specified by the animal safety officer or a police officer or for such period and in
such manner as may otherwise be required by a public official with lawful authority. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6.12.030: POSSESSION AND DISPOSITION OF INFECTED ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any animal to keep such animal if it is known to have a contagious disease unless the animal is under the current
treatment of a licensed veterinarian. If any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter is found to be suffering from rabies or is inflicted with
hydrophobia, mange or other infectious or dangerous disease, it shall not be released. The animal safety officer may order that an incurably contagious
or harmful animal be destroyed, subject to appeal to the city administrator. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
Chapter 6.16
VICIOUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS
6.16.010: VICIOUSNESS GUIDELINES AND STANDARDS:
A. In determining whether or not an animal is vicious, the animal safety officer shall be guided by the following:
1. Whether or not the dog has bitten or attempted to bite any person or persons;
2. Extraneous circumstances surrounding the occasion indicating the temper or potential ferocity of the subject animal; or
3. Its general menace to the public or to specific individuals.
4. The potential for the animal to attack or menace again.
5. The record or history of compliance with animal regulations by the dog's owner.
6. The propensity of the breed of dog, according to documented authority, to display aggressive or vicious characteristics.
B. These provisions shall apply to dogs even though the dog in question has been vaccinated and licensed as required by this title. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6.16.020: VICIOUS DOG; COMPLAINT:
Any person reasonably apprehensive over the safety of his person, family or property because of the threatening, predatory, menacing, destructive or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 57/268
vicious actions of any dog may make written complaint to the animal safety officer providing such information as the animal safety officer requires. Such
proceedings may also be initiated by an animal safety officer upon information developed in the course of his duties. The animal safety officer, after
investigation and consultation with the owner or custodian, and upon finding that there is good cause to believe that an animal poses a threat of injury to
persons, animals or property, may declare such animal vicious. The owner of such animal shall immediately be notified in writing of the declaration and
shall immediately thereafter maintain said dog in an enclosed cage or other secure enclosure as required by thischapter or by the lawful directives of the
animal safety officer. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6.16.030: VICIOUS DOG; APPEAL:
Any owner or keeper aggrieved by the classification of his animal as vicious, may request, in writing, a hearing before the city council at the next
regularly scheduled meeting at which the appeal request may be accommodated. Notice of any such appeal hearing shall be provided by mail or
personal delivery to any complaining party or adjoining property owner at least seven (7) calendar days in advance of the appeal hearing. Subject to
procedural rulings by the mayor, any appealing party, as may those opposing such appeal, may present witnesses, evidence, and argument in support
of the appeal, and the council shall by a vote of the majority of the members present either affirm or reverse the findings of the animal safety officer. The
mayor may establish time limits and procedural standards for presentation of any such appeal. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6.16.040: VICIOUS ANIMALS; CONFINEMENT AND SUPERVISION:
A. Every dog declared vicious shall be confined by its owner or authorized agent of its owner within a building or secure enclosure which complies with
this section. The secure pen or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides, or in the alternative to a secure top, the
sides must be of such height that the enclosed animal could not, under any foreseeable circumstances in the opinion of the animal safety officer,
escape by jumping or otherwise. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less
than one foot (1'), or be otherwise designed to prevent any possibility of escape by digging by the dog. All such pens, enclosures or structures must
be adequately lighted, be kept clean and in sanitary condition and comply in all respects with applicable zoning and building codes.
B. A vicious dog may be temporarily allowed out of said secure enclosure if such freedom from confinement occurs when accompanied at all times by
an adult with the physical ability to control the dog and if securely muzzled. Every person harboring a vicious animal is charged with an affirmative
duty to confine the animal in such a way that children, other than those of the owner, do not have access to such animal and that the animal cannot
access others, either adult or children. The pen, enclosure or structure shall be locked and shall have displayed in a prominent place a clearly visible
sign, at least eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11") in size, in at least two (2) conspicuous locations on the property, indicating that
there is a vicious dog on the premises. The owner of a vicious dog shall not suffer or permit the dog to go beyond the premises of the owner unless
the dog is caged or securely muzzled and restrained by a chain or leash not more than three feet (3') in length, and under the physical restraint of a
person large andstrong enough to control the dog. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its
vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any human or animal.
C. It shall be duty of the owner of a declared vicious animal to furnish the animal safety officer or police officer with the residence location of said animal
unless or until the vicious designation is removed, even if such location is not within the city.
D. The owner of a dog declared vicious pursuant to this chapter must secure and maintain general liability insurance, in an amount of not less than fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00), which insures against the liabilities which derive from custody of the vicious dog. Proof of this insurance shall be
displayed to any animal safety officer or police officer upon demand. Said insurance shall be obtained within ten (10) days from the date that the
animal is declared vicious. Noncompliance with the requirements of this section by any owner of a dog designated as vicious shall constitute a
violation of this chapter subject to all penalties or methods of enforcement authorized hereby. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6.16.050: DANGEROUS OR NUISANCE DOGS:
Any dog which has been at large in excess of two (2) times in any calendar year or which has been at large and has proven menacing or threatening
when at large may be declared a nuisance or dangerous, as appropriate, by the animal safety officer. A dog may be designated as dangerous even
though it has not behaved in a manner severe enough to warrant designation as a vicious dog. Upon making such a declaration, the animal safety
officer may prescribe the actions which the dog owner must take to abate the nuisance or to protect the public from the menacing characteristics of an
animal so designated. Such restrictions may include additional fencing, security measures, repair of containment facilities, additional supervision or
other measures intended to address the nuisance or danger involved. Such designation may be applied for a certain designated time frame such that
the restrictions serve as a probation for the animal or animal owner in question. Violation of any restrictions set forth in a written order of the animal
safety officer pursuant to this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter, subject to all penalties and enforcement measures authorized hereby.
Upon petition and demonstration of compliance with applicable requirements, the animal safety officer may revise the designation of a vicious dog to
nuisance or dangerous status if the animal safety officer believes that such designation will fulfill the purposes of this chapter. Any decision concerning
classification of an animal as a nuisance or dangerous may be appealed by the animal owner in accord with the procedures established in this chapter
regarding vicious dogs. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6.16.060: SUBSEQUENT ATTACK:
Should any dog attack or bite a person or another animal, after the owner or harborer of such dog has been notified that the dog has been declared
vicious, dangerous or nuisance, such dog shall be impounded, held for observation and shall not be returned to its owner until the animal safety officer
can be assured that the insecurity which allowed the animal to go free has been remedied and will remain so. If any declared vicious dog is found at
large and cannot be safely taken up and impounded, such dog may be summarily destroyed by any police officer or animal safety officer. Failure to
maintain security for vicious, dangerous or nuisance dogs shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 58/268
Chapter 6.20
IMPOUNDMENT
6.20.010: IMPOUNDMENT:
A. In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, an animal safety officer or a police officer may seize, impound and humanely confine to an
animal shelter or hospital any of the following animals:
1. Any dog without a valid license tag;
2. Any animal at large;
3. Any animal constituting a public nuisance or considered a danger to the public;
4. Any animal that is in violation of any quarantine or confinement order of the Panhandle health district, a Post Falls animal safety officer or any
standing quarantine or confinement order of any public officer;
5. Any unattended animal that is ill, injured or otherwise in need of care;
6. Any animal that is reasonably believed to have been abused or neglected;
7. Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having rabies;
8. Any animal that is charged with being potentially dangerous, or dangerous where the city council or animal safety officer determines that there is a
threat to public health and safety; including illegal exotic and wild animals;
9. Any animal that a court of competent jurisdiction has ordered impounded or destroyed;
10. Any animal that is considered unattended or abandoned, as in situations where the owner is deceased, has been arrested or has been evicted
from his regular place of residence;
11. Any animal that has been declared vicious and the owner or harborer fails to adhere the established guidelines set forth in the vicious dog
guidelines as set forth in chapter 6.16 of this title.
B. An animal safety officer or police officer may also, or in lieu of impoundment of a dog running at large, issue to the owner a notice of violation which
calls for payment of an animal control fee or, in the alternative, may issue a uniform citation charging the owner with a criminal violation of this
chapter. Any animal owner issued a notice of violation shall pay any animal control fee established by resolution to the city within thirty (30) days of
the date the notice of violation is issued. Such fee may be paid at the location noted on the notice of violation. In the event that such fee is not paid
within the time period prescribed, the animal safety officer or police officer may issue a uniform citation or refer the matter to the city prosecutor in
order to initiate misdemeanor criminal proceedings for the underlying violation of this chapter. Such citation or complaint shall be punishable as a
criminal misdemeanor as otherwise provided by this code. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6.20.020: NOTICE TO OWNER AND REDEMPTION:
A. Upon impoundment of an animal, the animal safety officer may attempt to notify the owner by telephone or mail. If the owner is unknown or cannot be
contacted, the animal safety officer shall post written notice for three (3) working days at the Post Falls city hall, describing the animal and the time
and place of taking. Any notice to the owner may also include the location of the shelter or hospital where the animal is confined, hours during which
the animal can be reclaimed, and the fees to be charged to the owner. The owner may also be advised that the failure to claim the animal within
three (3) working days may result in the destruction or other disposition of the animal.
B. An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay impound fees as established by resolution of the city council. The rates charged for any
subsequent impoundment may likewise be established by resolution of the city council.
C. Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within three (3) working days shall be subject to placement for adoption in a suitable home or euthanized in a
manner prescribed by the city. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6.20.030: PROPERTY OWNERS MAY IMPOUND:
Any person finding an animal at large upon his property may remove the same to any animal shelter that will take possession of the animal. Any person
doing so shall inform the shelter operator of the location where the animal was captured, type of animal, and any other information which may be
relevant to locating the owner or circumstance concerning the animal. If no such shelter is available, the property owner may humanely hold the animal
in his own possession and immediately notify the animal safety officer. The property owner shall provide a description of the animal and the name of the
owner if known. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6.20.040: RETURN OF ANIMAL TO OWNER:
If the name of the owner or custodian of an animal found at large is known or can be obtained with reasonable dispatch, the animal safety officer may
attempt contact with such owner and advise the owner of the location of the animal and attempt to make arrangements to return the animal. If the animal
owner is not available, the animal safety officer may provide written notice to the registered owner explaining who the owner must contact to reclaim the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 59/268
animal. The officer may remove the animal to the nearest shelter that will accept the animal. The ultimate responsibility for locating an impounded
animal is the owner's. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6.20.050: DISPOSITION OF LARGE ANIMALS:
Any animal safety officer or other designated person on call who removes or takes custody of a healthy large animal such as a horse, cow, mule or other
animal, which is not acceptable to any animal hospital or shelter, shall be authorized to call a trucking firm or company which may convey the animal to a
farm or other appropriate facility that will accept such animals. The disposition of any animal removed to a facility other than an animal hospital or shelter
shall be handled in the same manner as though the animal were confined in an animal hospital or shelter. Any such expenses of shelter or care shall be
the responsibility of the owner. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
Chapter 6.24
ANIMAL LICENSING
6.24.010: LICENSING OF DOGS:
A. License Required: No person shall own, keep, or harbor any dog over the age of six (6) months within the city unless such dog is licensed as
provided in this chapter.
B. Application: Application for such license shall be made by the owner on a form to be provided by the city within ten (10) days after acquiring any dog
over six (6) months of age or within ten (10) days after a dog becomes six (6) months of age; provided that any owner moving to the city for the
purposes of establishing residence or becoming a resident as a result of any annexation, and otherwise required to obtain a license, shall have until
thirty (30) days after establishing residence to obtain such license.
C. Proof Of Rabies Vaccination Required: All owners applying for a license must show to the satisfaction of the licensing authority that the animal for
which the license is being obtained has been inoculated against rabies within the last two (2) years.
D. Proof Of Sterilization: Any owner claiming that his dog has been spayed or neutered must show to the satisfaction of the licensing authority that the
operation has been performed.
E. Payment Of License Fee: A license fee shall be paid at the time of making application. The license fee for dogs shall be established by the city
council by resolution. Such fee may be different depending upon the altered status or other relevant characteristics of the animal.
F. Exemption From License Fee: License fees shall not be required for seeing eye dogs, dogs prescribed by a doctor for medical reasons, government
police dogs or dogs belonging to a nonresident of the city (which are licensed elsewhere) and kept within the boundaries of the city for not longer
than thirty (30) days; provided that all dogs not subject to payment of the license fee shall at the time of entry into the city be properly vaccinated
against rabies, and while kept within the city, meet all other requirements of this title. Any owner claiming any of these exemptions has the burden of
proving to the satisfaction of the licensing authority that the dog in question is entitled to such exemption.
G. Penalties: Any owner of a dog over the age of six (6) months who fails to obtain a license within the time period specified inthis chapter shall be
subject to a fee set by the city council by resolution and/or shall be subject to prosecution for violation of this chapter as otherwise provided herein.
(Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
6.24.020: LICENSE TAGS; IDENTIFICATION:
A. Upon payment and acceptance of the license fee, the city shall issue a durable license tag, stamped with an identification number for the animal for
which the license has been obtained. Any license issued for the keeping of a dog shall take effect on the date of issuance and shall be valid for the
period of time paid for and shown on the receipt issued by the licensing authority. Every dog for which the owner is required to obtain a license must
wear a valid license tag at all times when the animal is off the premises of its owner.
B. No person may use a license for any animal other than the animal for which the license was issued. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from
the neck of any dog the license tag issued pursuant to this section or to alter such tag in any manner.
C. Any dog license issued in reliance of false or inaccurate information may be revoked. Anyone who knowingly submits false information to obtain a
license or to obtain a license without paying the appropriate fee shall be deemed to have violated this chapter and shall be subject to all potential
penalties therefor. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1998)
Chapter 6.28
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
6.28.010: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 60/268
It shall be a violation of this title to:
A. Fail to comply with any provision of this title, that is, to do that which is described as unlawful or to violate the requirements established by this title;
B. Fail to comply with any lawful order of the animal safety officer or police officer, unless such order is lawfully stayed or reversed; or
C. Any person who violates any provision of this title shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24
of this code. Should any person be found guilty in any court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the animal involved to be destroyed by the
animal safety officer.
D. The city may undertake civil legal action in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek to enjoin conduct which violates the provisions of this title and/or
to recover the reasonable costs of actions deemed necessary to bring about compliance herewith. (Ord. 1152 § 5, 2008)
Title 7
RESERVED
Title 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.04
NUISANCES GENERALLY
8.04.010: DESIGNATED; ACTIONS AGAINST PERSON CREATING:
A. Anything which is injurious to the health or morals of another, or offensive to the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere
with a reasonable person in the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is declared a nuisance and may be the subject of an action.
B. In the case of a moral or public nuisance, an action may be brought by any resident citizen of the city or by the city itself; in all other cases the action
may be brought by any person whose personal enjoyment is injuriously affected, or whose personal enjoyment is lessened by the nuisance; and by
the judgment the nuisance may be enjoined or abated, as well as damages recovered. The costs of abatement are as determined by Idaho Code
sections 50-334 and 50-1008. (Ord. 513 § 1, 1986: prior code § 6-1-34)
8.04.020: CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS:
It is unlawful and is deemed a public nuisance for any person to engage in acts of building construction, site development, use of heavy equipment for
earthmoving or installation of public works, or other construction activities which involve use of concussion, compression, power tools, or which produce
bothersome noise, illumination, dust, or similar undesirable environmental effects onto adjoining residential properties, between the hours of ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. on one day and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the succeeding day of the week. (Ord. 648 § 1, 1992)
8.04.030: EXCEPTION; SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
A. Any person desiring to carry out construction work or other development activities which would violate the terms of section 8.04.020 of this chapter
may petition the city clerk for an exemption from the limitations contained therein. Such exemption may be granted by the city administrator, upon
payment of the appropriate fee established by resolution of the city council, and upon approval of a verified application for exception showing that:
1. The construction or land development activity will take placein an area exclusively committed to commercial or industrial land use and that the
activity prohibited by section 8.04.020 of this chapter would not produce conflicts with the peace and quiet of residential or temporary lodging uses
in the vicinity; or
2. The construction or land development activity will take place in an essentially undeveloped area and that no residences or other lodging uses
would be affected by construction activity carried on during the hours proscribed in section 8.04.020 of this chapter; or
3. Some other factor(s) unique to the site preclude the possibility of conflict with adjoining land uses intended to be protected by the provisions of this
chapter;
4. The project must operate in violation of the express provisions of section 8.04.020 of this chapter in order to be completed (e.g., continuous
concrete pour);
5. An emergency exists which precludes compliance if emergency conditions are to be alleviated.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the person requesting an exemption from the provisions of section 8.04.020 of this chapter to present sufficient
competent evidence to show compliance with the provisions of this section. The city administrator may approve, conditionally approve, or reject a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 61/268
request for exemption based upon the application submitted and any investigation he conducts. The reasons for conditional approval or rejection
shall be contained in writing in the response provided by the administrator.
C. Any exemption request which has been approved or conditionally approved may be revoked upon receipt of a complaint by the city administrator or
his designee. Any revocation shall be effective upon mailing to the person exempted. Revocation or denial of an exemption may be appealed to the
city council, with mailed notice to be provided to any complaining parties and to owners of adjoining lands. (Ord. 648 § 1, 1992)
8.04.040: ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS:
Any violation of section 8.04.020 of this chapter or the terms of any exemption or conditional exemption shall be punishable as a violation of this code in
accordance with chapter 1.24 of this code. In addition, the city may elect to bring legal action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the
requirements of this chapter by seeking a court order to prevent further violation. (Ord. 648 § 1, 1992)
Chapter 8.08
FIREWORKS AND FIRE PREVENTION
8.08.010: AUTHORIZATION:
This title is enacted pursuant to the general police power and the authority granted to cities by article 12, section 2 of the Idaho constitution and Idaho
Code title 39, chapter 26. (Ord. 959 § 2, 2000)
8.08.020: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this title is to promote the public health, safety and the general welfare of the residents of the city by reducing the risk of wildfire and to
foster the safe sale and use of fireworks within the city. (Ord. 1296, 2016)
8.08.030: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this title, words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations shall have the meanings given below or as ascribed to them in title 39, chapter
26 of the Idaho Code or as otherwise appropriate to their context.
NATURAL AREA: A naturally vegetated area within a public park that is not irrigated, or manicured.
PUBLIC PARK: Includes any park, natural area, beach, recreation area, trail, playground or play field owned, leased or maintained by the city or school
district 273.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Includes public parks, public rights of way and streets, curbs and sidewalks, parking lots, alleys and the grounds of public
buildings and schools owned, leased or maintained by the city or school district 273. (Ord. 1296, 2016)
8.08.040: FIREWORKS; REGULATION OF SALES, USE, STORAGE AND DISCHARGE:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, sell, possess, store, discharge or use fireworks as defined in Idaho Code title 39, chapter 26
except in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and requirements of Idaho Code title 39, chapter 26, or its successor.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, possess or use any of the following dangerous fireworks at any time within the city:
1. Firecrackers, cannon crackers, giant crackers, salutes, silver tube salutes, cherry bombs, mines, ground bombardment, grasshoppers and other
explosive articles of similar nature;
2. Skyrockets and rockets, including all similar devices employing any combustible or explosive material and which rise in the air during discharge;
3. Roman candles, including all devices which discharge balls of fire into the air;
4. Chasers and whistles, including all devices which dart or travel about the surface of the ground during discharge;
5. Snakes and hats containing bichloride of mercury;
6. Sparklers more than ten inches (10") in length or one-fourth inch (1/4") in diameter or made with other than iron wires;
7. All articles for pyrotechnic display such as aerial shells, salutes, flash shells, sky battles, parachute shells, mines, dago bombs and similar devices;
8. All torpedoes which explode by means of friction, or which contain arsenic, and all other similar fireworks devices including cracker balls;
9. Fire balloons, lanterns or balloons of any type which have burning material of any kind attached thereto.
C. It shall be unlawful to use, possess, or in any way prepare to use, any fireworks described in this chapter or Idaho Code within the boundaries of any
public park or property within the city except when permitted by the city as part of an authorized public display. (Ord. 1296, 2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 62/268
8.08.050: FIREWORKS; PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. No person, without having a valid fireworks permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this code, shall import, export, possess for purpose of sale,
offer for sale, or sell any fireworks for any use or purpose including agricultural purposes or wildlife control, make a public display of fireworks within
the city or transport fireworks in violation of state or federal law. Sales and use of fireworks shall not contravene the provisions of Idaho Code with
respect to the permitted time and type fireworks to be used.
B. A temporary fireworks sales permit may be issued only to a nonprofit, charitable, religious or eleemosynary corporation or association organized and
existing primarily for veterans', patriotic, charitable or civic betterment purposes. Such corporation or association must be based in Post Falls by
virtue of having its principal and permanent meeting place in the city, must have twenty (20) or more bona fide members and must have been
established for at least two (2) or more years.
C. Applicants desiring to sell nonaerial common fireworks as defined in state law for the time period allowed by state law must first obtain an
administrative permit from the city as required by this code and approval by the Kootenai County fire and rescue as authorized by state law and the
fire code. Evidence of the possession of any such required permit must be demonstrated by the stand owner or operator on request by officials of the
city or the Kootenai County fire and rescue.
D. Both nonaerial common fireworks sales and fireworks displays shall comply with the terms of issued permits and with provisions of this code and
state law. Failure to so comply shall constitute a violation of this code. (Ord. 1296, 2016)
8.08.060: FIRE, BURNING AND SMOKING RESTRICTIONS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
A. It is unlawful to make, use or have any open fires in or on any public property unless an official sign is posted on the park, natural area, play field or
other area allowing an open fire. If open fires are allowed, the person burning or making the fire must comply with all fire and burning regulations of
the park, natural area, play field or other area.
B. Smoking and all other activities capable of generating an open flame are prohibited in all city owned, leased and maintained natural areas except at
signed smoking areas. (Ord. 1296, 2016)
8.08.070: OPEN BURNING BANNED UNDER STAGE 2 FIRE RESTRICTIONS:
All burning is prohibited within the city limits of Post Falls for the duration of any stage 2 fire restriction order issued by the Idaho department of lands for
any portion of Kootenai County. The prohibition contained in this section does not apply to the appropriate use of outdoor gas firepits or fireplaces,
covered gas or charcoal barbecue grills or smokers provided that the area surrounding the fireplace, firepit, grill or smoker is kept clear of dry vegetation
or other flammable material and the firepit, fireplace, grill or smoker is monitored by a responsible adult. (Ord. 1296, 2016)
8.08.080: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. It shall be a violation of the law to fail to comply with any provision of this chapter, that is, to do that which is described as unlawful or to violate the
requirements established by this chapter or to fail to comply with any lawful order of the planning and building director, any police officer or the fire
marshal.
B. Except as provided in subsection C of this section, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and may be punished as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this code.
C. An initial violation of subsection 8.08.040C of this chapter by possessing fireworks within a public park or property is an infraction punishable by a fine
not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). Any additional violations of subsection 8.08.040C of this chapter by possessing fireworks within a
public park or property is a misdemeanor punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this code.
D. The city may undertake civil legal action in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek to enjoin conduct which violates the provisions of this chapter
and/or to recover the reasonable costs of actions deemed necessary to bring about compliance herewith. (Ord. 1296, 2016)
Chapter 8.12
EXPLOSIVES
8.12.010: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter applies to all explosives except small arms ammunition and pyrotechnic devices. (Prior code § 7-3-1)
8.12.020: MANUFACTURE OR STORAGE PROHIBITED; PERMIT REQUIRED TO TRANSPORT:
The manufacture or storage of explosives within the limits of the municipality is prohibited. A permit shall be obtained from the clerk to transport any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 63/268
explosives in or through the municipality. (Prior code § 7-3-2)
8.12.030: TRANSPORTATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. It is unlawful for any person in charge of a vehicle containing explosives to smoke in, upon or near such vehicle; to drive, load or unload the vehicle
while intoxicated; to drive the vehicle in a careless or reckless manner, or to unload or load such vehicle in a careless or reckless manner.
B. It is unlawful to operate any vehicle containing explosives on any street in the municipality except in compliance with the following rules:
1. No such vehicle shall be so operated unless it is marked, loaded and equipped in full compliance with all laws of the state relating thereto.
2. No trailer shall be used for the conveyance of explosives in the municipality; but semitrailers as defined by statute may be so used.
3. No vehicle carrying explosives shall be parked or permitted to stand anywhere in the municipality longer than is necessary to make a lawful
delivery; provided, that the standing of such vehicle made necessary by mechanical trouble, traffic conditions, accident or in obedience to the
direction of a police officer or traffic signals shall not be considered a violation of this section. (Prior code § 7-3-3)
Chapter 8.16
TRAILER COURTS
8.16.010: DEFINITIONS:
DEPENDENT TRAILER COACH: A trailer coach which does not have a water closet and a bathtub or shower.
INDEPENDENT TRAILER COACH: A trailer coach that does have a water closet and a bathtub or shower.
LOCAL ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITIES: The individual official(s), board, department or agency established and authorized by a state, county, city or
other political subdivision created by law to administer and enforce the provisions of the local codes and laws as adopted or amended.
SERVICE BUILDING: A building housing communal toilet, laundry and other sanitary facilities necessary for the health and convenience of the trailer
occupants.
TRAILER COACH: A vehicle without means of self-propulsion, but licensable as a conveyance on public streets or highways, and which is constructed
to permit occupancy as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons.
TRAILER COACH SPACE: A plot of ground within a trailer court designated for the accommodation of one trailer coach.
TRAILER COURT: Any plot of ground upon which two (2) or more occupied trailer coaches are located. (Prior code § 5-3-1)
8.16.020: LOCATION:
A. The site must not be:
1. Close to swamps or other potential breeding places for insects or rodents;
2. Subject to flooding, fire or safety hazards;
3. Exposed to chronic nuisances, such as noise, smoke, fumes and odors.
B. The site should be bounded on at least one side by a public street or highway. (Prior code § 5-3-2(A))
8.16.030: TOPOGRAPHY REQUIREMENTS:
The topography must be favorable to good site drainage, minimum grading, trailer placement and ease of maintenance. Initial site grades exceeding
eight percent (8%), or rock formation close to the surface, are likely to cause high development costs. Sparsely wooded sites providing shade trees are
often advantageous. (Prior code § 5-3-2(B))
8.16.040: UTILITY AVAILABILITY:
The site must be readily accessible to public utilities, including water, sewerage and electricity. (Prior code § 5-3-2(C))
8.16.050: AREA REQUIRED:
The area of the trailer court must be sufficient in size to accommodate:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 64/268
A. The number of trailer coach spaces desired;
B. Roads and parking areas for motor vehicles;
C. Service areas, buildings and playgrounds;
D. On site utilities where public utilities are not available. (Prior code § 5-3-2(D))
8.16.060: IMPROVEMENTS:
The physical improvements of the site must be arranged to provide:
A. A convenient means of pedestrian and vehicular access to each trailer coach space, parking areas and accessory buildings;
B. An adequate supply of potable water;
C. A safe method of sewage disposal;
D. Electrical service for lighting and power; and
E. Diversion of surface water away from buildings, trailer coach spaces, service and recreational areas and its disposal from the site. (Prior code § 5-3-
3)
8.16.070: PLAN REQUIRED:
A plan of the proposed trailer court must be developed for approval of the city building inspector and the board of adjustment, indicating the layout of
trailer coach spaces, roads, walks, service buildings, service areas, utilities and necessary grading. (Prior code § 5-3-4)
8.16.080: NUMBER DETERMINATION:
Determination must be made in the initial planning stage on the number of dependent and independent trailer coaches to be accommodated. (Prior code
§ 5-3-4)
8.16.090: SPACE AND SIZE REQUIREMENTS:
Each trailer coach space must be not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet in area and should be at least twenty five feet (25') wide. (Prior code
§ 5-3-4(A))
8.16.100: SPACING REQUIRED:
A. The minimum spacing between trailer coaches and between trailer coaches and buildings must be:
1. Side to side spacing: Fifteen feet (15');
2. End to end spacing: Ten feet (10'). (Space between ends of trailer bodies, not chassis.)
B. No trailer should be located closer than twenty five feet (25') from the right of way line of a main highway or ten feet (10') from the trailer court
property line. (Prior code § 5-3-4(B))
8.16.110: ROADS AND WALKWAYS:
A. General Circulation: Safety and convenience must be a major consideration in the layout of roads, walks and parking areas within the trailer court. All
roads must be continuous.
B. Servicing: Suitable vehicular access for firefighting equipment, delivery of fuel, removal of garbage and refuse and for other necessary services must
be provided. Minimum service distances as required by local regulations or accepted practice must control.
C. Width Of Roads And Parking Areas: Main access roads, excluding parking: Two lane - twenty feet (20').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 65/268
D. Parking Area: The same number of motor vehicle parking spaces must be provided as the number of trailer coach spaces. These must be provided in
special parking areas.
E. Walks:
1. Location: The trailer park walk system must include a walk from the entrance of each trailer to service facilities.
2. Width Of Walks:
a. Public walks, minimum: Four feet (4');
b. Entrance walks (from public walk to trailer door): Two feet (2'). (Prior code § 5-3-4(C))
8.16.120: SERVICE BUILDINGS:
Each trailer court must be provided with one or more service buildings containing the requisite number of plumbing fixtures and other service equipment.
The service buildings must conform in general to the following requirements:
A. Location: Buildings should be located not more than two hundred feet (200') from any dependent trailer coach spaces.
B. Construction: The materials and methods used in the construction of service buildings must conform to local building codes for buildings of this
nature. They must have an interior finish which is moisture resistant and can be easily cleaned. All rooms of service buildings must be ventilated and
all exterior openings provided with screens.
C. Facilities: Separate men's and women's toilet rooms must be provided and distinctly marked. These rooms must be separated by a sound resistant
wall. A vestibule or screen wall must be provided to prevent direct view into the toilet rooms when exterior doors are open.
1. Plumbing Fixtures:
a. Every trailer court must provide adequate toilet and laundry facilities. In no instance should there be less than one laundry unit (laundry tray or
washing machine); one water closet, one lavatory and one shower for women; and one water closet, one lavatory and one shower for men. A
slop water closet (water closet with seat removed) must be provided in each service building. The slop water closet should be in a separate
room of the service building with a single direct opening to the outside.
b. The facilities listed above will accommodate any number of independent trailer coaches, and up to ten (10) dependent trailer coaches. One
water closet must be provided for each sex for every ten (10) additional dependent trailer coaches. (Urinals for men may be substituted for onethird
(1/3) of these water closets.)
c. One lavatory must be provided for each sex for every ten (10) additional dependent coaches; and one shower or bathtub for each sex for every
twenty (20) additional dependent coaches. A laundry unit must be provided for every twenty (20) additional trailer coach spaces.
d. All water closets and bathtubs or showers for women, and all water closets and bathtubs for men must be located in separate compartments,
with self-closing doors. Gang type shower compartments may be used for men. Individual shower stalls must be approximately three feet by
three feet (3' x 3'). Showers for women must have a dressing compartment with stool or bench. The room containing the laundry units must be
separated from the toilet rooms, and have an exterior entrance only.
e. All plumbing installations shall conform to the local plumbing code.
2. Electrical: All electrical installations shall conform to the local electrical code.
3. Heating: Heating facilities capable of maintaining a temperature of seventy degrees (70°) in cold weather should be provided.
4. Hot Water:
a. Facilities should provide for the continuous supply of three (3) to five (5) gallons of hot water per trailer coach space.
b. Hot water at a temperature of about one hundred eighty degrees (180°) should be provided for clothes washing equipment. (Prior code § 5-3-
4(D))
8.16.130: LAUNDRY FACILITIES:
Mechanical laundry drying equipment or laundry drying yards must be provided. Laundry drying machines must be located in service buildings. Where
laundry drying yards are used, they must be conveniently located to service buildings and have an area of approximately five (5) square feet per trailer
coach space. (Prior code § 5-3-4(E))
8.16.140: REFUSE COLLECTION:
Refuse must be stored in flytight and rodentproof containers. Each coach space will require from four (4) to six (6) gallons of refuse storage capacity per
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 66/268
day. Refuse container stations, where used, should be located at a maximum of two hundred feet (200') from any trailer coach space and preferably not
more than one hundred fifty feet (150'). (Prior code § 5-3-4(F))
8.16.150: RECREATION AREA:
At least one hundred (100) square feet per trailer coach space must be made available in one or more areas for recreational uses. These areas should
be located so as to be free from traffic hazards. (Prior code § 5-3-4(G))
8.16.160: GRADING AND DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS:
Grading and drainage must be performed so that water will drain away from trailer coach spaces, buildings, service and recreational areas, and off the
site in a manner which will provide reasonable freedom from erosion. Walks, driveways and retaining walls must be so constructed as not to interfere
with drainage. (Prior code § 5-3-5)
8.16.170: SLOPE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Trailer coach spaces must be graded toward abutting roadway to prevent surface water draining across adjacent coach spaces. Grading under
trailers must be provided to prevent puddling of water.
B. Where swales for the carriage of stormwater are needed between the trailer coach space and the roadway, they must be of a shallow type, generally
not to exceed eight inches (8") in depth, to permit the parking of the trailer without damage to the undercarriage.
C. The following minimum and maximum slope values will usually give satisfactory results:
Minimum
Percent
Maximum
Percent
Roads 0.50 0.8
Walks 0.50 10
Recreation area and laundry drying yards 0.50 4
Sodded and planted areas 1.00 10
Grade of coach space 0.50 5
(Prior code § 5-3-5(A))
8.16.180: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Roads And Parking Areas: Roads must be constructed of concrete or macadam, or of gravel, crushed stone, sand-clay, slag or other locally available
suitable materials, with a light bituminous surface treatment, oil coating or other dust preventive material. Roads must be crowned at center to shed
water to drainage facilities.
B. Walks: Walks must be constructed of concrete, macadam, gravel, fine stone, cinders or other materials providing a stable footing. Stepping stones
may be used from main walks to trailers.
C. Recreation Areas And Laundry Drying Yards: Surfacing may be natural ground cover, sand-clay or other suitable local materials. (Prior code § 5-3-
5(B))
8.16.190: WATER; REQUIREMENTS:
A safe and adequate supply of potable water must be provided in each trailer court.
A. Source Of Supply: Connection must be made to a public water supply.
B. Quantity: The minimum quantity of water to be provided must be one hundred twenty five (125) gallons per day per trailer coach space. Additional
quantities may be needed where lawn watering, car washing, are to be provided. Provision should generally be made for peak one hour domestic
requirements two and one-half (21/2) to three (3) times the average requirements. (Prior code § 5-3-6(A))
8.16.200: WATER; DISTRIBUTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 67/268
A. The piping material and method of installation used for water distribution must conform to code requirements of the city plumbing code.
B. In general such systems must:
1. Be piped to all buildings containing plumbing fixtures, and to trailer coach spaces intended for use by coaches with plumbing fixtures;
2. Not be interconnected or cross connected with any other system of piping, or otherwise to be subject to hazards of backflow or back siphonage;
3. Be sized to provide water in sufficient volume and at adequate pressure for the sanitary operation of all plumbing fixtures during periods of
maximum demand. (Prior code § 5-3-6(B))
8.16.210: FIRE PROTECTION:
A. Where public water system is available to the trailer court, the recommendations of the local fire protection authorities should be obtained relative to
the installation of fire hydrants and other protective devices.
B. Where the trailer court water supply and distribution system is not intended to provide fire hose outlets, approved type portable fire extinguishers
should be provided in service buildings and at other suitable locations. (Prior code § 5-3-6(D))
8.16.220: DRINKING FOUNTAINS:
A. At least one drinking fountain must be provided in all trailer courts.
B. Drinking fountains, where installed, should be constructed of impervious material and should have an angle jet with the nozzle above the overflow rim
of the bowl. The nozzle should be protected by a nonoxidizing guard, and the bowl should be of easily cleanable design, without corners. The bowl
opening should have a strainer. The drain from the fountain should have a strainer. The drain from the fountain should have no direct, physical
connection with a waste pipe, unless the drain is trapped. (Prior code § 5-3-6(E))
8.16.230: PLUMBING CODE CONFORMANCE:
The plumbing installed in all trailer courts must conform to the city plumbing code. (Prior code § 5-3-6(F))
8.16.240: SEWER REQUIREMENTS:
A system of septic tanks shall be provided in all trailer courts and all waste and soil lines discharging from buildings and trailer coaches should be
connected thereto. All septic tanks and connections must be in accord with local practices and be approved by local administrative authorities having
jurisdiction. (Prior code § 5-3-6(G))
8.16.250: ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Every trailer court must be provided with electric power. An electric outlet supplying one hundred ten (110) to one hundred fifteen (115) volts should
be provided for each coach space. The outlets should be weatherproof, and in easy reach of the parked trailer. In no instance should any power line
across the trailer court area be less than eighteen feet (18') above the ground. All electric wiring in the court must be in compliance with the village
electrical code.
B. Adequate over current protection must be provided on all circuits. Service drops to each coach space should be weatherproof, insulated, and not
smaller than two (2) no. 8 wires.
C. Street and yard lights, sufficient in number and intensity to permit the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night must be provided. Outdoor
lighting must be effectively related to buildings, trees, walks, steps and ramps. (Prior code § 5-3-6(H))
8.16.260: FUEL RESTRICTIONS:
Cylinders, containing liquefied petroleum gas or oil to be used as fuel by trailer occupants, must be connected to the stoves or heaters of the trailer by
copper or other metallic tubing, to provide leakproof connections. The cylinders should be securely fastened in place, not less than five feet (5') from any
coach exit. State and local regulations applicable to the handling of bottled gas and fuel oil must be followed. All installations must conform to the city fire
preventive ordinance. (Prior code § 5-3-6(I))
8.16.270: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED GENERALLY:
A. Where restaurants, filling stations, fuel depots, stores, are provided as an added convenience to the tenants, such buildings and facilities must be
constructed and maintained in compliance with applicable local codes and health regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 68/268
B. All ordinances, or parts of ordinances in conflict with the ordinance codified in this chapter, insofar as the ordinances in any way conflict with the
ordinance codified in this chapter, are repealed.
C. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining sections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this chapter, or the chapter as an entirety, it being the legislative intent that this chapter shall
stand notwithstanding the invalidity of such sections, sentence, clause or phrase.
D. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter, or any amendments thereto, is made a misdemeanor punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of
this code, providing that each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1152 § 7, 2008)
Chapter 8.20
GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
(Rep. by Ord. 1029 § 1, 2003)
Chapter 8.24
REFUSE AND STAGNANT WATER
8.24.010: PROHIBITION:
It is unlawful for any person to permit or suffer to be in or accumulate in, or upon any yard, lot, place or premises or upon any street or sidewalk adjacent
to or abutting upon any lot, block, place or premises or in any building or any shed owned or occupied by him or for which he may be agent within the
limits of the municipality, any stagnant water or impure water, refuse, vegetable decay or decaying substance, garbage or filth of any kind, nor suffer
such yard, lot, place, building or premises to be or to remain in such condition as to cause or create a nuisance or offensive smell or to pollute or render
unhealthful the atmosphere or the premises or create a rodent harborage, or thereby to be, become, cause or create a public nuisance. (Ord. 513 § 1,
1986: prior code § 8-2-1)
Chapter 8.28
PRIVIES AND SEPTIC TANKS
(Rep. by Ord. 1029 § 1, 2003)
Chapter 8.32
ABANDONED ICEBOXES, REFRIGERATORS AND CONTAINERS
8.32.010: RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned
building, structure or dwelling under his control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other
container which has a door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing the door or lid,
snap lock or other locking device. (Prior code § 6-4-1)
Chapter 8.36
ABANDONED VEHICLES
8.36.010: DEFINITIONS:
ABANDONED: To leave a motor vehicle on private property without the permission of the person having rights to the possession of the property, or on a
public street or other property open to the public for the purposes of vehicular traffic or parking, or upon or within the right of way of any road or highway,
for twenty four (24) hours or longer.
FRONT YARD: A yard extending between side lot lines across the frontage of a lot adjoining a public street and from the front line to the front of the
principal building.
HIGHWAY: A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes
street or alley.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Does not include highway.
REAR YARD: A yard extending between side lot lines across the rear of a lot opposite the side(s) of a building which fronts upon a public street and
from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 69/268
VEHICLE: A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, including snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles.
WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE: (The term inoperative vehicle when used alone shall include wrecked or dismantled vehicles.)
A vehicle which:
A. Does not carry a current valid state registration and license plates, or
B. Cannot be safely operated under its own power, or
C. Is visibly missing any part essential for movement, or on which such essential parts are broken or defective, including, but not limited to, missing
or flat tires, defective foot brakes, hand brakes, headlights, taillights, horn, muffler, rearview mirrors, windshield wipers or adequate fenders. (Ord.
1201, 2010)
8.36.020: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Pursuant to the authority granted by Idaho Code section 50-334 and correlated other provisions, the city council makes the following findings and
declarations:
The accumulation and storage of wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property is found to create a condition
tending to reduce the value of surrounding private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute
an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, injurious to the health, safety and general welfare due to broken glass,
standing water, accumulation of rusted parts and potential for breeding of vermin.
Therefore, the presence of a wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, on private or public property except as expressly hereinafter
permitted is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1201, 2010)
8.36.030: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to:
A. A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or
private property; or
B. A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer,
a licensed junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise; or
to a vehicle under salvage permit as provided in section 8.36.060 of this chapter.
Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance. (Ord. 1201, 2010)
8.36.040: UNLAWFUL TO LEAVE INOPERATIVE VEHICLES ON PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
It is unlawful to leave inoperative vehicles on public right of way for a period longer than twenty four (24) hours. Removal of any inoperative vehicle from
public right of way may be removed in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 18, title 49, Idaho Code. (Ord. 1201, 2010)
8.36.050: UNLAWFUL TO LEAVE INOPERATIVE VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
No person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any inoperative or
unlicensed vehicle to remain on such property longer than forty eight (48) hours, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly,
disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled unless pursuant to a salvage permit.
Except, one boat and/or one recreational vehicle without licenses may be stored in the side or rear yard, but not in any front yard. (Ord. 1201, 2010)
8.36.060: SALVAGE PERMIT:
Upon application of any person for a special permit and the payment of a nonrefundable fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council, the city
may cause a permit to be issued to such applicant for salvage of parts from one vehicle for necessary repairs of an existing vehicle registered to that
person. The permit will allow the presence of two (2) inoperative vehicles on the property: one vehicle being used as salvage and one vehicle being
repaired.
The length of time the permit can be issued will be determined by the following:
A. Salvage Permit For Thirty Days: If the conditions in subsection B of this section cannot be met, a thirty (30) day permit may be issued. At the end of
the thirty (30) day period, a city official may inspect the property and determine if the conditions for a six (6) month permit have been met. If those
conditions have not been met, a forty eight (48) hour notice will be given to have the vehicles and property in compliance or removed from the
premises. If the inoperative vehicle or any parts remain on the premises after the forty eight (48) hour notice, the same shall be removed and the cost
thereof charged to the permittee. A city official may also deny a permit for a good cause, including, but not limited to, the applicant's failure to comply
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 70/268
with the requirements of this chapter. In no case will a permit be issued if it appears that the applicant is or may be maintaining a business on the
property, no more than one permit may be issued to any property address.
B. Salvage Permit For Six Months: Vehicles and the property on which they reside must meet the following conditions before the salvage permit for six
(6) months can be issued:
1. Vehicles under salvage permit must be parked in compliance with general provisions and exceptions set forth in title 10, chapter 10.20 of this
code, and the appropriate zoning district parking requirements.
2. Vehicles under salvage permit are declared to require obstruction from public view and from adjoining properties by a solid opaque fence at least
six feet (6') in height.
3. Vehicles and the respective property on which they are located, that are maintained in a manner deemed to be detrimental to public health, safety,
or welfare due to broken glass, standing water, accumulation of rusted parts or potential for breeding of vermin, will have their salvage permits
revoked.
4. The above conditions must be maintained at all times or the permit will be revoked, and forty eight (48) hour notice given to have the vehicles and
property in compliance.
C. Further Action Upon Inspection: At the end of the six (6) month period, a city official may inspect the property. Upon demonstrating that significant
progress has been made on the repair or restoration of the vehicles under permit, up to three (3) further six (6) month renewals may be granted. At
the end of a renewal period(s), one or both vehicles must be in operating condition or removed, and all parts and waste removed from the property.
Failure to demonstrate significant progress will result in the permit being revoked and forty eight (48) hour notice is given to have the vehicles and
property in compliance or removed from the premises. If the inoperative vehicle or any parts remain on the premises after the forty eight (48) hour
notice, the same shall be removed and the cost thereof charged to the permittee.
D. Denial Of Permit: A city official may also deny a permit for a good cause, including, but not limited to, the applicant's failure to comply with the
requirements of this chapter. In no case will a permit be issued if it appears that the applicant is or may be maintaining a business on the property,
nor more than one permit may be in force or issued to any property address in any twelve (12) month period.
E. Painting Of Vehicles: Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless it is being done within an enclosed structure. (Ord. 1201, 2010)
8.36.070: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER:
(Rep. by Ord. 1201, 2010)
8.36.080: APPEAL:
A. Any interested party may appeal the issuance, denial or revocation of a salvage permit or a notice to remove a vehicle by filing a written notice of
appeal with the city administrator within five (5) business days after the issuance of the notice to remove or the decision to issue, revoke or deny a
salvage permit.
B. Such appeal shall be heard by the city administrator which may affirm, amend or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate.
C. The clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of hearing to the appellant.
D. In conducting the hearing, the city administrator shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. (Ord. 1201, 2010)
8.36.090: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY:
A. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the city's authority to also
pursue enforcement through whatever civil means are also available. The person violating this chapter shall be responsible for the city's costs
associated with civil enforcement action.
B. Prior to initiating prosecution for violation of this chapter, city staff shall attempt to provide notice to the person in charge or control of the real property
on which the violation has occurred. Such notice shall specify the nature of the violation and the time by which the violation must be abated. Said
notice shall be mailed to the person in charge or control of the property or delivered in person. If the person in charge or control cannot be found,
then notice shall be provided by posting a notice upon a conspicuous place on the premises and mailing a copy of said notice by certified mail to the
record owner reflected in the property tax records of the Kootenai County assessor of the same at such owner's address shown on those records.
(Ord. 1201, 2010)
8.36.100: REMOVAL COST, ASSESSMENT:
(Rep. by Ord. 1201, 2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 71/268
8.36.110: ALTERNATIVE PROVISIONS:
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in
addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency
having jurisdiction. (Prior code § 10-3-3)
Chapter 8.40
SALE OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING PHOSPHORUS
8.40.010: PURPOSE:
It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to and for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public inhabitants of the
city of Post Falls to prohibit, within the city limits, the sale or distribution of laundry cleaning products containing more than a trace amount of
phosphorus. (Ord. 589 § 1, 1990)
8.40.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following mean:
CITY: The city of Post Falls, Kootenai County, Idaho, or its authorized or designated agent, representative or deputy.
LAUNDRY CLEANING PRODUCT: Any product including, but not limited to, soaps, detergents, laundry bleaches and laundry additives used for the
purpose of cleaning laundry.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, governmental entity or any other legal entity.
PHOSPHORUS: Elemental phosphorus.
TRACE QUANTITY: Any incidental amount of phosphorus which is not part of the laundry cleaning product formulation, and is present only as a
consequence of manufacturing, and does not exceed 0.5 percent of the content of the product by weight expressed as elemental phosphorus. (Ord. 589
§ 2, 1990)
8.40.030: SALE OF PHOSPHORUS PRODUCTS PROHIBITED:
No person may sell, distribute, offer or expose for sale, whether for domestic or commercial use, and whether at wholesale or retail within the city limits
any laundry cleaning product which contains phosphorus in excess of a trace quantity. (Ord. 589 § 3, 1990)
8.40.040: LABELING REQUIRED:
All laundry cleaning products sold within the city limits shall have affixed thereto labeling which clearly indicates the percent of phosphorus contained in
the product to the nearest one-tenth (1/10) of one percent (1%) accuracy. Laundry cleaning products which contain only a trace quantity of phosphorus
may be labeled "Contains no phosphorus", "Contains no phosphates", or similar labeling which makes a clear statement that no prohibited quantity of
phosphorus is present in the product. (Ord. 589 § 4, 1990)
8.40.050: TIME FOR COMPLIANCE:
To allow depletion of existing stock and for the convenience of sellers, the prohibition of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not become effective
for ninety (90) days from the date of passage. (Ord. 589 § 5, 1990)
8.40.060: CUSTOMER NOTIFICATION:
Within ninety (90) days of passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all customers and residents of the city of Post Falls shall, by means selected
by the city, be notified of the initiation of the phosphate detergent ban program established by this chapter. (Ord. 589 § 6, 1990)
8.40.070: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY:
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the city's police department. Any person involved in the sale or distribution of any laundry cleaning
compound prohibited by this chapter shall, for a first offense of this section, be notified of such noncompliance by the city and shall be given ten (10)
days from receipt of such notice to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to comply with this section following this ten (10) day period, or
subsequent violations of any of the provisions of this section shall be a general misdemeanor and shall subject the person to the general penalty of title
1, chapter 1.24 of this code. (Ord. 1251, 2013: Ord. 589 § 8, 1990)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 72/268
Chapter 8.44
SPOKANE RIVER USE RESTRICTIONS
8.44.010: RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF SPOKANE RIVER AND ACCESS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the waters of the Spokane River located within the boundaries of the city, or to enter the Spokane River from
any lands located within the city which are west of the Spokane Street Bridge across the Spokane River at any time a sign or message is posted on
either side of the Spokane Street Bridge across the Spokane River or on public park and boat launch property indicating that entry to, or use of, the
Spokane River is then prohibited. For purposes of this chapter, the term "entry" shall include launching a boat or other flotation device; piloting, floating
on or riding in a boat or on a flotation device; or swimming, wading, diving or otherwise subjecting oneself or others to the hazards of the Spokane River
as a result of conduct occurring within the city when prohibitory signs are posted. These limitations shall not apply to public safety or law enforcement
personnel or authorized personnel or contractors of the owner or operator of the Post Falls Dam in the course of performance of their assigned or
necessary duties. It shall constitute a violation of this code to engage in the proscribed conduct or to disregard any sign posted pursuant to the
restrictions established hereby. The penalty for any such violation shall be as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this code. (Ord. 1236, 2012)
Chapter 8.48
BURIAL RESTRICTIONS
8.48.010: REQUIREMENTS FOR HUMAN BURIAL:
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, it shall be unlawful to bury or store the remains of any human body within the city except within a
cemetery owned or operated by political subdivision of the state or within a cemetery which complies with the endowment care cemetery act of the state,
or except where the remains are in the temporary care and custody of a public agency or public official, a state licensed funeral establishment or an
educational institution accredited or funded by the state. (Ord. 929 § 2, 1999)
Chapter 8.52
WEEDS, BUSHES, TREES AND OVERGROWN CONDITIONS; PROHIBITIONS
8.52.010: TERMS DEFINED:
The following terms shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter, unless the context of their use indicates otherwise:
BRUSH PILE: An accumulation of cuttings or dead portions of trees, brush or shrubs placed in a pile or allowed to lay randomly on the ground.
NUISANCE TREE OR SHRUB: Any large, woody perennial plant which is allowed to grow in such a manner as to obscure any traffic visibility triangle,
any traffic sign or encroach into a municipal public right of way in such a manner as to create a hazard to those using the right of way, or the existence of
any dead or dying tree or shrub which creates a hazard to public safety or public property.
VEGETATIVE LITTER: Scattered accumulation of dead portions of plant materials.
WEED: All uncultivated, unmowed grasses, annual plants, perennial plants, noxious weeds and all other rank uncultivated vegetation over eight inches
(8") tall, other than trees, shrubs, and cultivated plants, flowers and agricultural products. (Ord. 1024 § 2, 2003)
8.52.020: WEEDS, BUSHES, TREES AND OVERGROWN CONDITIONS UNLAWFUL:
A. It is unlawful for any owner, lessee, occupant, or any agent or representative of any such owner, lessee or occupant having control of any occupied or
unoccupied lot or parcel of land, or any part thereof in the city, to allow, permit or maintain on any such lot or land or any adjacent municipal public
right of way the growth of weeds, or unmowed grass or the accumulation of overgrown weeds, grass, brush, nuisance trees or shrubs, whether dead
or living. Allowing the unmanaged growth or accumulation of weeds (noxious or otherwise) or grass over eight inches (8") in height or the
accumulation or overgrowth of weeds, grass, brush or trees is declared to be a violation of this chapter. The owner of real property is ultimately
responsible for compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. All weeds, unmowed grasses, brush piles, and vegetative litter, with the exception of an actively operated compost pile not generating nuisance
odors, on any private property within the city are hereby declared to be a violation of this chapter.
C. Any tree, shrub or other plant material or any dead or dying tree or shrub located on private property in the city, which overhangs or intrudes over or
upon any public street, alley, avenue, roadway, sidewalk, traffic intersection visibility triangle or traffic sign to such an extent that it interferes with the
safety of the traveling public or is a hazard or hindrance to public safety or use of public property, is declared to be a violation of this chapter.
D. Pursuant to authority vested by Idaho Code section 50-317 or its successor and article XII, section 2 of the Idaho constitution, any owner, lessee,
occupant, or any agent or representative of any such owner, lessee or occupant having control of any occupied or unoccupied lot or parcel of land
shall be responsible for immediately remedying any conditions that violate the requirements of this chapter. Upon notice to the owner, the city is
empowered to abate such violation by causing the cutting and removal of trees, weeds, and grass, and the removal of rubbish upon and from private
property within the city and the parking within the curbing abutting same, and to assess the cost thereof against the private property so cleared, and
that which is adjacent to the parking/landscape strip between the sidewalks and curb and any alley so cleaned pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 73/268
317 or its successor. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, nothing addressed hereby shall preclude the city from acting upon conditions
that constitute a nuisance pursuant to provisions of Idaho Code and pursuing abatement as provided thereby. (Ord. 1024 § 2, 2003)
8.52.030: INITIATION OF COMPLAINTS:
Any person may file a weed, brush pile, vegetative litter or nuisance tree or shrub complaint by filing a written complaint with the city clerk or by reporting
such matters to the Post Falls police department. The city clerk shall forward all such complaints to the staff members assigned responsibility for
enforcement of this chapter by the city administrator. (Ord. 1024 § 2, 2003)
8.52.040: INSPECTION OF PREMISES AUTHORIZED:
City staff may determine by inspection whether such accumulation or growth or pile of weeds, brush or growth constitutes a violation of this chapter. It
shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any authorized staff member or agent making an inspection permitted under this section. (Ord. 1024
§ 2, 2003)
8.52.050: NOTICE TO ABATE WEEDS, BUSHES, TREES AND OVERGROWN CONDITIONS:
Whenever a city staff member or authorized agent finds that a violation does exist pursuant to any provision of this chapter, he may initiate enforcement
by giving notice, by certified and first class mail addressed to the last known address of the owner of record or by personally serving the notice upon the
owner of record, and if there is more than one owner of record, by such mail or personal service to any one of such owners. In the event the owner of
the property is unknown, or his whereabouts are unknown, notice shall be given by a combination of first class mail and certified mail based upon the
records of the county assessor. Such notice shall specify the violations required to be abated and the manner and time limits by which the owner of the
property is required to achieve compliance. (Ord. 1024 § 2, 2003)
8.52.060: OWNER TO ABATE VIOLATION:
It shall be the duty of the owner of private property, whose use constitutes a violation of this chapter, to cut, trim or remove such accumulations or growth
immediately upon the receipt of notice from the city, in no case less than the time frame stated in the notice which shall provide at least five (5) days for
performance unless an emergency is found to exist. (Ord. 1024 § 2, 2003)
8.52.070: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO ABATE VIOLATION:
Any owner or other person notified to cut, trim or remove weeds, brush pile, vegetative litter or nuisance tree or shrub growth from their property, and
who shall fail to do so and abate such violation within the time specified in the notice, shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction shall
be punished by fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). If abatement is not accomplished within five (5) days after an infraction citation is issued the
violation may subsequently be charged as a misdemeanor punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this code. Every day such violation
continues after the date specified in the notice shall constitute a separate and distinct offense, punishable by a lawfully appropriate penalty. (Ord. 1152
§ 8, 2008)
8.52.080: APPEAL, TIME LIMITS FOR FILING AND DECISION:
If the property owner receiving notice to abate a violation of this chapter contests the determination, a written appeal of the notice may be filed with the
city clerk within no more than ten (10) days of transmittal of the notice to abate a violation. The city administrator shall hear the appeal as soon as
possible. A decision shall be rendered in writing by the city administrator as soon as practical. Any decision rendered by the city administrator shall be
final. (Ord. 1024 § 2, 2003)
8.52.090: ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS BY CITY AND COLLECTION OF COSTS:
In any case where a person required under this chapter does not abate the violation, the city, through its own personnel, contractor and/or agents, may
enter upon the premises to cut, trim or remove weeds, brush piles, vegetative litter or nuisance tree or shrub growth, and abate such violation. The total
cost of the abatement shall be billed to the owner of the property for payment. In the event payment is not made within sixty (60) days, or if the owner or
whereabouts of the owner are not known, the cost of abatement bill may be certified by the city clerk and forwarded to the county treasurer for inclusion
in the county property tax assessment pursuant to Idaho Code section 50-1008. Pursuit of abatement by the city shall not preclude prosecution of
violations of this chapter. (Ord. 1024 § 2, 2003)
Chapter 8.56
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES
8.56.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to protect individuals under the age of eighteen (18) from the hazards of nicotine addiction and the dangers of
ingesting products with no regulatory oversight as to their purity, contents, and potential negative health impacts. (Ord. 1226, 2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 74/268
8.56.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE OR E-CIGARETTE: An electronic device usually composed of a mouthpiece, a heating element or atomizer, a battery, and
electronic circuits that provides a gas derived from liquid nicotine and/or other substances which is inhaled by a user simulating smoking. The term
includes such devices, regardless of the details of the product appearance or marketed name, generally manufactured to resemble cigarettes, cigars,
pipes, or other smoking devices.
LIQUID NICOTINE: Any liquid product composed either in whole or part of nicotine, propylene glycol and/or other similar substances and manufactured
for use with an e-cigarette to be converted into a gas for inhaling.
PERSON: Any natural person, individual, corporation, limited liability company, unincorporated association, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint
venture, joint stock association, or other entity or business of any kind.
PHOTOGRAPHIC IDENTIFICATION: State, district, territorial, possession, provincial, national or other equivalent government driver's license,
identification card or military card, in all cases bearing a photograph and a date of birth, or a valid passport. (Ord. 1226, 2011)
8.56.030: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. No person may give, distribute, transfer, sell, market, or offer e-cigarettes, their components, or samples to persons under eighteen (18) years of age.
B. No person shall give or distribute e-cigarettes, or their components, to a person by a coupon if such coupon is redeemed in any manner that does not
require an in person transaction in a retail store to help prevent redemption of such merchandise by a person under eighteen (18) years of age.
C. No person under the age of eighteen (18) may purchase, attempt to purchase, possess, or obtain e-cigarettes or their components. This prohibition
does not apply to activities or enforcement actions under the control of a city, state, or federal law enforcement authority.
D. No person shall sell or permit to be sold e-cigarettes or their components through any device that mechanically dispenses such products unless the
device is located fully within premises from which persons under the age of eighteen (18) are prohibited, and not less than ten feet (10') from all
entrance or exit ways to and from each premises. (Ord. 1226, 2011)
8.56.040: REQUIRED SIGNAGE TO BE POSTED; IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED:
A. Any person selling, marketing, displaying, giving, or distributing e-cigarettes or their components shall display a printed sign, posted so that it is
clearly visible to anyone purchasing e-cigarettes or their components. The sign must be in contrasting colors and at least 20-point type and must
read substantially as follows:
IF YOU ARE UNDER 18, YOU COULD BE SUBJECT TO PENALTY FOR PURCHASING E-CIGARETTES OR RELATED DEVICES OR THEIR
COMPONENTS. THE SALE OF E-CIGARETTES OR RELATED DEVICES OR THEIR COMPONENTS TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 18 IS
STRICTLY PROHIBITED. PHOTO ID REQUIRED.
B. The failure of a person to request and examine photographic identification from a person under eighteen (18) years of age prior to the sale, gift or
distribution of e-cigarettes or related devices to such person shall be construed against the seller and form a conclusive basis for the seller's violation
of this chapter. (Ord. 1226, 2011)
8.56.050: PENALTIES, ENFORCEMENT AND DEFENSES:
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. Each transaction is a new and separate violation.
B. It is a defense to a prosecution for violation of this chapter relating to age when the person making the gift, distribution, transfer, sale, marketing, or
offer as a gift, transfer, sale, marketing, or sample reasonably relied on an officially issued photographic identification showing the purchaser or
recipient was at least eighteen (18) years old.
C. It is a defense to subsection 8.56.030D of this chapter if the person demonstrates to the satisfaction of the building official that it is architecturally
impracticable for the device to be located not less than ten feet (10') from all entrance and exit ways. (Ord. 1226, 2011)
Title 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Chapter 9.04
INCHOATE OFFENSES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 75/268
9.04.010: AIDING, ABETTING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person, in any way or manner, to aid, abet, counsel, advise or encourage any other person in the commission of any of the acts
mentioned in chapters 9.08 through 9.24; 9.28, articles I and II; 9.32 and 9.40 of this title or in any manner encourage the commission of such offense
defined by chapters 9.08 through 9.24; 9.28, articles I and II; 9.32 and 9.40 of this title. (Prior code § 6-1-2)
Chapter 9.08
OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT
9.08.010: IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to represent falsely himself to be an officer of the municipality or who shall attempt to impersonate any such officer or who
shall without authority perform any official act therein on behalf of an officer. (Prior code § 6-1-17)
9.08.020: RESISTING OR INTERFERING WITH OFFICER PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to interfere wilfully with, resist, delay, obstruct, molest or threaten to molest any officer of the municipality in the exercise of
his official duties. (Prior code § 6-1-38)
9.08.030: ASSISTANCE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any citizen over the age of eighteen (18) years to refuse or neglect to render assistance to any police officer when called upon for such
assistance or aid in the suppression of riot or other unlawful assemblage or in the arrest of any person who has committed an offense. (Ord. 506 § 1,
1986: prior code § 6-1-22)
9.08.040: ESCAPE FROM PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person convicted of any offense or in lawful custody to escape or attempt to escape from custody. (Prior code § 6-1-14)
9.08.050: AIDING ESCAPE FROM PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to aid or assist any person to escape from lawful confinement or to assist any person to escape from the custody of any
peace officer. (Prior code § 6-1-1)
9.08.060: FURNISHING PRISONERS WITH WEAPONS OR DRUGS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to furnish or attempt to furnish or take into jail or to deliver or attempt to deliver to any prisoner therein confined, or in the
custody of any officer, any weapon, tool, intoxicating liquors, drug or other article without the consent of the officer in charge. (Prior code § 6-1-19)
Chapter 9.12
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON
9.12.010: ASSAULT OR BATTERY:
It is unlawful for any person to commit assault or battery. (Prior code § 6-1-3)
9.12.020: FRAUD; TO OBTAIN GOODS:
It is unlawful for any person to obtain any food, drink, goods, wares or merchandise under false pretenses, or to enter any public place and call for
refreshments or other articles and receive and refuse to pay for same, or depart without paying for or satisfying the person from whom he received the
food, goods, wares and merchandise. (Prior code § 6-1-16)
9.12.030: FRAUD; TO OBTAIN MONEY:
It is unlawful for any person, who by color, or aid of any trick or sleight of hand performance, or by fraud or by fraudulent scheme, cards, dice or device,
to win for himself or another any money or property or a representative of either. (Prior code § 6-1-41)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 76/268
Chapter 9.16
OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
9.16.010: FRAUDULENT AVOIDANCE:
It is unlawful for any person fraudulently to enter, without payment of the proper admission fee, any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert or other place
where admission fees are charged; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission of police
officers engaged in the performance of police duties to any place of public entertainment or amusement. (Prior code § 6-1-18)
9.16.020: SHOPLIFTING:
Whoever, without authority, wilfully conceals the goods, wares or merchandise of any store or merchant while upon the premises of such store or
merchant shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this code. Goods, wares
or merchandise found concealed upon the person shall be prima facie evidence of a wilful concealment. (Ord. 1152 § 9, 2008)
9.16.030: TAKING DOWN FENCE OR OPENING GATE OF ANOTHER:
It is unlawful for any person to take down any fence or to let down any bars to open any gate in or on the property of another without the consent of the
owner, occupant or person in charge thereof. (Prior code § 6-1-42)
9.16.040: MALICIOUS MISCHIEF:
It is unlawful for any person wilfully and maliciously to injure, deface, mutilate, remove, pull down, break or in any manner interfere with or molest or
secrete or destroy any real or personal property belonging to or under the control of any person. (Prior code § 6-1-31)
9.16.050: TRESPASS:
Every person who wilfully commits trespass by either:
A. Every person, except under landlord-tenant relationship, who, being first notified in writing, or verbally by the owner or authorized agent of the owner
of real property or a police officer, to immediately depart from the same and who refuses to so depart after being so notified; or
B. Every person, except under landlord-tenant relationship, who, being first notified in writing, or verbally by the owner or authorized agent of the owner
of real property or a police officer, to depart and not return to the same and who does return after being so notified, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
The foregoing provision shall not apply to any law enforcement, emergency medical or public safety officer or other person lawfully entering property
pursuant to his or her official duties or an emergency situation. (Ord. 794 § 1, 1995)
9.16.060: THEFT OF RENTAL PROPERTY:
A. A person steals property and commits theft when, with intent to deprive another of property or to appropriate the same to himself or to a third person,
he wrongfully takes, obtains or withholds such property from an owner thereof.
B. It shall be prima facie evidence that a person knowingly obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner when a lessee of the
personal property of another, leased or rented by written instrument specifying the time and place the personal property is to be returned, fails to
return the personal property to the owner:
1. Within ninety (90) days; or
2. Within seventy two (72) hours after written demand for return thereof is personally served or given by registered mail to the last known address
provided in such lease or rental agreement.
C. Any person convicted of such theft shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this code. (Ord. 1152
§ 10, 2008)
Chapter 9.20
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
9.20.010: PROHIBITING AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION PRACTICES AND SOLICITATION OF FUNDS FROM OCCUPANTS OF
MOTOR VEHICLES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 77/268
A. Solicitation Of Vehicle Occupants Prohibited In Public Highway Right Of Way Open To Vehicular Traffic: In order to prevent possible injury to
pedestrians or distraction of motorists leading to auto crashes, it shall be unlawful for any person to sit or stand on a highway, as defined in Idaho
Code 49-109(5) open to vehicular traffic to solicit business or contributions from the occupants of any vehicle.
B. Aggressive Soliciting Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in aggressive solicitation in any public place. For purposes of this
section "aggressive solicitation" is defined as:
1. Continuing to solicit from a person after the person has given a negative response to the soliciting;
2. Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person without that person's consent in the course of soliciting;
3. Blocking, obstructing or interfering with the free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or
vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact in the course of soliciting;
4. Exhibiting threatening conduct or manner toward a person solicited which would cause a reasonable person to be fearful for his or her safety
and/or the safety of his or her property;
5. Persisting in closely following or approaching the person being solicited and continuing to solicit after the person has informed the solicitor by
words or conduct that the person does not want to be solicited or does not want to give money or anything of value to the solicitor;
6. Using profane or abusive language in the course of solicitation that would be likely to provoke an immediate defensive reaction from the person
being solicited or would cause a reasonable person to be fearful for his or her safety or well being;
7. Soliciting money from anyone who is in a fixed location whether waiting in line for tickets, waiting to enter a building at a particular place or for
another purpose that limits the ability of a person solicited to move away from a solicitor.
C. Limiting Solicitation In Certain Circumstances: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation in any place to which the public or a
substantial part of the public has access, including streets, highways, transportation facilities, schools, places of amusement, parks, playgrounds and
the common areas of public and private buildings and facilities, including parking lots or any other area intended for use by the public in any of the
following circumstances:
1. To solicit funds or business on any private or residential property after having been asked to leave, or to refrain from soliciting, by the owner or
other person lawfully in possession of the real property.
2. Without permission of the owner or other person lawfully in possession of the real property, to solicit within twenty feet (20') of any automated teller
machine. Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an enclosed automated teller machine facility, the distance
shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the facility.
3. To solicit for funds or business in or upon any public transportation vehicle or public transportation facility, at any bus stop or in any public parking
lot, structure or other parking facility operated by a public agency.
4. To solicit for funds or business activity within ten feet (10') of an entrance to a building fronting upon public property or a public highway as defined
by Idaho law, unless permission is expressly granted by the owner of the abutting business.
5. To solicit funds or business activity from any person entering or exiting a parked motor vehicle or in a motor vehicle stopped on a public street.
6. To solicit funds or business activity from any person located within the patio or sidewalk area of a retail business establishment that serves food
and/or drink.
7. To solicit funds or business activity from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset until one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise, except as may be otherwise
allowed at any time on private property by permission of the business and/or landowner. (Ord. 1247, 2013)
9.20.020: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
A. It is unlawful for any person, wilfully or maliciously, to disturb the peace and quiet of another or of any neighborhood or family or religious
congregation or other assembly by loud or unusual noises or indecent behavior or by offensive or unbecoming conduct or for any person to threaten,
quarrel, fight or provoke an assault or battery or utter any obscene or fighting words in the presence of another.
B. It is further unlawful for any person who owns, leases, or has custody and control of a motor vehicle equipped with an audible vehicle alarm to allow
said alarm to sound in excess of ten (10) minutes on any single occasion before said alarm automatically terminates or is manually terminated by the
responsible owner, lessee, or custodian; in excess of three (3) separate alarms, regardless of duration, in any consecutive seven (7) day period; or in
excess of five (5) separate alarms, regardless of duration, in any consecutive twenty eight (28) day period. Each alarm which exceeds the maximums
established hereby, either with respect to duration or frequency, shall constitute a separate offense, each of which shall be punishable as a
misdemeanor. It shall be a defense against a charge of violation of the ordinance provisions which prohibit repeated vehicle alarms to provide proof
that an actual attempt to break and enter the vehicle in question has occurred. Any circumstance where a responsible person provides preponderant
evidence that an actual break in attempt has occurred shall be disregarded in calculating the multiple alarms which constitute a violation of this
section. (Ord. 833 § 1, 1996: Ord. 524 § 2, 1986: prior code § 6-1-11)
9.20.030: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY:
It is unlawful for two (2) or more persons to assemble together for the purpose of disturbing the peace or for the purpose of committing an unlawful act
and not to disperse upon the command of an officer so to do. (Prior code § 6-1-43)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 78/268
9.20.040: RIOT:
It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse immediately to disperse upon an order to do so by a police officer, when two (2) or more persons are
assembled for the purpose of disturbing the peace or for the purpose of committing any unlawful act. (Prior code § 6-1-39)
Chapter 9.24
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
9.24.010: OBSCENE LITERATURE; DISTRIBUTION PROHIBITED:
A. It is unlawful for any person to exhibit, pass, give or deliver to another any obscene book, pamphlet, picture, card, print, paper, writing, mold, cast or
figure.
B. "Obscene" means that material which depicts sexual acts or conduct that taken as a whole appeals to prurient sexual interests and is without
redeeming social value, as judged by contemporary community standards. (Ord. 524 § 2, 1986: prior code § 6-1-10)
9.24.020: LEWD CONDUCT:
It is unlawful for any person to urinate or stool in any place open to the public view, or to be guilty of any lewd, lascivious or obscene conduct in any
public place. (Ord. 524 § 2, 1986: prior code § 6-1-34)
9.24.030: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
It is unlawful for any person to appear in a state of nudity in any public place or in any such place to make any intentional exposure of his or her person
or private parts thereof, or the private parts of another, or to wear clothing that fails to keep such private parts hidden from the view of others. (Ord. 524
§ 2, 1986: prior code § 6-1-25)
9.24.040: PROSTITUTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to pursue or advertise in any manner her vocation as a prostitute or for any person to advertise the profession of a
prostitute or solicit for a prostitute. (Prior code § 6-1-37)
9.24.050: HOUSE OF PROSTITUTION:
It is unlawful for any person to keep or assist in the keeping of a house of ill fame or prostitution or knowingly to reside therein or knowingly to rent, lease
or permit any person to occupy any house or room owned, leased or controlled by him for this purpose. (Prior code § 6-1-23)
9.24.060: GAMBLING:
It is unlawful for any person to deal, play or conduct, either as owner, employee or lessee, whether or not for hire, any game played with cards, dice or
any other device for money, checks, credit or other representative of value. (Prior code § 6-1-20)
9.24.090: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
It is unlawful for any person to torture or beat cruelly, starve or otherwise ill treat any animal in his care or charge, whether belonging to himself or any
other person. (Prior code § 6-1-7)
Chapter 9.28
OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
Article I. Delinquency
9.28.010: ENCOURAGING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person, by any act or neglect, to encourage, aid or cause a child to come within the purview of the juvenile authorities; and it shall
likewise be unlawful for any person, after notice that a driver's license of any child has been suspended or revoked, to permit such child to operate a
motor vehicle during the period that such driver's license is suspended. (Prior code § 6-1-13)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 79/268
Article II. Alcoholic Beverages
9.28.020: ALCOHOL; FURNISHING WITH AND PURCHASE BY PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to procure, sell or give away any beer, wine, liquor, or other alcoholic beverage to any person under the age proscribed by
Idaho Code section 23-949 or for any person under the age proscribed by said statute to purchase, attempt to purchase or otherwise procure, consume
or have in his possession any beer, wine, liquor, or other alcoholic beverage. (Ord. 571 § 1, 1989: Ord. 507 § 1, 1986: prior code § 6-1-6)
9.28.030: FURNISHING WITH TOBACCO PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to sell or give away, directly or indirectly, to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years any cigarettes, tobacco or any
compounds of tobacco used in filling up or making of a cigarette or to give or sell any cigarette papers to minors. Every minor person under the age of
eighteen (18) years who shall buy, accept or have in his possession any cigarette, cigar or tobacco in any form, or who shall buy, accept or have in his
possession any cigarette paper or other paper or wrapper intended for the wrapping of tobacco in the form of a cigarette, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 683 § 1, 1992: Ord. 507 § 1, 1986: prior code § 6-1-40)
Article III. Curfew
9.28.040: DEFINITIONS:
EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss
of life. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, automobile accident, or any other situation requiring immediate action to prevent
serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any place of business to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN: A. A person, who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
B. A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
MINOR: Any person less than eighteen (18) years of age, except for persons emancipated by either marriage or by court order.
PARENT: A person who is:
A. A natural parent, stepparent or adoptive parent; or
B. A person at least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or legal guardian to have the care and custody of the minor.
PRIVATE PROPERTY OPEN TO THE PUBLIC: Real property not owned by the federal government or the state of Idaho or any of its political
subdivisions, but is available for vehicular traffic or parking by the general public or customers of the business.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, apartment houses, office buildings, retail stores/complexes, recreational facilities, and shops. (Ord. 1195 § 2, 2010)
9.28.050: CURFEW ESTABLISHED:
A. It is unlawful for any minor to be upon any public place or private property open to the public between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and
five o'clock (5:00) A.M. unless the person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or any other adult person lawfully and properly accompanying
the minor person, or unless provided for herein.
B. It is unlawful for any parent or legal guardian to knowingly permit or allow the minor to be present, without a specific purpose and without a parent or
guardian, in any public place or private property open to the public within the city during curfew hours.
C. It is unlawful for an owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment to knowingly allow a minor, without permission of a parent or guardian, to
be present upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours, unless the establishment is involved in rendering services for an emergency
or is a designated "safe place" and the minor is seeking emergency help, shelter, or care. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
owner, operator, or employee of an establishment asked the minor to leave the premises and promptly notified the law enforcement department for
the city that a minor is present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refuses to leave. (Ord. 1195 § 2, 2010)
9.28.060: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not apply in cases where the minor is:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 80/268
A. Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
B. On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any unauthorized detour, delay or stop;
C. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
D. Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any unauthorized detour, delay or stop;
E. Involved in an emergency;
F. Attending an official school, religious, recreational, or other activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city of Post Falls, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from such activity, without any unauthorized detour,
delay or stop; or
G. Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States constitution, such as the right of free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and
the right of assembly, or going to or returning from such activity, without any unauthorized detour, delay, or stop. (Ord. 1195 § 2, 2010)
9.28.070: FAILURE TO PICK UP MINOR:
It is unlawful and shall be considered a separate offense under this article for any parent, guardian or other adult person having the legal care and
custody of such minor, after being notified to do so by a law enforcement officer, to refuse to come immediately to any location designated by a law
enforcement officer where the child is ordered to remain for pick up and to refuse to take charge of such minor. (Ord. 1195 § 2, 2010)
9.28.080: JUVENILE RUNAWAYS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any minor to leave the city of Post Falls residence of a parent or legal guardian, without the permission of the parent or legal
guardian, with the intent of staying away from, or at a distance from, the residence. This section is not intended to apply to a minor leaving the residence
for a visit to a neighbor or friend that is less than twelve (12) hours and is not overnight, if the circumstances support that there was an intent at the time
the minor left the residence to return the same day.
A. The following are prima facie evidence of an intent to stay away, but are not intended to be the only evidence of intent to stay away:
1. Failure or refusal to return to the residence after a parent or legal guardian has requested the minor to return to the residence and the request has
been communicated to the minor either orally or in writing.
2. Failure or refusal to return to the residence after a law enforcement officer has advised the minor that the parent or legal guardian has requested
the minor to return to the residence.
3. Wilfully fleeing or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer after being lawfully ordered to stop.
4. Wilfully failing or refusing to answer a telephone, or respond to a text or e-mail message, from the parent or guardian, or from a law enforcement
officer.
5. Removal of the minor's clothing from the residence.
6. Oral or written statements of an intent or a threat to leave and not return. (Ord. 1232, 2012)
9.28.090: PENALTIES:
A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. In the event that the person is a minor, a violation of this chapter may form
the basis for a petition for proceedings pursuant to the juvenile corrections act. (Ord. 1195 § 2, 2010)
Chapter 9.32
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
9.32.010: MARIJUANA PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to possess any part of the plant Cannabis sativa L. (marijuana) either growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted
from any pad of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seed or resin. (Prior code § 6-1-47)
9.32.020: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 81/268
It is unlawful for any person to use, or possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia, as defined by state of Idaho statute 37-2701(n), to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal,
inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance as defined by Idaho state statute 37-2701(e). (Ord. 575 § 1,
1989)
Chapter 9.36
WEAPONS
9.36.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, whenever used in this chapter, have the following meanings:
FIREARMS: Any instrument used in the propulsion of shot, pellets, or bullets, or other harmful objects by the action of gunpowder exploded within it, or
by the action of compressed air within it, or by the power of springs, and including what are commonly known as air rifles and BB guns.
MANUALLY OPERATED THROWING DEVICE: Bow and arrows, slingshots, and any other instrument used to propel any object by mechanical or
manually operated means. (Ord. 730 § 1, 1993: prior code § 6-5-1)
9.36.020: CONCEALED PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to carry concealed upon his person any brass knuckles, revolver, pistol, dagger, stiletto or other deadly or dangerous
weapon unless the person has secured a concealed weapons permit from the sheriff of the county, or the jurisdiction in which they reside if they are not
a resident of the state of Idaho, or is otherwise authorized by the laws of the state of Idaho to carry a concealed weapon without a permit. (Ord. 1006
§ 1, 2002: Ord. 518 § 1, 1986: prior code § 6-5-2)
9.36.030: DISCHARGE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to discharge firearms or manually operated throwing devices of any kind or description within the limits of the municipality;
provided, however, that this shall not apply to police officers in the discharge of their duties. Military honor guards performing at funerals or at public
events and performers in theatrical productions or firearms demonstrations may, with the permission of the chief of police or his designee, discharge
firearms using blanks.
A. Exceptions:
1. A person may discharge a firearm on properties that are zoned to allow agricultural use, if discharge of the firearm is for the purpose of
slaughtering animals raised on the property for the purpose of human consumption, or the property is zoned to allow the slaughter and packaging
of meat for human consumption, and the person discharging the firearm complies with the following conditions:
a. The discharge of the firearm is aimed away from persons, vehicles, roadways, buildings constructed for human occupancy, and other animals;
b. The slaughter of the animal is not visible from a public roadway; and
c. The person discharging the firearm provides prior notice to the law enforcement agency for the city.
2. A person discharging a firearm in the lawful defense of person or persons or property. (Ord. 1271, 2014)
9.36.040: EXCEPTION; PERMIT:
The governing body may at any time, upon receipt of proper application, grant permits to shooting galleries, gun clubs and others for shooting in fixed
localities and under specified rules. Such permits shall be in writing attested by the clerk conforming to such requirements as the governing body shall
demand, and the permit thus issued shall be subject to revocation at any time by action of the governing body. (Prior code § 6-5-4)
Chapter 9.40
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
9.40.010: BARBED WIRE OR ELECTRIC FENCES:
It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any electric fence or any fence constructed in whole or in part of barbed wire or to use barbed wire as a
guard to any parking lot or parcel of land, unless the person or entity seeking to erect the fence has made an application to the planning and zoning
commission and the commission has approved the application. The commission shall approve the application upon its determination that the following
conditions have been met:
A. The applicant has shown that he has good cause for the use of such a fence and that the fence will not be harmful to the general public;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 82/268
B. The fence is to be located: (Ord. 517 § 1, 1986: prior code § 6-1-5)
1. In an area zoned either heavy industrial, industrial unit development, planned unit development or educational district as defined and described in
the zoning ordinance, (Ord. 1241, 2012: Ord. 517 § 1, 1986: prior code § 6-1-5)
2. In an area not zoned as set out in subsection B1 of this section, but that contains a dangerous or sensitive public facility like an electric plant or a
water reservoir, or
3. In areas that are zoned for agricultural or livestock use and then only to keep livestock fenced in or out;
C. Except in areas zoned for agricultural or livestock use, the fence is to be constructed in the following manner:
1. Located at the top of nonbarbed fence and beginning at a height of not less than six feet (6') from the level of the ground, but not making the total
height of the fence above eight feet (8'),
2. The barbed wire portion of the fence must be included toward the area to be protected at an angle of not less than forty five degrees (45°),
3. The barbed wire portion of the fence shall not consist of more than three (3) strands;
D. In the case of the fence being used in an area zoned for agricultural or livestock use, the fence shall be constructed as follows:
1. The fence shall not exceed four and one-half feet (41/2') in height,
2. No more than four (4) strands of barbed wire shall be used,
3. The strands of barbed wire shall be at least eight inches (8") apart,
4. The fence is to be marked in such manner as to be clearly visible to the public. (Ord. 517 § 1, 1986: prior code § 6-1-5)
9.40.020: LITTERING; INJURIOUS MATERIAL:
A. It is unlawful for any person to deposit, place or allow to remain in or upon any public thoroughfare any material or substance injurious to person or
property.
B. It is unlawful for any person to scatter or throw upon the public thoroughfares any handbills, posters, advertisements or papers. Nothing herein shall
be construed to authorize any person to obstruct the public thoroughfares or create any nuisance therein.
C. No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street or highway unless the vehicle is so constructed, covered, or loaded as to prevent any of its
contents or load from dropping, sifting, leaking, blowing, spilling or otherwise escaping therefrom. (Ord. 1055 § 2, 2004: prior code § 6-1-8)
9.40.030: SPITTING:
It is unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit upon any sidewalk or upon the floor of any public building or room used for public assemblies. (Prior
code § 6-1-15)
9.40.040: KEEPING OF JUNK RESTRICTED:
It is unlawful for any person to store or keep any old articles or materials which may be classified as junk, adjacent to or in close proximity to any
schoolhouse, church, public park, public grounds, business buildings or residences without first providing proper and tight buildings for the storage of the
same. "Junk" shall mean old iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead or other base metals; old cordate, ropes, rags, fibers or fabrics; old rubber; old bottles or
other glass; bones; wastepaper and other waste or discarded materials which might be prepared to be used again in some form; and any or all of the
foregoing. Junk shall not include materials or objects accumulated by a person as byproducts, waste, scraps from the operation of his own business or
materials or objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of his own manufacturing processes. (Ord. 516 § 1, 1986: prior code § 6-1-26)
9.40.050: USE OF LOUDSPEAKER OR SOUND TRUCK:
A. It is unlawful to play, operate or use any device known as a sound truck, loudspeaker or sound amplifier, radio or phonograph, with loudspeakers or
sound amplifier or any instrument of any kind or character which emits loud noises and is attached to or upon any vehicle unless such person in
charge of such vehicle shall have first applied to and received a written permit from the chief of police to operate any such vehicle so equipped.
B. The permit is to be granted upon the party seeking the permit agreeing to obey the following rules and limitations:
1. The sound truck may only amplify music or human speech.
2. The hours of operation shall be limited to eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) A.M. to one thirty o'clock (1:30) P.M. and four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. to six
thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M. Monday through Saturday.
3. The sound truck shall travel at least ten (10) miles per hour unless held up by traffic; if the truck is held up more than one minute the equipment
shall be turned off for the duration of such stop.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 83/268
4. The truck shall not amplify profanity, lewd, indecent or slanderous remarks.
5. Sounds shall not be issued within one hundred (100) yards of hospitals, schools or churches.
6. The volume of sound shall not be audible for a distance in excess of one hundred feet (100') from the sound truck and shall not be unreasonably
loud, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility.
C. Violations of these rules may lead to a revocation of the permit to operate a sound truck. (Ord. 520 § 1, 1986: prior code § 6-1-29)
9.40.060: LUG WHEELS:
It is unlawful for tractors with wheels injurious to pavement to be permitted upon the public thoroughfares unless the operator of such vehicle shall first
plank such streets. (Prior code § 6-1-30)
9.40.070: WATER FLOWING ON STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person to allow any water to flow into or upon any public thoroughfare. (Prior code § 6-1-45)
9.40.080: ARTICLES ON WINDOWSILLS:
It is unlawful for any person to place or keep on any windowsill, porch or other projection above the first story of any building abutting on any sidewalk
any article which might do injury by falling upon any person on the sidewalk in front of such building, unless the article be securely fastened or protected
by screens. (Prior code § 6-1-46)
9.40.090: POINTING LASER POINTER AT PUBLIC OFFICER:
A. As referred to in this section the term "laser pointer" shall mean any device that emits light amplified or concentrated by the stimulated emission of
radiation that is visible to the human eye.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to direct light from a laser pointer at a uniformed police officer, uniformed security guard, uniformed emergency
communications officer, uniformed fireman, uniformed emergency medical worker, or other uniformed city, state or federal peace officer, or at the
marked vehicle or into the public office of any such individual. (Ord. 933 § 1, 1999)
9.40.100: ATTACHMENTS TO UTILITY POLES:
It is unlawful for any person to post, paint, tack or otherwise attach any notices or advertising matter not regulated under title 18 of this code to any
public or private utility pole or to any fence, wall or building or other property until first obtaining the consent of the owner of the property. (Ord. 1055 § 3,
2004)
Chapter 9.44
EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS
9.44.010: TERMS DEFINED:
In construing the provisions of this chapter, except where otherwise plainly declared or clearly apparent from the context, words shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning, and in addition, the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM SYSTEM: Any assembly of equipment, mechanical, electrical or electronic, designed to alert an alarm service company, law enforcement
agency, the public, or any person or any public emergency response entity, of the commission or attempted commission of a crime, or occurrence of
another emergency, at a particular location, excluding vehicle alarms.
FALSE ALARM: The activation of a burglary, robbery, or other emergency alarm for the purpose of summoning the police or other public emergency
responders, including fire or medical, when no burglary, robbery, or other emergency is being committed, attempted, or is occurring on the premises.
(Ord. 827 § 1, 1995)
9.44.020: ALARM SYSTEM PRACTICES AND CHARACTERISTICS PROHIBITED OR REQUIRED:
The following alarm system methods, practices, or characteristics are prohibited or required, as appropriate, within the corporate limits of the city:
A. Systems designed to alert any law enforcement agency of an emergency by providing unattended automatic dialing to any law enforcement agency
or any emergency response (9-1-1) system for the purpose of transmitting a preprogrammed signal, message, or code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 84/268
B. Systems which lack a standby backup power source which will automatically assume the operation of the alarm system without activating the alarm.
C. Systems which do not automatically shut off their audible alarm within a maximum of twenty (20) minutes of its activation or which do not have an
automatic cutoff with a rearming phase which is able to distinguish between an open and closed circuit, preventing rearming if the circuit is open, to
prevent recurring false alarms.
D. Monitored systems shall maintain a current alarm information file with the alarm company where the alarm is monitored containing the following
minimum information:
1. A recognizable numerical street address;
2. Detailed directions from a major road or landmark;
3. A list of persons authorized to enter the premises and their telephone;
4. Instructions indicating where the alarm is located showing where the shutoff or disarming device is located.
E. The occupant, or owner, if not occupied, of any alarm equipped premises must clearly display on the outside of the premises the name of the alarm
monitoring service and a twenty four (24) hour emergency telephone number answered by a living person.
F. Any alarm monitoring service or premises owner, occupant, or other responsible person serving as representative for any of the foregoing, upon
learning that a false alarm has sounded, shall immediately notify the police department of the false alarm. (Ord. 827 § 2, 1995)
9.44.030: NONCOMPLIANCE AND MULTIPLE FALSE ALARMS; SERVICE FEES, REMEDIES, AND PENALTIES:
A. Failure to comply with the requirements or prohibitions of section 9.44.020 of this chapter shall be subject to the imposition of a service fee upon the
occupant of the affected premises, or the owner, if the premises is not occupied, in accordance with a fee schedule established by resolution of the
city council. Such fee schedule shall reflect the relative level of costs incurred by the city as a result of the building occupant's/owner's
noncompliance. Said fee shall be billed by the city's finance department, and if not paid within thirty (30) days of the occurrence, may be appended to
the municipal utility bill of the premises involved, subject to all collection remedies and terms provided therefor. Such service fee charges may also
be separately collected in a manner deemed appropriate by the finance director.
B. Multiple false alarms, in excess of two (2) from the same location or alarm system within a six (6) month period, continuously and cumulatively until a
six (6) month period free of false alarms has been achieved, shall obligate the occupant/owner to pay a service fee as set forth in a resolution
adopted by the city council which shall become due and payable no later than thirty (30) days after occurrence of the third false alarm in a six (6)
month, or longer, period. Said fee shall be billed by the city's finance department, and if not paid within thirty (30) days, be appended to the municipal
utility bill of the premises involved, subject to all collection remedies and terms provided therefor.
C. The occurrence of more than three (3) instances of the conduct prohibited or omission of that required by section 9.44.020 of this chapter within any
continuous six (6) month period shall constitute a violation of this chapter. The occurrence of more than five (5) accidental or unintentional false
alarms within the six (6) month period (or longer until 6 continuous months are free of false alarms), as described in subsection B of this section,
shall constitute a violation of this chapter. A violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of
this code. (Ord. 1152 § 11, 2008)
9.44.040: AUTHORITY TO ADMINISTER:
The chief of police shall have the authority to administer the process of receiving alarm reports and responses, the placement of alarm systems, and
other practices necessary to aid in the orderly and safe reporting of emergency circumstances within the city. Such authority shall include the authority to
order the disconnection of alarm systems which fail to meet the standards established by this chapter on a continuing basis. (Ord. 827 § 4, 1995)
9.44.050: NO OBLIGATION CREATED IN POLICE DEPARTMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted to create a duty to respond on the part of the police department. The police department may
respond to alarms in accordance with the availability of resources, manpower, and in consideration of other duties. (Ord. 827 § 5, 1995)
9.44.060: GRACE PERIOD REGARDING MULTIPLE FALSE ALARMS:
There shall be a ninety (90) day grace period respecting the accidental false alarm provisions of this chapter beginning at the effective date hereof,
during which time no service fee will be charged to a premises occupant/owner exceeding the limits established by subsection 9.44.030B of this chapter.
Such grace period shall not affect liability for penalties for violation of this chapter. (Ord. 827 § 6, 1995)
Title 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 85/268
Chapter 10.04
UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 1020 § 1, 2003)
Chapter 10.08
STATE MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS ADOPTED
(Rep. by Ord. 1020 § 2, 2003)
Chapter 10.12
U-TURNS
10.12.010: RESTRICTIONS:
The drivers of vehicles in the city are prohibited from making reverse or U-turns on any street in the municipality between intersections. U-turns will be
permitted at intersections except where otherwise posted. (Prior code § 10-2-2)
Chapter 10.16
SPEED LIMITS
10.16.010: DESIGNATED:
A. Due to the residential, urban or business character of the neighborhood abutting the streets in residential, business or urban districts, the reasonable
and safe maximum speed limits within the city limits shall be:
1. All streets three (3) lanes in width or less within the city shall bear a maximum speed limit for wheeled vehicles of twenty five (25) miles per hour,
unless posted signage indicates to the contrary.
2. Unless posted signage indicates to the contrary, all four (4) lane or greater streets within the city shall bear a maximum speed limit for wheeled
vehicles of thirty five (35) miles per hour.
B. The speed limits in school zones shall be twenty (20) miles per hour, when children are present.
C. The street superintendent, the city engineer, or their designee, may adopt a temporary speed limit lower than the customary speed limit in a given
area when such speed limit is deemed necessary to cover special conditions arising from construction zones, street maintenance or special events
approved by the city. The temporary speed limit shall be posted in conformance with Idaho Code section 49-209. (Ord. 1020 § 3, 2003: Ord. 840 § 1,
1996: Ord. 697 § 2, 1993)
10.16.020: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any wheeled travel in excess of the speed limits established in this chapter or by signage posted by the city pursuant to determination of the city
engineer, street superintendent, or city council, which signage is authorized, is deemed not reasonable and prudent, and the same is unlawful. Violation
of this chapter shall be subject to punishment as an infraction. The penalty for an infraction violation shall be as determined by order of the Idaho
supreme court, as such is adopted from time to time. (Ord. 1020 § 4, 2003: Ord. 697 § 3, 1993)
Chapter 10.20
PARKING
10.20.010: TEMPORARY PARKING RESTRICTIONS; AUTHORITY OF CHIEF OF POLICE:
The police department is authorized to indicate temporary zones or locations, for a period not to exceed seven (7) consecutive days, where vehicles
shall not be parked when, in the opinion of the chief of police, it is necessary to temporarily prevent the parking of vehicles to avoid public harm or
inconvenience. The chief of police may do so either by placing appropriate signs or placing barricades or officers at such places where parking is to be
restricted. The chief of police is empowered to employ the authority granted by this section to take such actions as may be necessary to prevent parking
on public streets which blocks or otherwise impedes the convenient delivery of mail by the U.S. postal service. It shall be unlawful for any person to park
any vehicle at such time and at such designated places in violation of the restrictions established by the chief of police. The police department is
authorized to remove such illegally parked vehicles and the owner thereof shall pay the cost of such removal and storage. (Ord. 1020 § 5, 2003: Ord.
710 § 1, 1993)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 86/268
10.20.020: PARKING REGULATIONS; GENERALLY:
A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with law or the directions of a
police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following circumstances:
1. At any location where a traffic control device restricting or prohibiting parking has been posted by a department head or his/her designee;
2. On or across a public sidewalk, pedestrian path, bicycle path or similar nonvehicular right of way, or between the curb and sidewalk or within an
area improved on the right of way for stormwater drainage;
3. In front of, or otherwise blocking use of, a public or private driveway or street access from lands adjoining a public street;
4. Within an intersection of public rights of way;
5. On, or impeding use of, or within twenty feet (20') of, a pedestrian crosswalk or the point of intersection of public rights of way measured at the
curb line for streets so developed, provided that this limitation shall not apply to vehicles in public service which may park within six feet (6') of
such points;
6. Alongside or opposite any maintenance or construction operation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
7. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
8. Upon a bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or highway or within a highway tunnel;
9. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
10. In an alley so as to hinder or block traffic;
11. In a marked fire lane on the site of any structure open for public access or where access restrictions have been imposed by the fire department.
12. The city of Post Falls is hereby authorized to post and enforce parking regulations in public places. The regulations in this section shall apply in
the incorporated and unincorporated areas of the city.
B. The city council may designate a tow away zone at any location where a traffic control device restricting or prohibiting parking has been posted by
authority of a department head or his/her designee, provided that the tow away warning is posted along with the traffic control device which restricts
or prohibits parking. Whenever any peace officer finds a vehicle in violation of this provision, the officer is authorized to require the driver or other
person in charge of the vehicle to move it, or to remove or cause to be removed to a place of safety any unattended vehicle. The procedures of Idaho
Code, title 49, chapter 18 are hereby adopted concerning disposition of vehicles. (Ord. 1286, 2015)
10.20.030: PARALLEL:
Motor vehicles shall be parked parallel to the curb on all streets and avenues, with the right hand wheels within eighteen inches (18") of the curb. Motor
vehicles shall not be parked within thirty feet (30') of the corner of the curb or edge of road or within fifteen feet (15') of any fire hydrant. It is unlawful for
any person to park a vehicle on any portion of any street where the curb is painted yellow, except as provided herein.
A. Exceptions:
1. On one-way streets, motor vehicles shall be parked parallel to the curb on all streets and avenues with either the right hand wheels or the left hand
wheels within eighteen inches (18") of the curb.
2. Angled parking is allowed at locations where angled parking spaces are designated by the city by the use of pavement markings or in areas where
the designated parking area is designated by a modification of the curb line that provides a recessed parking area.
3. No parking of any type will be allowed when signage is posted prohibiting parking. (Ord. 1154 § 1, 2008)
10.20.040: ALLEY:
No motor vehicle shall be parked in the alleys of the city except for the purpose of loading or unloading, which shall be done as expeditiously as possible
and shall not exceed thirty (30) minutes' elapsed time in any one block unless special permit be obtained from the chief of police. (Prior code § 10-4-3)
10.20.050: TIME LIMITATION:
No vehicle, including major recreational vehicles or equipment, shall be parked continuously at the same location or combination of locations within the
same block on any public street or public alley on any public street or alley in the city for more than twenty four (24) hours. For the purpose of this
chapter, "major recreational vehicles and equipment" are defined as including, but not limited to, boats and boat trailers, pickup campers or coaches
(designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, and tent trailers. (Ord. 1201, 2010)
10.20.060: PRIVATE PROPERTY:
A. It is unlawful for any person to park upon the private property of another without the consent of the owner of such property, and the police department
is authorized to remove the vehicle therefrom and cause the same to be stored, following the procedures under title 49 of the Idaho Code, provided
the owner of the private property has first complained against the owner or operator of such vehicle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 87/268
B. It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in the front yard of a residence that is not an improved driveway. For the purpose of this section, an
improved driveway shall be an off street vehicle access to a parcel of land from a private or public street or alley constructed of compacted gravel,
grass pavers, brick pavers, asphalt or concrete.
C. Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property
unless stored in a completely enclosed building or carport. One boat and/or one recreational vehicle without licenses may be stored in the side or
rear yard, but not in any front yard. (Ord. 1201, 2010)
10.20.070: PICK UP AND DELIVERY:
Whenever possible all deliveries and pick ups by motor vehicles or by trucks shall be made from the alleys. (Ord. 1020 § 9, 2003: prior code § 10-4-4)
10.20.080: CITY PARKS; FEES:
A. This section shall be known and cited as the parking fee regulations for designated fee parking areas of the Post Falls city parks.
B. The Post Falls park and recreation department shall have full authority to designate certain parking areas of city parks as fee parking areas.
C. A parking fee shall be collected from the driver of each automobile desiring to park in the designated fee parking area.
Parking fees shall be paid upon entrance to the designated fee parking area.
D. Any person may purchase an annual parking permit from the Post Falls park and recreation department which shall authorize a vehicle with that
sticker firmly attached to its windshield access to the designated fee parking area providing that sufficient parking space is available for that vehicle
at the time of entrance. The amount of the daily parking fee and fee for an annual permit shall be set by resolution of the city council.
E. A person seeking only to launch a boat at the boat launch, and does not park the vehicle or trailer, shall not be required to pay a fee. The vehicle and
boat trailer shall not be left for more than one-half (1/2) hour during the launching process without parking the vehicle and trailer. This provision shall
not apply to towing vehicles with an annual parking permit. (Ord. 1020 § 10, 2003: Ord. 533, 1987: prior code § 10-4-9)
10.20.090: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It is unlawful for any individual to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Anyone found violating any provision of this chapter, except section
10.20.060 of this chapter, may be issued a civil citation and shall be assessed a civil penalty as established by resolution of the city council for first
violations. The city citation assessment shall be payable at the city hall, or Post Falls police department, within thirty (30) days from the date of issuance.
If, within the thirty (30) day period following the issuance of a city citation the assessment has not been paid, or if a second or subsequent violation is
committed, a uniform infraction citation may be issued and the violator, if found guilty, will be fined as provided by law. In the alternative to the city
citation process, a peace officer may issue a uniform infraction citation which shall be payable as provided by law. A violation of section 10.20.060 of this
chapter shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1206, 2010)
Chapter 10.24
OPEN CONTAINERS OF ALCOHOL IN VEHICLES
10.24.010: ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEFINED:
As used in this chapter, the term "alcoholic liquor" has the following meaning: Any spirits, wine, beer (including 3.2 beer), ale, or other liquid containing
more than one-half (1/2) of one percent (1%) of alcohol by volume which is fit for beverage purposes or is intended for beverage purposes. (Prior code
§ 6-1-49(A))
10.24.020: PROHIBITED:
No person shall have in his or her possession an open or unsealed container containing alcoholic liquor within an area accessible to operators or
passengers of a motor vehicle, including motorcycles, while such vehicle is in motion on any thoroughfare, public street, alley, or public parking lot within
the city, except for passengers in the passenger area of a motor vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of persons for
compensation, or in the living quarters of a recreational vehicle as defined by title 49 of the Idaho Code. (Ord. 1020 § 11, 2003: prior code § 6-1-49(B))
10.24.030: WARNING ISSUANCE:
(Rep. by Ord. 1020 § 12, 2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 88/268
10.24.040: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person operating or in actual physical control of a motor vehicle, as defined by title 49 of the Idaho Code, violating any provision of this chapter shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this code. Other persons violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1152 § 12, 2008)
Chapter 10.28
PARADES, FUNERAL PROCESSIONS AND TEMPORARY STREET CLOSURE
10.28.010: USE OR CLOSURE OF STREETS AND WAYS FOR PARADE, FUNERAL PROCESSION OR RECREATIONAL
PURPOSE; PERMIT REQUIRED; SOLICITATION OF MOTORISTS PROHIBITED:
A. It is unlawful for any funeral procession, parade containing persons, vehicles or animals, or party or festival to occupy, close, march upon or proceed
along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police in compliance with such requirements as set forth herein and in
compliance with other provisions of local, state and federal law.
B. Pursuant to section 9.20.010 of this code, no person shall solicit business or contributions from the occupants of any vehicle. (Ord. 1247, 2013)
10.28.020: PARADE PERMIT; CRITERIA:
The following criteria shall be met before a parade permit may be issued by the community development department:
A. The person seeking the issuance of a parade permit shall have completed an application form to be supplied by the community development
department. The completed application form must be received by the community development department at least thirty five (35) days prior to the
date of the parade. The time frame set forth herein may be waived in the discretion of the community development department upon a finding that
such waiver would not compromise the ability of the city to prepare for the activity for which the permit is requested. Any application that is for the
closure of any street or any portion of a street must include a street closure signage and control plan.
B. The community development department must determine from the information contained in the application or from information developed from other
sources, including the knowledge of community affairs by the police department and street department that:
1. The route, timing and nature of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to its route or
elsewhere within the community.
2. The route, timing and nature of the parade will not require more police officers than can reasonably be provided, while still providing normal
protection to the city.
3. The route, timing and nature of the parade will not unduly interfere with the proper fire, ambulance, police or other public services to areas
contiguous to the parade or elsewhere in the community.
4. The parade is not likely to cause injury to persons or property or create disorderly conduct or create a disturbance. If the chief of police is unable to
conclude this, he shall meet and confer with the applicant to determine what steps, if any, the sponsor/applicant could take to avoid disorder or to
minimize the possibility of a public disturbance.
5. The parade is scheduled to move expeditiously along a defined route from its place of origin to its place of termination.
6. The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising products, goods, or private commercial events and is not designed to be held
purely for profit or private promotional considerations.
7. The person seeking the issuance of a parade permit has agreed to furnish qualified road guards as needed to assist the police department or has
provided evidence of contractual arrangement to provide same.
8. The person seeking the issuance of a parade permit has tendered payment of the parade permit fee established by the city council by resolution,
such resolution being hereby authorized. Such fee may be waived by the city council upon a showing that the activity to be conducted is to be
carried out primarily for the general benefit of the community.
9. The street closure signage and control plan is in substantial compliance with the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
C. In the event the community development department cannot make the findings required by this section, the reasons shall be stated in writing and the
applicant notified that an appeal may be brought before the city council at the next available meeting for which proper notice may be provided. When
requested by an unsuccessful applicant, the city council shall consider the application in light of provisions of this chapter and related provisions of
law and take official action concerning such request as appropriate. (Ord. 1180 § 1, 2009)
10.28.030: FUNERAL PROCESSION PERMIT; CRITERIA:
The following criteria shall be met before a funeral procession permit may be issued by the chief of police:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 89/268
A. The person seeking the issuance of a funeral procession permit shall have completed an application form to be supplied by the police department.
The completed application form must be received at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the date of the funeral procession.
B. The chief of police must find that the funeral procession route and time does not conflict with other special events using the same route, or an
affected route, at the same time. (Ord. 963 § 2, 2000)
10.28.040: PERMIT; TEMPORARY STREET CLOSURE ON REQUEST; CRITERIA:
A. Any person seeking the issuance of a permit to temporarily close all or any portion of a street shall include a street closure signage and control plan
along with the closure application.
B. The following criteria shall be met before a permit to close a section of street for a party, festival or other special event may be issued by the
community development department, subject to conditions of mitigation as deemed appropriate:
1. Finding that the flow of traffic within the community and within the adjacent neighborhood will not be adversely or unnecessarily affected.
2. Finding that the provision of emergency services would not be adversely affected by the temporary closure.
3. Finding that the hours of closure will not unreasonably disrupt the peaceful enjoyment of the use of adjoining lands and buildings.
4. Finding that the organizers of the temporary closure event have made a good faith effort to notify all households adjoining the street section to be
closed and have designed events to minimize impairment of access to adjoining land uses.
5. Finding that the street closure signage and control plan is in substantial compliance with the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". (Ord.
1180 § 2, 2009)
10.28.050: FUNERAL PROCESSION; IDENTIFICATION:
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by such method as may be determined and designated by the chief of police.
(Ord. 963 § 2, 2000)
10.28.060: FUNERAL PROCESSION; DRIVER COMPLIANCE:
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall follow the lead of the vehicles ahead as closely as may be practical and safe. (Ord. 963 § 2, 2000)
10.28.070: FUNERAL PROCESSION, STREET CLOSURE, OR PARADE; DRIVING THROUGH PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for a driver of a vehicle to drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and
when such vehicles are conspicuously designated. It is likewise unlawful to drive through or across a parade in progress or through a street which has
been temporarily closed. The foregoing prohibitions shall not apply when authorized by a police officer or other authorized monitor of the street closure,
funeral procession or parade. (Ord. 963 § 2, 2000)
Chapter 10.32
TRUCK TRAFFIC AND PARKING
10.32.010: TITLE OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the TRUCK TRAFFIC AND PARKING CODE. (Prior code § 9-15-1)
10.32.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CITY: The city of Post Falls.
DEVIATING TRUCK: A truck which leaves and departs from a truck route while traveling inside the city or which is otherwise in violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
LOT: A platted parcel of real property or a parcel under single ownership.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
TRUCK: Any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property, and whose licensed weight exceeds sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds. If
the vehicle in question is a tractor-trailer(s) combination, the definition shall include both tractor and trailer(s).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 90/268
TRUCK ROUTE: A way over certain streets, over and along which trucks coming into and going out of the city must operate. (Prior code § 9-15-2)
10.32.030: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
All trucks within the city shall be operated only over and along the truck routes and on the other designated streets over which truck travel is permitted.
(Prior code § 9-15-3)
10.32.040: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not prohibit:
A. Operation On Street Of Destination: The operation of trucks upon any street when necessary to the conduct of business at a destination point,
provided streets upon which such traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point.
B. Emergency Vehicles: The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the city.
C. Public Utilities: The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city, public utilities, any contractor or material man, while engaged in the repair,
maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements, or street utilities within the city, or any trucks operated for the purpose of solid waste
collection pursuant to a contract with the city.
D. Detoured Trucks: The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be operated upon the
street for which such detour is established. (Ord. 1020 § 15, 2003: prior code § 9-15-3(A))
10.32.050: TRUCK ROUTES:
The city engineer is authorized to establish truck routes within the city limits and to designate those routes by the appropriate signage. (Ord. 1020 § 16,
2003: prior code § 9-15-4)
10.32.060: TRUCK ROUTES; OUTSIDE ORIGIN, OUTSIDE DESTINATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 1020 § 17, 2003)
10.32.070: TRUCK ROUTES; OUTSIDE ORIGIN, INSIDE DESTINATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 1020 § 17, 2003)
10.32.080: DESIGNATED STREETS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1020 § 17, 2003)
10.32.090: OUTSIDE ORIGIN; SINGLE DESTINATION POINT:
All trucks entering the city for a destination point in the city shall proceed only over an established truck route and shall deviate only at the intersection
with the street, upon which such traffic is permitted, nearest to the destination point. Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating truck shall return to
the truck route by the shortest permissible route. (Prior code § 9-15-6(A)(1))
10.32.100: OUTSIDE ORIGIN; MULTIPLE DESTINATIONS:
All trucks entering the city for multiple destination points shall proceed only over established truck routes and shall deviate only at the intersection with
the street, upon which such traffic is permitted, nearest to the first destination point. Upon leaving the first destination point a deviating truck shall
proceed to other destination points by the shortest direction and only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted. Upon leaving the last destination
point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route. (Prior code § 9-15-6(A)(2))
10.32.110: INSIDE ORIGIN; OUTSIDE DESTINATION:
All trucks, on a trip originating in the city, and traveling in the city for a destination point outside the city shall proceed by the shortest direction over
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 91/268
streets on which such traffic is permitted to a truck route. (Prior code § 9-15-6(B)(1))
10.32.120: INSIDE ORIGIN; INSIDE DESTINATION:
All trucks, on a trip originating in the city, and traveling in the city for destination points in the city shall proceed only over streets upon which such traffic
is permitted. (Prior code § 9-15-6(B)(2))
10.32.130: MAP MAINTENANCE:
The city clerk shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out truck routes and streets upon which truck traffic is permitted; the maps shall be kept on
file in the office of the city clerk and shall be available to the public. (Prior code § 9-15-7(A))
10.32.140: SIGNPOSTING:
(Rep. by Ord. 1020 § 17, 2003)
10.32.150: WEIGH IN:
Any law enforcement officer shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any commercial vehicle not proceeding over a truck
route or street over which truck traffic is permitted to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining
whether this chapter has been complied with. (Ord. 1020 § 18, 2003: prior code § 9-15-7(C))
10.32.160: CITY AUTHORITY:
The city engineer, street superintendent and/or the mayor are authorized to have posted seasonal axle weight limitation. (Ord. 1020 § 19, 2003: prior
code § 9-15-8)
10.32.170: PROHIBITIONS:
A. No loaded trucks of any size or weight shall be permitted to use any street, except as provided in section 10.32.050 of this chapter, further providing,
no loaded trucks shall have inside destinations located within residentially zoned districts as defined by this code nor shall loaded trucks be parked
upon any street within the city.
B. No vehicle in excess of sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds licensed vehicular weight shall be allowed to park on any street within the corporate city
limits other than for the purpose of loading or unloading cargo. Commercial and wholesale delivery vehicles will be permitted to make home or retail
delivery to places at any location within the city. No tractor-trailer(s) combination vehicles nor any detached tractor or trailer(s) thereof shall be parked
on any street right of way within the city. Not more than two (2) tractor-trailer combinations, whether attached or detached, may be parked on a
residential lot in a residentially zoned district, provided that parking of said vehicles is accomplished completely off public right of way and entirely on
private property, that the vehicles are unladen; and provided, that the parking thereof is not in violation of any other ordinance of the city.
C. No vehicle with wheels or driving surfaces injurious to pavement shall be operated or permitted upon the public thoroughfares of the city unless the
operator of such vehicle first planks such streets. (Prior code § 9-15-9)
10.32.180: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the traffic or parking provisions set out in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined not more than the amount provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this code. (Ord. 1152 § 13, 2008)
Chapter 10.36
BICYCLES
Article I.
10.36.010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle propelled wholly or in part by muscular power upon any of the public thoroughfares or public
highways of the city, without first obtaining from the police department a license therefor, except when the operator is not a resident of the city and is
traveling through the city from one destination outside of the city limits en route to another destination outside of the city limits or is a participant in an
organized bicycle race or rally. (Ord. 1020 § 20, 2003: prior code § 5-12-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 92/268
10.36.020: LICENSE; ISSUANCE; FEE:
The police department is authorized and directed to issue, upon written application, bicycle licenses. The license shall become due on January 1 and
shall be valid until December 31 of said year. The licenses when issued shall entitle the licensee to operate such bicycle for which the license has been
issued, upon all the public thoroughfares of the municipality, exclusive of sidewalks. No fee shall be charged. (Ord. 572 § 1, 1989: prior code § 5-12-2)
10.36.030: SAFETY STANDARDS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1020 § 21, 2003)
10.36.040: STICKER; REQUIRED:
The municipality shall provide each year metallic license stickers and/or seals, together with registration cards and holders therefor, the metallic stickers
and registration cards having numbers stamped thereon in numerical order, beginning with number "1" and indicating the year for which the same are
issued and the words "Post Falls" stamped thereon; such metallic license stickers shall be suitable for attachment upon the frame of the bicycle and it
shall be the duty of the owner, parent or guardian to attach one such metallic license sticker to the frame of each bicycle. It shall be the duty of the police
department to issue a license and collect the fee herein provided for. Such metallic license shall remain attached during the valid existence of such
license. The police department shall also keep a record of the date of issue, to whom issued, and the license number thereof. (Ord. 1020 § 22, 2003:
prior code § 5-12-3)
10.36.050: STICKER; DUPLICATE ISSUANCE:
When a bicycle license sticker has become illegible, lost, stolen or destroyed, upon application of the owner, the police department shall issue another
license sticker for the fee set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1020 § 23, 2003: prior code § 5-12-7)
10.36.060: SERIAL NUMBER DESTRUCTION:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame licensed hereunder. It shall also
be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license sticker, seal or registration card during the time such is operative. Provided,
however, that nothing in this article shall prohibit the police department from stamping numbers of the frames of bicycles on which no serial number can
be found, or on which the number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. (Ord. 1020, 2003: prior code § 5-12-6)
10.36.070: SALE; RECORD KEEPING:
(Rep. by Ord. 1020 § 24, 2003)
10.36.080: SALE; RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of buying, trading, exchanging secondhand bicycles, to purchase, trade or exchange the same
from or with any person under the age of eighteen (18) years without the written consent of such person's parent or guardian. (Prior code § 5-12-9)
10.36.090: SALE; TITLE TRANSFER:
It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle to report such sale or transfer by returning to the police department
the registration card issued to such person as licensee thereof, together with the name and address of the person to whom the bicycle was sold or
transferred, and such report shall be made within five (5) days of the date of the sale or transfer. It shall be the duty of the purchaser of such bicycle to
apply for a transfer of registration therefor within five (5) days of the sale or transfer. (Prior code § 5-12-5)
10.36.100: NONCONFORMANCE; IMPOUNDMENT:
The police department may impound and retain possession of any bicycle operated in violation of any of the provisions of this article, and retain
possession of the same until the violation is corrected. In the event the violation is not corrected and a bicycle is retained in custody more than ninety
(90) days, the vehicle may be sold at public auction following the procedures set out in title 55, chapter 14 Idaho Code. (Ord. 1020 § 25, 2003: prior
code § 5-12-10)
Article II.
10.36.110: EFFECT OF REGULATIONS:
A. It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required herein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 93/268
B. The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this article.
C. These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any public thoroughfare or public path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles. (Prior code § 10-1-1)
10.36.120: COMPLIANCE WITH TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE:
A. Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signs, signals and other control devices applicable to vehicles
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
B. Wherever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, it shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle to
disobey the direction of any such sign, except where a person dismounts from the bicycle to make such turn in which event such person shall then
obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. (Prior code § 10-1-2)
10.36.130: RIDING PROVISIONS:
A. A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
B. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use
of such.
C. Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path, except when operating the bicycle
pursuant to a special events permit. (Ord. 1020 § 26, 2003: prior code § 10-1-3)
10.36.140: SPEED LIMIT:
(Rep. by Ord. 1020 § 27, 2003)
10.36.150: EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY:
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield
the right of way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on
the roadway. (Prior code § 10-1-5)
10.36.160: CLINGING TO VEHICLE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person riding upon any bicycle to attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon any public thoroughfare. (Prior code § 10-1-6)
10.36.170: IMPEDIMENT RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person operating a bicycle to carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the
handlebars. (Prior code § 10-1-7)
10.36.180: PARKING PROVISIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to park a bicycle in such a manner as to interfere or obstruct pedestrian traffic. (Prior code § 10-1-8)
10.36.190: RIDING ON SIDEWALK:
It is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district or to ride a bicycle on any sidewalk or roadway on which is
erected by the city a sign prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon. (Ord. 1020 § 28, 2003: prior code § 10-1-9)
10.36.200: EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five
hundred feet (500') to the front and a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from all distances from fifty feet (50') to three hundred
feet (300') to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance
of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 94/268
B. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. (Prior code
§ 10-1-10)
Chapter 10.40
VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON SIDEWALKS
10.40.010: DRIVING OR PARKING ON SIDEWALK PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION:
It is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to drive within any sidewalk area, bicycle path or other pedestrian path, except at a permanent or temporary
driveway. For the purposes of this section, the sidewalk area shall include the area between the roadway side of the curb and the sidewalk. No vehicle
shall be parked within any sidewalk area except public service vehicles. (Ord. 1020 § 29, 2003: prior code § 10-2-8)
Chapter 10.44
TRAFFIC PENALTIES
10.44.010: DESIGNATED:
Any violation of chapters 10.12, 10.16, 10.28 and 10.40 of this title shall be an infraction punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars
($100.00). (Ord. 1020 § 30, 2003: Ord. 509 § 1, 1986: prior code § 10-2-10)
Chapter 10.48
SNOW REMOVAL
10.48.010: PLOWING OR DEPOSITING SNOW, DIRT OR DEBRIS ON PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY PROHIBITED:
A. It is unlawful for any operator of snow removal equipment or the owner of any land upon which snow removal equipment is operated to place or
otherwise permit, sanction, approve or cause the placement of any fallen snow onto public property or rights of way upon its removal from privately
owned lands.
B. Depositing or causing to be deposited dirt or debris within the public rights of way without the permission of the city is declared to be a nuisance and
the responsibility of the person making such deposit to immediately remove the dirt from the right of way. (Ord. 1020 § 31, 2003: Ord. 696 § 1, 1993)
10.48.020: VIOLATION; MISDEMEANOR:
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 696 § 1, 1993)
Chapter 10.52
MAINTENANCE OF INTERSECTION VISIBILITY
10.52.010: VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS OF PUBLIC ROADS:
At the intersection of any two (2) traveled public rights of way, or the intersection of a public right of way with a private street not otherwise subject to the
nondiscretionary requirements of Idaho Code section 49-221, or its successor, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a
manner as to materially impede vision for drivers using the adjacent rights of way in accordance with applicable traffic laws. The duty for compliance
with this general requirement shall rest with the property owner or with the occupant/resident of any such premises, as appropriate. Establishment or
maintenance of any such sight obstruction may be deemed a nuisance and, subject to the provisions hereof, may be subject to abatement as provided
by law. (Ord. 1171 § 6, 2009)
10.52.020: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Any structure, tree, vegetation, sign or solid, sight obscuring item, which might obscure vision between three feet (3') and ten feet (10') in height and
which is located upon private property within a triangle formed by intersecting right of way lines, or the intersection of right of way lines with the property
or easement lines for private roadways, and having twenty five foot (25') sides adjoining the intersection of two (2) streets, may be subject to the
determination and enforcement authorized by this chapter. The city engineer or the chief of police, or his/her respective delegate, is hereby authorized to
declare the existence of any such sight obstruction or visibility impairment a nuisance and to take such administrative steps as may be appropriate to
eliminate or modify same. (Ord. 1171 § 7, 2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 95/268
10.52.030: NONCOMPLIANCE:
If a satisfactory accommodation cannot be made after administrative efforts, the city engineer or chief of police, or respective delegate, may issue an
order to remove any designated sight obstruction, subject to a right of appeal to the city council at the next meeting of the city council at which the matter
can be heard. The city council shall hear from the property owner/occupant/resident and the officer of the city who issued the order to abate, and render
a final decision concerning the matter. If compliance is not forthcoming after appeal, enforcement of compliance with this chapter and abatement of any
nuisance determined to exist may be pursued by appropriate action on behalf of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 928 § 3, 1999)
Title 11
RESERVED
Title 12
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 12.04
RIGHT OF WAY CONSTRUCTION PERMITS
12.04.010: PERMITS REQUIRED; STREET AND RIGHT OF WAY IMPROVEMENTS:
A. All construction of new street improvements, including, but not limited to, street base preparation, paving, installation of curbs, gutters, sidewalks,
storm water facilities, sanitary sewer facilities, water line construction or replacement of such facilities, or construction, replacement, or capital
maintenance of any public utility or other facilities desiring to make use of the public right of way, including facilities providing electrical, telephone,
natural gas, irrigation water, and cable television service shall require a right of way construction permit issued by the city public works department.
B. Any construction work in the public right of way which will affect the condition of existing public facilities or will result in the construction of facilities
which will be subject to public maintenance shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
C. A public facility construction permit shall be required prior to the initiation of construction work on a new subdivision. Said permits may be issued by
the city engineer or his authorized representative after review and approval of plans and specifications, and payment of required fees. No fee shall
be charged for construction undertaken pursuant to direction by the city.
D. No temporary stockpiling, storage of materials, demolition, storage or equipment, or other activities which would obstruct a public right of way shall be
allowed without a permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
E. The public works department is authorized to develop construction and improvement specification for installation in public rights of way within the city.
Said standards shall be presented to the city council for review and shall be effectiveupon passage of a resolution adopting said standards. Such
standards may be changed by subsequent resolution of the city council. (Ord. 706 § 3, 1993)
12.04.020: PERMIT APPLICATION:
Applications for permits required by this chapter shall be made to the city public works department on forms provided for that purpose. No work subject
to the provisions of this chapter shall be initiated until an application has been completed and approved according to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
706 § 3, 1993)
12.04.030: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Permit requests shall include site plans, engineering plans, specifications, and such other information as may be necessary to allow the city engineer to
determine that standards have been complied with. (Ord. 706 § 3, 1993)
12.04.040: PAYMENT OF FEES REQUIRED:
No permit application shall be deemed complete until the fees required for said application have been paid in full. The fees for permit issuance and for
construction inspection oversight are authorized by this chapter. Said fees may be set, and changed from time to time, by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. 706 § 3, 1993)
12.04.050: PERMIT IS BINDING ON APPLICANT:
Any permit required by this chapter shall be binding upon the applicant until all obligations established by the terms of this chapter and by the terms of
the specific permit have been complied with in their entirety. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable to any other person or
entity. The public works department may require written proof that the person making application is a bona fide representative of the identified permit
applicant. (Ord. 706 § 3, 1993)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 96/268
12.04.060: PERMIT IS REVOCABLE FOR CAUSE:
A. Notwithstanding compliance with the application procedures set forth in this chapter, or with resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter, any permit
issued pursuant to the authority established by this chapter shall be revocable, for cause, in the sole discretion of the public works department.
Revocation may occur in summary fashion upon the happening of any material noncompliance with permit terms, material noncompliance with terms
of this chapter or standards adopted pursuant to it, or for other such substantial reason as the public works department might determine, including
the submittal of inaccurate ormisleading information on any application.
B. Revocation of any such permit shall require that work cease unless specifically allowed to continue, by written order of the public works department,
in order to eliminate a hazard or to preserve the integrity of work in progress. Issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter shall not convey any
ongoing right to construct in or occupy any public right of way. The permission to construct authorized by this chapter shall be revocable at will and
without recourse. All such permits are temporary and shall be effective only for the limited time frame authorized in the permit.
C. The city reserves the right to remedy any condition associated with construction in a public right of way which it deems to pose an imminent threat to
the public health, safety and welfare. The costs of said remedial action shall constitute a charge against the permit applicant, which costs shall be
reimbursed to the city prior to restart of construction. (Ord. 706 § 3, 1993)
12.04.070: APPLICATIONS; TIMING:
Applications for permits required by this chapter shall be made in advance of the date upon which work is scheduled to commence. Advance timing shall
be variable depending upon the scope of the work to be completed and the degree of prior review which has been conducted. Review periods may be
waived by the public works department in the event of emergencies. The permit shall provide a time limit within which the work shall be completed. The
permit shall be void if the work is not commenced and completed within the date specified on the permit unless an extension of time, for good cause, is
granted as provided in section 12.16.100 of this title. (Ord. 706 § 3, 1993)
12.04.080: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Any applicant for a permit authorized by this chapter shall demonstrate that is has general liability insurance in the amount of five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) which insures said work against damage to public facilities and against damage to the public in general. No permit shall issue
without proof of such insurance. The public works department is authorized to maintain a registration of qualified contractors for purposes of simplifying
administration of this requirement. Any such proof of insurance shall require at least thirty (30) days' advance notice of cancellation or expiration to the
city. (Ord. 706 § 3, 1993)
12.04.090: RESPONSIBILITY FOR CONSTRUCTION OBSERVATION; SUBDIVISION:
Primary responsibility for construction inspection for new subdivisions shall rest with the permittee's licensed professional engineer. The permittee's
engineer shall provide thecity with documentation of compliance with city construction standards and attendant construction observation necessary to
verify compliance, as required by the city engineer. The city retains an absolute right to inspect and to require production of test results to assure
compliance with city standards. If test results are not produced or inspection is impeded, the permit may be revoked in the sole discretion of the public
works department. (Ord. 706 § 3, 1993)
12.04.100: QUALITY CONTROL STANDARDS:
Standards for construction quality control and inspection shall be the latest adopted by resolution of the city council, pursuant to recommendation by the
public works department. (Ord. 706 § 3, 1993)
12.04.110: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. This chapter may also be enforced by initiation of civil legal action to compel compliance with
the terms of this chapter or to restrain violation thereof. All costs of civil enforcement shall be borne by the violator. (Ord. 706 § 3, 1993)
Chapter 12.08
CURB AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 12.12
DRIVEWAYS AND CURB CUTS
12.12.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
APRON: That portion of the driveway approach extending from the gutter flow line to the sidewalk section and lying between the end slopes of the
driveway approach.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 97/268
CURB RETURN: The curved portion of a street curb at street intersections or the curved portion of a curb in the end slopes of a driveway approach.
DRIVEWAY: An area on private property where automobiles and other vehicles are operated or allowed.
DRIVEWAY APPROACH: An area, construction or improvement, between the roadway of a public street and private property intended to provide access
for vehicles from the roadway of a public street to a definite area of the private property, such as a parking area, a driveway, or a door, intended and
used for the ingress and egress of vehicles. The component parts of the driveway approach are termed the apron, the end slopes or the curb return, and
the sidewalk section.
END SLOPES: Those portions of the driveway approach which provide a transition from the normal curb and sidewalk elevations to the grade of the
apron, either by means of a sloping surface or by means of a curb return together with the area between the projected tangents of the curb return.
SIDEWALK SECTION: That portion of the driveway approach lying between the back edge of the sidewalk and the apron plus the end slopes measured
at the front edge of the sidewalk. (Prior code § 9-10-1)
12.12.020: PERMIT; REQUIRED:
No person, firm or corporation shall remove, alter or construct any curb, sidewalk, driveway approach, gutter, pavement or other improvement in any
public street, alley or other property owned by or dedicated to or used by this city and over which it has jurisdiction to regulate the matters covered
hereby, without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk and no permit shall be granted until the applicant shall file with the city works superintendent,
for his approval, two (2) copies of a drawing showing the location, size and type of construction of all such proposed improvements to serve the property
affected. (Prior code § 9-10-2)
12.12.030: PERMIT; APPLICATION; FEE:
Applications for permits to construct such improvements shall be made to the city works superintendent on forms provided for that purpose. Fees for the
issuance of permits provided for in this chapter shall be:
A. For each residential driveway or curb cut, five dollars ($5.00);
B. For each commercial driveway or curb cut, five dollars ($5.00). (Prior code § 9-10-3)
12.12.040: PERMIT; ISSUANCE:
Upon approval by the city works superintendent of the drawing of the proposed improvements, and the receipt of the permit fees as stated in section
12.12.030 of this chapter, the city clerk shall issue a permit for the improvement. (Prior code § 9-10-4)
12.12.050: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. No driveway approach shall be permitted to encompass any municipal or public utility facility without the express written consent of the city or the
public utility owning the facility.
B. At street intersections no portion of any driveway approach, including end slopes, shall be permitted closer than two feet (2') to the intersection of the
prolonged property lines and the curb.
C. At street intersections no portion of any driveway approach, including end slopes, shall be permitted closer than two feet (2') to the intersection of the
prolonged back edges of the sidewalks and the curb.
D. No driveway approach shall be permitted within fifteen feet (15') of a property line common with that of a corner lot, when there is an existing fence
greater than three feet (3') in height present within ten feet (10') of the right of way. (Ord. 1171 § 8, 2009)
12.12.060: APPROACH LENGTH:
The length of driveway approach aprons shall not exceed the following dimensions:
A. For residential driveways, fourteen feet (14') for single driveways, and twenty two feet (22') for double driveways. Not more than one driveway shall
be permitted for lots having frontages of sixty feet (60') or less.
B. For commercial driveways, the total width of driveways, measured at the bottom, shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the street frontage of the
property served by such driveways, on the streets where such driveways are constructed, and no single driveway shall exceed forty feet (40') in
width.
Exceptions to the limitations set out above in this subsection may be granted by the planning and zoning commission, pursuant to the various
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 98/268
procedures set forth in title 18, chapter 18.20 of this code, upon a showing of good cause why such an exception should be granted and upon a
finding that, by granting the exception, the purposes of the ordinance codified herein will not be undermined.
C. A safety island of full height curb shall be provided between driveway approaches serving any one property frontage. Wherever possible, this safety
island shall be twenty two feet (22') in length and in no case shall it be less than ten feet (10') in length.
D. In no case shall single driveways serving more than one property be combined to allow greater widths than stated above. (Ord. 521 § 1, 1986: prior
code § 9-10-6)
12.12.070: CONSTRUCTION DETAIL:
A. All driveway approaches and sidewalk sections, where constructed of Portland cement concrete shall be five inches (5") thick for residential
driveways and six inches (6") thick for commercial driveways. Steel reinforcement may be required.
B. The sidewalk section of the driveway approach shall be finished and scored as specified by the city works superintendent for typical sidewalk
construction. Apron and end slope areas of the driveway approach shall be finished after trowelling smooth and scoring, with a fiber push broom
drawn over the surface parallel to the curbline.
C. Driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with the standard plans for driveway approaches as filed with the city clerk, a copy of which
shall be furnished applicant at the time the application is filed. (Prior code § 9-10-7)
12.12.080: LIMITED STREET IMPROVEMENT AREA:
A. Where standard gutters and curbs have been installed but concrete sidewalks have not been, the permit may authorize the applicant to construct the
sidewalk section of the same materials as those used for paving applicant's premises. Such sidewalk section and the driveway approach shall be
constructed to established grade and shall be adequate and suitable for the traffic to be carried by it. The permit shall provide and the applicant shall
agree that if and when thereafter concrete sidewalks are constructed, the applicant or his successor shall install a concrete sidewalk section for the
driveway.
B. Where standard gutters and curbs have not been installed, the apron lengths set forth in section 12.12.060 of this chapter shall be measured along
the property line and there shall be not less than sixteen feet (16') of frontage between driveway approaches serving any one property. Permits shall
not be issued for any surface improvement or paving on the street right of way between driveway approaches unless a concrete curb or other
physical obstruction, of a design satisfactory to the city works superintendent, is constructed and maintained by the applicant along his property line,
so that the entrance and exit of vehicles to and from applicant's property will be restricted to the established driveway approaches.
C. Pursuant to the permit provided for herein, applicant may surface the driveway approaches or other areas within the right of way by extending the
same type of paving used on applicant's premises so that it merges with the street pavement, provided applicant's paving is adequate and suitable
for the traffic to be carried; such extended paving between the property line and the street pavement shall be to established grade or other slope
fixed by the city works superintendent to provide for proper runoff. Such paving between the property line and the street pavement may meet the
street pavement at a point ahead of the curb opening in order to provide for safe deceleration of vehicles turning into the applicant's premises. If the
applicant's paving is extended beyond the property line into a street right of way at an intersection, the city works superintendent may require
applicant to construct a suitable traffic island or curb to provide for the protection of such municipal facilities as may be necessary. (Prior code § 9-10-
8)
12.12.090: PUBLIC PROPERTY ENCROACHMENT:
City street rights of way may not be used for private or commercial purposes. A permit for the construction of driveway approaches shall not be issued
unless vehicles to be served or serviced can be parked entirely within the private property lines. (Prior code § 9-10-9)
12.12.100: RESOLUTION AND DETERMINATION:
Whenever in the judgment of the council it becomes necessary or proper to construct, replace or repair any curb, the council shall pass a resolution
describing the curb to be constructed, replaced or repaired, giving the name of the street or streets and the number of the lot and block along which the
curb is to be constructed or repaired, and specifying the character or kind of such, and the manner in which the same is to be constructed or repaired
and requiring that such curb is to be constructed, replaced or repaired, as the case may be, by the owner of the abutting property, within not less than
five (5) days or more than sixty (60) days after service by the city works superintendent, of a notice to such owner to so construct, replace or repair the
same. The exact number of days between the five (5) days and sixty (60) days to be given in which to do the work shall depend on the kind of curb
ordered constructed and the character of the repairs ordered made, the number of days given to be in each case at the discretion of the council. (Prior
code § 9-10-10)
12.12.110: NOTICE; FORM:
Upon passage and approval by the council of such resolution described in section 12.12.100 of this chapter, the city works superintendent shall, without
delay, give to the owner of the property where any curb is required to be constructed, replaced or repaired, a notice in writing, which notice shall be in
substantially the following form:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 99/268
TO (Name)
You are hereby notified that that portion of the following described (property or curb) to-wit: (property or curb needed to be constructed, replaced or
repaired) upon which the following described property, to-wit: of which you are the owner, immediately abuts, is (unfit or unsafe) for the public travel
because of (here state defect or cause of defect or need of construction, replacement or repair of said curb).
And you are hereby instructed and ordered to (here rate whether to construct, repair or replace) said portion of said curb, in accordance with the
resolution passed by the Council on the day of , 19 , and to have said work completed on or before the day of , 19 .
This notice is issued and served in accordance with the laws of the Municipality.
(Prior code § 9-10-11)
12.12.120: NOTICE; SERVING:
Such notice, as set out in section 12.12.110 of this chapter, shall be served by delivering the same to such owner or by leaving it at the house of his
usual abode with some person over twenty one (21) years of age residing therein; provided, however, that if such owner is not a resident of the
municipality, then such notice may be served by certified mail by depositing such notice in the post office, addressed to the person to whom it is to be
served at his place of residence, if known, and if not known, then addressed to the last known place of residence, with postage prepaid. (Prior code § 9-
10-12)
12.12.130: NOTICE; AFFIDAVIT OF SERVICE:
The city works superintendent shall make such notice in duplicate and on the back of one he shall make an affidavit of service. Such affidavit shall be
made before the clerk or a notary public. The city works superintendent shall file the copy which has the affidavit of service with the clerk. (Prior code
§ 9-10-13)
12.12.140: WORK BY CITY:
If, after such resolution is passed and the notice is served as provided, such owner fails, neglects or refuses to construct or repair such curb within the
time required by the resolution and notice, the city works superintendent shall, without delay and without any further order from the council, cause the
same to be done in accordance with the resolution, either by day labor or by contract work, and the fill cost thereof shall be assessed on and against the
property along which such curb is so constructed, replaced or repaired, and the fill amount of such costs shall become a lien upon the property and shall
at the time provided by law be certified by the council to the county tax collector to be placed on the proper tax roll to be collected as other taxes are
assessed against such property. (Prior code § 9-10-14)
12.12.150: SPECIAL TAX:
All such assessments for the construction, replacement or repair of curbs, as referred to in sections 12.12.140 and 12.12.160 of this chapter, shall be
known as special assessments for improvements, and shall be levied and collected as a special tax. All money received from such special assessments
shall be held by the treasurer as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the improvement for which the assessment is made. The money shall be
used for no other purpose whatsoever except to reimburse the municipality for money expended for such improvement. (Prior code § 9-10-15)
12.12.160: NONPAYMENT; PENALTY:
Whenever any such curb is so constructed, replaced or repaired by the city works superintendent and the fill costs thereof are assessed against the
property as provided in section 12.12.140 of this chapter, the owner of the property may pay to the treasurer the fill amount so assessed against the
property and have the lien thereof discharged. If the amount so assessed against any such property is not paid on or before August 20 following its
construction and repair, there shall be added to the amount so assessed against the property one and one-half percent (1.5%), which is the amount the
county charges for the collection of such money. (Prior code § 9-10-16)
12.12.170: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this code. Each day a violation of this
chapter shall continue shall be considered a separate violation. (Ord. 1152 § 14, 2008)
Chapter 12.16
EXCAVATIONS
12.16.010: PERMIT; REQUIRED:
A. It is unlawful for any person, corporation or municipal corporation other than the city of Post Falls, or utility to make or cause or permit to be made any
excavation in or under the surface of any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place for the installation, repair or removal of any pipe, conduit,
duct or tunnel, or for any other purpose, without first obtaining from the city works superintendent a written permit to make such excavation and pay
such fees as are prescribed in section 12.16.020 of this chapter to cover the cost of inspection. The city works superintendent shall, before issuing
such permit, require:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 100/268
1. Application for the permit shall be made in writing to the city works superintendent on forms furnished by the city works superintendent. The
application shall contain such information as the city works superintendent may require, and be made in quadruplicate and filed with him for
processing;
2. Plans and profiles showing work to be done, locations, limits of work, location of pavement replacement, etc., together with such further
information as the city works superintendent may require, shall be furnished by the applicant when requested by the city works superintendent.
B. If an emergency street cut, opening, or excavation is made, application for a permit shall be made on the next working day.
C. If the street cut, opening or excavation is to be made in a state highway, the permittee shall also comply with all lawful regulations of the Idaho
department of highways.
D. All permits granted under this chapter shall imply that all pipes, conduits, vaults, ducts and other underground installations shall be of the quality,
installed in the manner, and subject to the inspection that is or may be prescribed elsewhere in this code. (Prior code § 9-9-1)
12.16.020: PERMIT; APPLICATION; FEE:
A. When an application for such a permit is made as provided for herein, and when such application to excavate and the details shown upon the
accompanying plans, when such plans are required, comply with the terms of this chapter and the regulations of the council, the application and the
plans shall be approved by the engineer.
B. Utility companies shall not be charged for a permit, but shall pay for the cost of inspection of work done under permits and shall be billed by the
treasurer at a cost to be determined by resolution of the council. (Prior code § 9-9-2)
12.16.030: BOND REQUIRED:
No such permit shall be issued unless and until application is filed with the clerk for a bond in such amount as may be determined by the city works
superintendent conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss, liability or damage which may result or accrue from or because of making, the existence or
manner of guarding, or construction or excavation, and the performance in payment of any work or costs provided in this chapter. Such bond may be in
cash or issued by a corporation licensed to do business in the state of Idaho as a surety company. (Prior code § 9-9-3)
12.16.040: PERMIT; REQUIREMENTS:
A. The application, when approved and signed by the city works superintendent, shall be forwarded to the treasurer and shall constitute the permit when
issued by the treasurer.
B. Permits shall be secured at least two (2) working days before the work is commenced, except in the case of emergencies.
C. Permits shall not be transferable.
D. The police, fire department and water department shall be notified when so specified in the application.
E. The permit shall provide a time limit within which the work shall be completed.
F. The permit shall be void if the work is not commenced and completed within the date specified on the permit unless an extension of time for good
cause is granted as provided in section 12.16.100 of this chapter. (Prior code § 9-9-4)
12.16.050: PERMIT; CONFLICT OF PROVISIONS:
Every permit for an excavation in or under the surface of any public street, alley or other public place shall be granted subject to the right of the
municipality, or of any other person entitled thereto, to use that pad of such street, alley, or other public place for any purpose for which such street, alley
or other public place may be lawfully used. (Prior code § 9-9-27)
12.16.060: PERMIT; REVOCATION:
Any permit granted within the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city works superintendent for noncompliance with any of the provisions
hereof. (Prior code § 9-9-5)
12.16.070: SUPERVISION:
The permittee shall be responsible for all claims and liabilities arising out of work performed under the permit or arising out of the permittee's failure to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 101/268
perform the obligations with respect to street maintenance. The permittee shall, and by acceptance of the permit agrees to, defend, indemnify, save and
hold harmless the municipality, its officers, and employees, from and against any and all suits, claims or actions brought by any person for or on account
of any bodily injuries, disease or illness or damage to persons and/or property sustained or arising in the construction of the work performed under the
permit or in consequence of permittee's failure to perform the obligation with respect to street maintenance. (Prior code § 9-9-20)
12.16.080: PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. All work shall be performed in a neat and workmanlike manner, and so programmed as to cause a minimum of interference with traffic and
inconvenience to the public. Free and unobstructed access shall be provided to all mailboxes, fire hydrants, water gates, valves, manholes and other
public service structures and property as may be required for emergency use. All gutters, pipes, drains, conduits, culverts, catch basins, storm water
inlets and all other storm water facilities, shall be kept open so as to permit the free and unobstructed flow of water at all times. Such public service
structures or property shall not be removed or relocated without proper coordination with the properly constituted authorities charged with their
control and maintenance. The working area shall be confined so as not to obstruct roadways and walks unnecessarily. Temporary roadways,
driveways and walks for vehicles and pedestrians shall be constructed where required. It may be the duty of the permittee making any excavation in
any public street, alley or other public place, to maintain safe crossings for vehicle traffic at all street intersections, and safe crossings for pedestrians
at intervals of not more than three hundred feet (300'). All materials excavated shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench and kept trimmed
so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to public travel. If the street is not wide enough to hold the excavated materials without using part
of the adjacent sidewalk, the person by whom the excavation is made shall erect a tight board fence along and upon such sidewalk and keep a
passageway at least four feet (4') in width open upon and along such sidewalk. All gutters shall be maintained free and unobstructed for the full
depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot (1') in width from the face of such curb at the gutter line. It shall also be the duty of the permittee
excavating or otherwise obstructing any sidewalk in the city limits to erect and maintain a four foot (4') walkway outside of the curbline along such
excavation or obstruction during such time as the sidewalk may remain impassable, with a substantial railing on each side to protect pedestrians.
B. Any monument of granite, concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property
subdivision, or a precise reference point within the municipality shall not be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission in writing from the
city works superintendent, the permission to be granted upon condition that the person applying therefor shall cause to be replaced, at his expense,
by the city works superintendent of this municipality, the monument so removed or disturbed. (Prior code § 9-9-6)
12.16.090: SURFACE RESTORATION:
A. Where excavations or trenches are made in exposed portland cement or concrete surfaces (concrete driveways, sidewalks and pavement), a power
driven concrete saw may be required to cut a kerf deep enough to permit complete breakage of the concrete without ragged edges.
B. Portland cement concrete surfaces disfigured or damaged by the permittee shall be replaced or cleaned and ground to a smooth and uniform
appearance. (Prior code § 9-9-7)
12.16.100: COMPLETION REQUIRED:
After the work has been started, it shall be diligently and continuously prosecuted until completed, and all work shall be completed within the time
specified in the permit unless an extension of time for good cause shown is approved by the city works superintendent. (Prior code § 9-9-8)
12.16.110: SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
During the performance of the work the permittee shall provide and maintain fences, barricades, warning and directional signs, flares, red lights,
watchmen, and flagmen as may be required by existing laws and regulations, and as deemed necessary in the opinion of the city works superintendent,
to ensure full and complete safety to the general public. It shall also be the duty of the permittee making any excavation in any public street, alley or
other public place, to place and maintain barriers at each end of such excavation and at such places as may be necessary along the excavation to
prevent accidents, and also to place and maintain lights at each end of such excavation and at distances of not more than fifty feet (50') along the line
thereof, from sunset each day to sunrise of the next day, until such excavation is entirely refilled, and it is unlawful for the permittee to fail, refuse or
neglect to comply with any requirement contained in this section. (Prior code § 9-9-9)
12.16.120: COMPLIANCE WITH SAFETY LAWS:
The permittee shall obey and enforce all lawful safety orders, rules and recommendations of the state and local laws, rules, codes and lawful
regulations. (Prior code § 9-9-10)
12.16.130: WORK BY CITY:
If the work is unduly delayed by the permittee, and if the public interests reasonably so demand, the engineer shall have the authority, upon written
notice to the permittee, to complete the work or any portion thereof. The actual cost of such work by the municipality plus fifteen percent (15%) as an
overhead charge shall be charged to, and paid for by, the permittee. (Prior code § 9-9-11)
12.16.140: BACKFILLING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 102/268
All trenches and excavations shall be backfilled in the manner provided in this section. The trench or excavation shall be filled to not less than one foot
(1') above the top of the pipe or other utility facility with fine material selected from the excavation, free from stones and lumps and of such character as
to be readily compacted around and under the pipe or other utility facility, or with an imported fine granular material wherever material from the
excavation is not suitable. The backfill material shall be thoroughly compacted around the pipe or other utility facility. Above the resultant level of this first
operation the trench or excavation shall be backfilled with earth from the trench excavation or with imported material to six inches (6") below the
subgrade of the curb, gutter, pavement, sidewalk or driveway to be replaced or to the surface if no improvement replacement is indicated. The use of
water in this stage of the backfill operation will not be permitted if the soil will not readily drain and/or if the adjacent street may become damaged or the
paving is unduly delayed. If the material from the excavation will not give the required relative compaction, an imported granular material that will give
the relative compaction shall be used. Excess water must be evaporated before the next layer of earth or paving is placed. If an improvement
replacement is indicated, the upper six inches (6") of the trench immediately below the subgrade of the improvement to be replaced shall be filled with
selected imported granular material of such character as to readily compact by sprinkling with water if too dry to tamp and thoroughly compacted by
power driven equipment. All work shall be done in such a manner as to obtain a relative compaction throughout the entire depth of the backfill of not less
than that which exists adjacent to the excavation, but in every case the work shall be done in such a manner as to obtain a relative compaction of not
less than eighty percent (80%). (Prior code § 9-9-12)
12.16.150: PAVEMENT AND DRAIN RESTORATION:
Pavement shall be replaced with standard type pavement as indicated on the permit. Curbs, gutters, sidewalks, sewers, drains, structures, and all other
improvements damaged, disturbed or removed during the progress of the work shall be restored or replaced to as good or better condition as existed
prior to the entry on the work by the permittee in accordance with standard specifications of the municipality and to the satisfaction of the city works
superintendent. (Prior code § 9-9-13)
12.16.160: EDGE AND TRENCH MAINTENANCE:
The edges of all trenches and excavations shall be properly trimmed and squared, and all loose material shall be removed before the pavement is
placed. (Prior code § 9-9-14)
12.16.170: TEMPORARY SURFACING:
Temporary surfacing acceptable to the city works superintendent, where indicated on the permit, shall be installed on the same day the backfilling has
been completed unless otherwise directed. The time limit for the replacement of temporary surfacing with final pavement shall be at the direction of the
city works superintendent. (Prior code § 9-9-15)
12.16.180: MUNICIPAL USE:
At all times during the performance of work the municipality shall have the right to use all, or any part of, the area occupied by the permittee under the
permit. (Prior code § 9-9-16)
12.16.190: COMPLETION NOTICE:
Notice of completion shall be filed with the city by the permittee within ten (10) days after completion of the work. (Prior code § 9-9-17)
12.16.200: DAMAGE; INSPECTION:
After the completion of the work, the permittee shall exercise reasonable care in inspecting for, and immediately repairing and making good, any injury
or damage to any portion of the street which occurs as a result of work done under the permit, including any and all injury or damage to the street which
would not have occurred had such work not been done, for a period of one year. (Prior code § 9-9-18)
12.16.210: DAMAGE; REPAIR:
The permittee shall, upon notice from the city works superintendent or his authorized representative, immediately repair any injury or damage in any
portion of the street which occurs as a result of the work done under the permit, including any and all damage to the street which would not have
occurred had such work not been done, and which, in the opinion of the city works superintendent or his authorized representative, constitutes a public
hazard. In the event such repairs are not made by the permittee within twenty four (24) hours after notice, the city works superintendent is authorized to
make such repairs and charge all costs plus fifteen percent (15%) to the permittee. By acceptance of the permit, the permittee agrees to comply with this
section. (Prior code § 9-9-19)
12.16.220: SUPERVISION:
It shall be the duty of the city works superintendent or his authorized representative, to supervise and direct all such making and refilling of excavations
and repairing of street surfaces, and to require that all such excavations, refilling and repairing, comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Prior code
§ 9-9-21)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 103/268
12.16.230: UTILITIES UNDER STREET; MAP; CONTENTS:
It is made the duty of every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in pipes, conduits, ducts, or tunnels under the surface of any public
street, alley, sidewalk or other public place for supplying or conveying gas, electricity, communications, water, steam, or oil, in, to, or from the
municipality, or to or from its inhabitants, of for any other purpose, upon demand of the city to file in the office of the city, upon a seventy two (72) hour
notice, such map or set of maps as shall be demanded, which map or set of maps shall show in detail the exact location, size, description and date of
installation, if known, of all mains, laterals, services and service pipes, and of all valves, pressure regulators, drips, manholes, handholes, transformer
chambers or other appliances installed beneath the surface of such public streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places in the municipality belonging
to, used by, or under the control of, such person, or in which such person has any interest. It shall also be the duty of every person, upon demand of the
city, upon seventy two (72) hours' notice, to file such corrected map or set of maps as demanded by the city, showing the complete installation of all
such pipes and other appliances, including all installations made during the previous year, to and including the last day of such year. (Prior code § 9-9-
22)
12.16.240: UTILITIES UNDER STREET; PROTECTION COST:
The owner of any facility shall bear all costs of moving, removing, shoring up, supporting or protecting the facility in the event it becomes necessary for
the municipality or its authorized contractor to trench or excavate under or adjacent to the facility under the construction, reconstruction, repair or
maintenance of any municipal street or any municipally controlled public sanitary or storm sewer under or adjacent to the facility. (Prior code § 9-9-23)
12.16.250: SURPLUS MATERIAL REMOVAL:
All surplus material removed under the provisions of this chapter relative to excavations shall, if required by him, be delivered to such points as the city
works superintendent shall direct, provided the distance such material is required to be hauled does not exceed one mile. (Prior code § 9-9-24)
12.16.260: EMERGENCY WORK:
Nothing in this chapter relative to excavations shall be construed to prevent any person maintaining any pipe or conduit in any public place, street, or
public alley by virtue of any law or permit, from making such excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when such
necessity arises; provided that the person making such excavation shall obtain a permit therefor on the next working day. (Prior code § 9-9-26)
12.16.270: EXCEPTIONS:
None of the provisions of this chapter relative to excavations shall apply to any work done or to be done, along in or upon public streets, alleys or other
public places pursuant to any law of the state of Idaho providing for the improvement thereof, or to any work done or to be done, along, in, or upon any
such street, alley or other public place pursuant to any contract for improvement authorized by the council, nor to excavations made by any department
or officer of the city of Post Falls in the discharge of its official duties; provided, however, that the general requirements for the performance of the work
and compliance with the safety orders and laws shall apply to all such work and to all excavations made along, in or upon any public street, alley or
other public place. (Prior code § 9-9-25)
12.16.280: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this code. (Ord. 1152 § 15, 2008)
Chapter 12.20
STREET LIGHTING
(Rep. by Ord. 1029 § 1, 2003)
Chapter 12.24
STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING
12.24.010: GENERAL:
A. Title: This chapter shall be known as the STREET NAMING AND ADDRESSING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF POST FALLS, IDAHO.
B. Authority: This chapter is authorized under the provisions of article 12, section 2 of the Idaho constitution and by title 50, chapter 13 and title 67,
chapter 65 of the Idaho Code, as amended or subsequently codified.
C. Purpose: This chapter implements portions of the city of Post Falls comprehensive plan and supplements the Post Falls subdivision and zoning code.
Its purpose is to provide the residents of the city of Post Falls with a uniform and standardized system of street naming and addressing to:
1. Minimize future street name and addressing conflicts.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 104/268
2. Provide a database for city records and enhanced 911 services.
3. Expedite property identification by emergency services.
4. Comply with the addressing guidelines published in U.S. postal service publication 28.
D. Jurisdiction: These regulations shall apply to the naming of all public and private streets and the addressing of all addressable structures and parcels
within the incorporated city limits of Post Falls.
E. Applicability: This chapter shall apply to all property and to all public and private streets within the city of Post Falls.
F. Implementation And Administration: The city of Post Falls community development department shall have the authority to implement, administer, and
enforce provisions of this chapter. For the purposes of addressing, the city of Post Falls community development department will hold and maintain
all addressing data. The community development department is authorized to cooperate with Kootenai County and emergency service providers in
administering this chapter. Authority under this chapter includes, but is not limited to:
1. Assigning address numbers in accordance with this chapter and the Post Falls addressing standards and application manual.
2. Approving new street names.
3. Maintaining the addressing database to include mapping.
4. Assembling, updating, and maintaining an official list of all street names throughout the city for use by all jurisdictions.
5. Providing, in the appropriate format, assigned address information to Kootenai County geographic information system (GIS), the local telephone
exchange provider, and the local U.S. post office.
6. Providing assistance and information regarding addressing to local jurisdictions. This includes the creation and maintenance of the Post Falls
property address guide in cooperation with Kootenai County and emergency services providers.
G. Guidelines Of Interpretation: Words used in the present tense include the future; words used in singular number include the plural and vice versa.
The word shall is mandatory, the word should is directory, and the word may indicates the use of discretion. Unless the subject clearly requires
otherwise, the words or phrases used shall have the meanings commonly appropriate to their context and the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 1135
§ 1, 2007)
12.24.020: STREET NAMING:
A. General Street Naming Provisions: Streets, proposed with subdivisions or through other processes, shall be named and the names approved by the
city and Kootenai County GIS.
In selecting street names, the following provisions shall be employed:
1. Centerline alignment street name standards should be observed for noncontinuous streets, unless there is no possibility for extension of the street
to make it a continuous through street.
2. Names of similar pronunciation and/or spelling shall be prohibited (example: Briar Lane, Brier Lane).
3. Variations of the same name with a different street designation shall be prohibited within the first word of the two (2) word title or in the street
extension (example: Pine Street, Pine Drive, White Pine Rd, White Lilly Ln).
4. No street name shall consist of more than two (2) words or contain more than fourteen (14) letters, excluding the street direction (N, S, E, and W)
and extension (street, lane, court, etc.).
5. No street shall have more than one name.
6. No street name shall contain the words north, south, east, or west, or any combination thereof, within the street name. All named streets that
extend from incorporated areas into unincorporated areas shall retain the same name.
7. Streets that have a definite north-south directional course shall be designated as a "street".
8. Streets which have a definite east-west directional course shall be designated an "avenue".
9. Streets which do not have a definite directional course shall be designated as a "drive", "trail", "way", or "lane".
10. A dead end street or cul-de-sac less than one thousand feet (1,000') in length, when not an extension of an existing street or a continuation of a
proposed street, shall be called a "court".
11. A street that has its ingress and egress on the same street shall be designated a "loop".
12. A street that circles back upon itself shall be designated as a "circle".
13. Special scenic routes or park drives may be designated "parkway" upon review and approval by the community development director.
14. A newly established street, which has less than a one hundred twenty five foot (125') centerline alignment offset from an existing street
intersection, shall continue the same street name. A newly established street, which has more than a one hundred twenty five foot (125') centerline
offset from an existing street intersection, shall be assigned a new name.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 105/268
15. Streets, public or private, shall be named according to the regulations in this chapter when serving or potentially serving three (3) or more users.
16. Duplicate street names are prohibited within the city of Post Falls. Existing duplicated names shall be corrected in accordance with this chapter to
the greatest extent that is practical.
17. Street names which are not readily capable of pronunciation or which would be distasteful to a reasonable person are prohibited.
18. For the purposes of addressing developments with multiple buildings in a complex (commercial, industrial, office, residential or combination
thereof), a street centerline may be established and named from which to assign addresses. For instance, within a commercial shopping center or
multi-family development, a fire lane or main drive may be established andnamed for addressing purposes so that addresses may be derived from
the designated street centerline.
B. Naming New Streets Or Naming Unnamed Streets: Any new street to be established within the city of Post Falls, public or private, or any existing
unnamed street, public or private, shall require a street name approved by the city of Post Falls community development department and Kootenai
County (for E911 purposes).
1. For subdivisions, approved street names shall be provided on the final plat map. Street names shall be submitted and approved prior to final plat
processing.
2. For other new streets or naming of unnamed streets, the owner or owners and/or contract buyers of properties abutting said street, may request,
on an application form provided by community development and the payment of an applicable fee, an official name for a street (public or private). It
is the responsibility and requirement of the applicant(s) to provide the community development department with a prioritized list of names
(minimum of 3) that are acceptable to a majority (51 percent) of the property owners abutting the street in question.
The community development department shall give consideration to any street name requests; only after all street naming requirements of this
chapter are met. Once a name request is approved the name will be added to the official street name list. The applicant shall be responsible for
the cost of the sign and installation.
C. Renaming Of Existing Duplicated Street Names: Where duplicate names exist, streets may be renamed by community development to eliminate
duplication. The community development department will determine which streets need renaming using the following criteria:
1. When the street was originally named.
2. The number of improved properties served by the street.
3. Other factors as deemed appropriate to promote community health and safety.
D. Official Designation Of Existing Street Names: With the adoption of this chapter, all streets properly named shall be designated as the official street
names.
E. Renaming Of Streets: Property owners abutting an existing street which has an existing approved name may petition the city council for a name
change. Requests for name changes shall be approved by one hundred percent (100%) of property owners abutting the street and the payment of
an applicable fee, set by resolution of the city council, and pay the cost of street sign replacement. Changes may be authorized by the city council
when it is found to be in the public interest and meets the namingrequirements of this chapter.
F. Controversial Or Disputed Street Names: The community development director shall have the discretion to refer any disputed street name, addressing
issues, or controversial street name changes to the city administrator for resolution. (Ord. 1135 § 1, 2007)
12.24.030: ADDRESSING PROCEDURES:
A. Addressing General Procedures: Addressing along the city of Post Falls streets shall be based on the grid, using Spokane Street and 1st Avenue as
its origin. Address numbers will run consecutively to the north, south, east, and west from the point of beginning.
B. Address Numbers: Address numbers shall be clearly readable from the street, and shall contrast with background color pursuant to the international
fire code. If a structure is more than seventy five feet (75') from the street, or is otherwise not clearly visible from the street, its address shall be
posted at the intersection of its access and public or private street. The address sign shall be no less than four feet (4') or more than six feet (6')
above the ground on a substantial, maintained support structure. The view of the address from the street must be unobstructed. All primary letters,
numbers, and symbols shall be a minimum of four inches (4") in height, with a one-half inch (1/2") stroke, and shall be contrasting with the
background color.
Property owners are responsible for displaying proper address identification in accordance with this chapter.
C. Address Number Assignments: The following are basic standards for addressing:
1. From the point of beginning, 1600 address numbers will be designated per linear mile or existing block structure will be followed.
2. All addresses shall include a direction letter (N, S, E, W) following the address number, pursuant to the grid defined in subsection A of this section
(example: 6400 N Greensferry Road).
3. Even numbers shall appear on the south and east side of streets and odd numbers on the north and west sides.
4. If a building (commercial, industrial, office, residential or combination thereof) has a number of entrances, each serving a separate occupant, then
the building may be assigned an address and the individual units shall be assigned subunit numbers or individual addresses may be assigned to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 106/268
each entrance.
5. A building (commercial, industrial, office, residential or combination thereof) with one main entrance shall be assigned onenumber with the owner
of the structure responsible for providing designated individual subunit numbering.
6. Manufactured home parks shall be assigned one number for each lot within the park based on the addressing system coordinates. The owner of
the mobile home park shall be responsible for providing designated individual numbering of each mobile home space. Streets within the
manufactured home park shall be signed according to subsection 12.24.040A of this chapter.
7. For multiple buildings in a development (commercial, industrial, office, residential or combination thereof), it may be appropriate to establish a
private street centerline for addressing purposes. Building would then be addressed using the established street centerline in accordance with
numbering procedures in this chapter.
8. Projects requiring site plan review (title 18, "Zoning", of this code, specifically section 18.20.130, "Site Plan Review", of this code) shall be
assigned addresses as part of the site plan review process. The arrangement of buildings and vehicular travel aisles and the implications to
addressing should be considered when reviewing site plans.
9. All addressing plans shall be reviewed and approved by Kootenai County GIS department to ensure conformance to emergency services
protocols.
For effective and efficient emergency services and enhanced 911, it is important to provide for consistent and uniform addressing procedures
throughout the county. In addition to the basic standards for addressing set forth in this chapter, the Post Falls property addressing guidelines to be
adopted by resolution by the city council shall be followed to provide solutions to addressing situations that do not fall within the type of streets or
scenarios that are provided in this chapter.
D. Addressing Along Streets:
1. A diagonal or meandering street shall be assigned numbers depending upon the address baseline that it most favors.
2. For circle and loop streets, direction designations shall be determined by the street's predominate direction (N, S, E, W).
3. For circle streets, the numbering shall start at the intersection point of the street closest to the address origination point and shall proceed in a
clockwise direction using a consecutive numerical order with the odd/even numbers based on the starting point of the circle street as if the street
were straight.
4. For loop streets, the beginning of the street is designated by the closest intersection to the origination point and shall be increased numerically to
that point that is farthest from theorigination point.
5. Properties with structure(s), or bare land parcels that have a driveway shall be assigned an address based on a primary access point on a named
street or common driveway.
6. Properties that have multiple driveways shall have a primary access point designated by the property owner that will be used for addressing. If the
property owner does not designate this primary access point, the community development director shall make the official determination and
designate a primary access point that will be used for address assignment.
7. Parcels accessed by a common easement, serving fewer than three (3) structures, shall be assigned a primary access point at the point where the
easement intersects a public street, private street or common driveway centerline. This primary access point will be used to assign an official
address for each parcel.
8. All plats produced as a result of subdivisions, minor subdivisions, planned unit developments, condominium, or other projects that require the
establishment of primary access points from public or private streets for driveways shall have predesignated primary access points. These points
shall be utilized to assign addresses to the associated lots. The primary access points shall be verified by the city of Post Falls community
development department prior to final plat processing. (Ord. 1135 § 1, 2007)
12.24.040: SIGNING:
A. Street Signs: Street signs shall be placed, constructed and installed in conformance with the city of Post Falls standards for public works construction
and the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD). (Ord. 1135 § 1, 2007)
12.24.050: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Violations: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Erect or install a street name sign not in accordance with this chapter;
2. Remove, alter, change, or deface a street name sign or address identification erected or installed as provided herein;
3. Place or post addresses not approved by this chapter; or
4. Fail to place an address visible from the street.
B. Penalties: Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine of
one hundred dollars ($100.00).
In the event that violations of this chapter are not corrected within fifteen (15) days of written notice, the city of Post Falls may perform the work
and bill the property owner(s). (Ord. 1135 § 1, 2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 107/268
12.24.060: ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS:
A. Administrative Procedures: The city council may, by resolution, adopt formal or informal administrative procedures; create fee schedules, etc., to
facilitate implementation of the purpose and intent of this chapter.
B. Appeals: Appeals concerning interpretation or administration of this chapter may be filed by any affected person. Such appeals shall be filed within a
reasonable time of the action being appealed, not to exceed thirty (30) days, by filing with the community development director a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds of the appeal. The director shall schedule the item for review by the city administrator to be commenced within a reasonable
period of time after receipt of a completed notice of appeal and give due notice to any affected party. The director shall transmit to the city
administrator all papers that constitute the record upon which the action appealed was taken. The city administrator shall decide the appeal. The
decision of the city administrator may be appealed to the city council.
Enforcement actions may not be appealed. (Ord. 1135 § 1, 2007)
Chapter 12.28
SURVEYS
12.28.010: FILING:
All surveys hereafter made by any person which are to become a matter of public record, all resurveys or retracements of real property which are to be
monumented, all utility surveys, all road and highway surveys, all cemetery surveys, and any surveys which affect the general public in any way within
the city limits, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. (Prior code § 9-6-1)
12.28.020: DESCRIPTION FILING:
All surveys, plats, or retracement required to be filed with the office of the city clerk as provided in section 12.28.010 of this chapter, shall be described
and such description shall be filed with the city clerk. (Prior code § 9-6-2)
12.28.030: ERROR CORRECTION:
Should the city engineer inspect or check such surveys and plats filed with the clerk as in this chapter provided, he shall notify the person filing the
same, by written notice, of any discrepancies therein. Any person so notified to correct such discrepancies shall do so within a reasonable time after
notice by the city engineer. (Prior code § 9-6-3)
12.28.040: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who fails to do any of the acts required under this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable under the general penalty ordinance
of the city. (Prior code § 9-6-4)
Chapter 12.32
COMMUNITY FOREST ORDINANCE
12.32.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the CITY OF POST FALLS COMMUNITY FOREST ORDINANCE. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1997)
12.32.020: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to encourage the preservation, expansion, protection and proper maintenance of the community forest of Post Falls.
It is intended that the Post Falls "Tree Standards Manual" developed by the urban forestry commission of the city be used as a guide for best
management practices in tree planting, care and maintenance. (Ord. 897 § 2, 1997)
12.32.030: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to any public tree within the city and to those trees on private property that violate the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 897 § 3,
1997)
12.32.040: POWERS OF THE DIRECTOR:
The director of parks and recreation is hereby assigned to provide support staff for the activities of the urban forestry commission. The director is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 108/268
authorized to carry out the tree related responsibilities set forth in this chapter, including enforcement responsibility. In doing so, the director is
authorized to appoint or designate others to carry out his responsibilities. (Ord. 897 § 4, 1997)
12.32.041: FEES IN LIEU OF INSTALLATION OF PUBLIC TREES:
A. Fee Criteria: If a fee is to be paid in lieu of the installation of the public trees by the developer of a subdivision, or as part of a commercial or industrial
site plan approval, the fee for each required tree shall be determined by the city council by resolution, based on the following criteria:
1. The estimated purchase and installation cost of a 1.75 inch caliper tree, typically containerized, balled and burlapped, or bare root, plus twenty
percent (20%) for contingencies and administration.
B. Fee Collection: The fee shall be paid as follows:
1. Subdivisions: At the time of completion of the construction improvement agreement.
2. Commercial or industrial site development adjacent to existing streets: At the time of building permit issuance, unless the fee was paid previously
as part of a subdivision.
C. Prior Approved Development: For subdivisions and site development approved prior to the effective date of this section, the developer/owner may
submit a written request to the urban forester to be allowed to pay the approved fee for the required trees in lieu of the existing requirements to plant
trees. The urban forester, after review of the request, may approve or deny the request and such approval or denial shall be in writing stating the
reasons for the decision. A decision of the urban forester may be appealed to the parks and recreation director. (Ord. 1217, 2011)
12.32.050: UNLAWFUL PRACTICES PROHIBITED FOR PUBLIC TREES:
Public trees constitute an asset that belongs to every community resident. "Public trees" include all trees which grow on city owned or city managed
lands within the corporate limits of the city. Pursuant to this chapter it is hereby deemed unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this chapter,
punishable by misdemeanor criminal penalty or by appropriate civil remedy to do any of the following to a public tree:
A. "Top" or "head back" a tree by the improper pruning or severe cutting back of limbs within a tree's crown or the removal of the top portion of the trunk
of a coniferous tree.
B. To cut down, destroy or materially damage any public tree without the express authorization by the director.
C. Attach devices or structures (i.e., tree houses or signs) to, on, or within trees on public property.
D. Dispose of or apply substances which are toxic to trees, within the proximity of the root zone of trees on public property, whether such disposal or
application be on public or private property.
E. Damage public trees through construction operations involving compaction of, excavation of, or filling of soils within the root zone of trees on public
property, whether such activities be on public or private property.
F. Damage a tree on public property by significantly pruning or disturbing its root system whether such disturbance takes place on public or private
lands.
G. Vandalize or otherwise harm a tree on public lands by defacing or injuring the bark, limbs, roots or trunk by cutting, burning, chopping, applying
substances or other means of inducing harm to the shape or vitality of the tree.
H. Remove or break cultural devices such as bracing, cabling, guying, implant capsules, irrigation, stakes or protective devices for trees on public
property.
I. Fail to immediately clean debris from public or private tree maintenance or removal so travel will not be impeded on sidewalks or streets. Cleanup of
all debris from tree maintenance or removal shall be completed within seventy two (72) hours of completed trimming or removal work.
J. The following trees are expressly prohibited for use as street trees within public street rights of way or where they are within the zone of influence of
adjacent public sidewalks:
Acer negundo Box elder maple
Acer saccharum Silver maple
Betula paperifera Paperbark birch
Betula pendula European white birch
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 109/268
Coniferous species Firs, pines, or cedar
Fraxinus excelsior European ash
Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo (female trees)
Gledistia tricanthos Thorned honeylocust
Juglans nigra Black walnut
Populus species Poplars, aspen, cottonwood
Robinia pseudotacacia Black locust
Salix species Willow species
Ulmus species Elm species, unless otherwise approved by the director
K. Plant a public tree without written authorization from the Post Falls urban forester or parks and recreation director and/or plant a public tree without
complying with the Post Falls "Tree Standards Manual". (Ord. 1220, 2011)
12.32.060: CERTIFIED OR LICENSED ARBORIST REQUIRED:
When the pruning of trees on public property is undertaken by utilities and/or professional tree care operators (including any person or business
performing tree care or trimming for a fee or compensation), such work shall be done under the direct supervision of a person qualified as a certified
arborist by the International Society Of Arboriculture. Compliance with this standard shall require that the certified arborist visit the site of the work to
prescribe the pruning to be done and to actively monitor the pruning operation. This requirement shall not prohibit an adjoining home or business owner
from carrying out minor pruning on street trees immediately adjoining his/her property so long as such minor pruning does not alter the essential shape
of the tree or does not violate any of the specific prohibitions established by this chapter. (Ord. 897 § 6, 1997)
12.32.070: CARE OF PRIVATE TREES:
Each landowner with private trees on his/her land is hereby legally responsible to carry out the following duties concerning said trees:
A. Maintain trees on private lands so they will not endanger the public or become hazardous to public rights of way, public utilities or other public
property.
B. Control injurious pests by removing debris or trees harboring insects or disease from their private real property or by using other legally approved
methods to eradicate treeborne insects or disease. Such methods shall not cause undue harm to the environment.
C. The director is authorized to take such steps as (s)he may deem necessary to protect the community forest from actions or inaction regarding trees
on private lands. Retention or neglect of a tree on private lands which harbors insects or diseases which endangers the health or vitality of the Post
Falls community forest shall be deemed a violation of this chapter which shall be subject to the remedies and penalties otherwise set forth herein.
(Ord. 897 § 7, 1997)
12.32.080: REMOVAL OF PUBLIC TREES:
A. Policy: Trees on public lands shall not be removed by private individuals without the prior written authorization of the director. The following criteria
will be considered:
1. Whether the tree is sufficiently diseased or is an alternate host of an injurious disease.
2. Whether the tree is harboring injurious insects or pathogens and may cause significant potential danger to the Post Falls community forest or to
private trees.
3. Whether the tree is dead or nearly dead and/or constitutes a public safety hazard.
4. Whether the tree interferes with overhead utility lines and creates an unresolvable public safety hazard.
5. Any other criteria deemed to be in the public interest.
B. Replacement: Replacement of a public tree shall be required when removal of a public tree occurs without authorization from the director unless
replacement would be contrary to the public interest. Said obligation of replacement shall be additional to other sanctions required by this chapter.
Replacement may be required at a location different from the place of removal. (Ord. 897 § 8, 1997)
12.32.090: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished as provided in title 1, chapter
1.24 of this code. Each violation, including the removal of each public tree, may be considered a separate violation. Should any person be found
guilty in any court of competent jurisdiction or otherwise plead guilty to an alleged violation hereof, the court may order restitution if the Post Falls
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 110/268
community forest is diminished or harmed as a consequence of such violation. Restitution recommendations shall not exceed the replacement or
appraisal value formulas for said damaged or eliminated tree(s) established by the "Guide For Plant Appraisal", written by the Council Of Tree And
Landscape Appraisers, published by the International Society Of Arboriculture. Such restitution amount shall be recommended to the prosecutor by
the director utilizing said value formulas.
B. The city may undertake civil legal action in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek to enjoin conduct which violates the provisions of this chapter or
to recover the reasonable costs of actions deemed necessary to bring about compliance herewith. Said actions may also seek restitution for
damages and costs incurred to remedy the consequences of violation. (Ord. 1152 § 16, 2008)
Chapter 12.36
LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS CODE
12.36.010: PURPOSE OF PROVISIONS:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health and welfare of the citizens of the city and to provide the mechanism for and promote the
making of improvements to the various areas within the city, which may come within the purview of this chapter and/or any state or local statutes or rules
and regulations governing the same. (Prior code § 9-11-1)
12.36.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the identical meanings as respectively set forth in
Idaho Code section 50-1702, as amended from time to time:
A. Cost and expenses;
B. Clerk, attorney or other municipal officer;
C. Council;
D. Engineer;
E. Off street parking;
F. Resident owner or resident owners; and
G. Street or streets. (Prior code § 9-11-3)
12.36.030: AUTHORITY:
The governing body of the city shall have the power to make or cause to be made any one or more or combination of those certain improvements listed
in Idaho Code section 50-1703, as amended from time to time. (Prior code § 9-11-2)
12.36.040: CODE ADOPTED:
The terms and provisions of Idaho Code section 50-1701 et seq., referred to, known and cited as "Local Improvement District Code" of the Idaho Code
shall be and are hereby deemed to be incorporated herein by reference as if set forth in full and shall be complied with in all respects applicable hereto
as the same now exists or may from time to time be amended in whole or in part or repealed in whole or in part. (Prior code § 9-11-4)
12.36.050: BUSINESS DISTRICT:
The city shall have the right to establish business improvement districts, referred to as "district" or "districts", for the purposes of the acquisition,
construction or maintenance of parking facilities for the benefit of the district; physical improvement and decoration of any public space in the district;
promotion of public events which are to take place on or in public places in the district; the acquisition and operation of transportation services to
promote retail trade activities within the district; and the general promotion of retail trade activities in the district; and the right to levy special
assessments on all businesses within the district and specially benefited by business improvement district to pay the damages or costs incurred therein
as provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 9-11-5)
12.36.060: STATE BUSINESS PROVISIONS ADOPTED:
The terms and provisions of Idaho Code section 50-2601 et seq., are incorporated herein as if set forth in full and shall be and are hereby deemed to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 111/268
become incorporated by reference and shall be complied with in all respects applicable hereto as the same now exists or may from time to time be
amended in whole or in part or repealed in whole or in part. (Prior code § 9-11-6)
Chapter 12.40
VALUE OF REAL ESTATE IN LOCAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
12.40.010: FULL CASH VALUE DEFINED:
By the term "full cash value" is meant the value at which the property would be taken in payment of a just debt from a solvent debtor or the amount the
property would sell for at a voluntary sale made in the ordinary course of business, taking into consideration its earning power when put to the same
uses to which property similarly situated is applied. (Prior code § 9-4-2)
12.40.020: DETERMINATION:
The actual value of the real estate in local improvement district no. 1 and any subsequently formed local improvement districts shall be the full cash
valuation. The board of trustees shall appoint for local improvement district no. 1, and for any subsequently formed local improvement districts, three (3)
disinterested persons who are residents and taxpayers within the city of Post Falls, to establish the full cash value of each lot, block and parcel of land,
or any unplatted area lying within local improvement district no. 1 or any subsequently formed local improvement districts. (Prior code § 9-4-1)
Chapter 12.44
COMMERCIAL USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY
12.44.010: RESTRICTIONS GENERALLY:
No commercial or business activity of any nature except as hereinafter specifically allowed shall be carried on or conducted on city owned property. For
the purpose of this chapter, city owned property shall include public right of way under the jurisdiction of the city, but shall not include commercial or
business activity that consists of using the public right of way for motor vehicle traffic purposes. (Ord. 1210, 2011)
12.44.020: NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS:
The mayor or his designee are authorized to waive the permit fee for charitable or community nonprofit organizations. (Ord. 1210, 2011)
12.44.030: CONCESSIONS GENERALLY:
The director of the parks and recreation department is authorized to enter into agreements with vendors to operate concessions on city property and to
establish the criteria for such concessions. (Ord. 1210, 2011)
12.44.040: PERMIT REVOCATION:
Concession or commercial activity permits may be revoked at any time by the parks and recreation department or police department upon any one or
more of the following occurrences:
A. Failure to follow hours of operation restrictions;
B. Failure to maintain clean, neat and tidy concession area;
C. Revocation of health department permit;
D. Violation of any state, county or city statute, ordinance or regulation;
E. Failure to maintain insurance as herein provided;
F. Causing damage to city owned property or creating a public safety hazard.
Providing that the concessionaire is first given a notice of violation and intent to revoke warning not less than twenty four (24) hours prior to proposed
revocation and, further providing, concessionaire has failed to cure and remove the violation during the twenty four (24) hour period, except when the
violation is related to damaging city owned property or creating a public safety hazard. If such a violation were to occur, the activity must cease and the
city owned property vacated immediately upon receipt of the notice of violation. (Ord. 1210, 2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 112/268
12.44.050: PERMIT; APPEAL:
Concessionaire shall have the right to appeal the permit revocation to the city administrator within ten (10) days of the revocation. If not so appealed, the
revocation remains permanent for the remainder of the season. The decision of the city administrator shall be permanent and binding upon the
concessionaire. Upon revocation, concessionaire shall remove the concession from the property of the city and bear the entire cost thereof. If not so
removed within five (5) days of notice of revocation, the city may remove the concession and recover the costs thereof from concessionaire, including
any court costs and attorney fees incurred in so doing. (Ord. 1210, 2011)
12.44.060: DISPLAY AND PROMOTION LIMITED; AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED:
Commercial displays, promotions, arts and craft displays, exhibits or other commercial activities with items for sale may be permitted in the discretion of
the PRD or PD. Application for commercial display permits must be received a minimum of thirty (30) days before the requested permit date. Permit fees
will be based upon the nature and scope of the activity and shall be set by the PRD or PD with rights to appeal to the city administrator. (Ord. 1210,
2011)
12.44.070: PERMIT; BOND:
The PRD or PD may, by special permit where a commercial activity, in the opinion and discretion of the PRD or PD, will aid in a general community
promotion, grant permits for the operation and carrying on of commercial or semicommercial enterprises on city owned property, under the following
conditions:
A. Liability, Insurance: The person or organization operating such enterprise shall enter into an agreement with the city, holding the city and its elective
and appointive officers and employees harmless from any and all liability for injury to persons or property and agreeing to reimburse the city for any
injury to city property and, to this end, file with the city clerk evidence satisfactory to the legal department of the city a policy of liability insurance in
the minimum amounts of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for injury to property or persons per occurrence, with the city named as an
insured thereon.
B. Bond: Post a bond in the form and amount deemed sufficient by the city administrator and payment of such fees as may be required by the city
administrator. (Ord. 1210, 2011)
Chapter 12.48
PARKS
Article I. Use Restrictions
12.48.010: HOURS:
It is unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle, use any equipment, facilities, accessories, or appliances for camping purposes, sleeping, or
preparing meals, in any public park owned or operated by the city between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
Special exceptions to this prohibition in the form of overnight camping permission or meal preparation authorization may be granted by express authority
of the director of parks and recreation when the use or activity is of general community benefit or of particular benefit to the city. Approval of any such
exception shall be evidenced by a permit or letter of authorization to that effect which shall be exhibited to any officer of the city upon request. Appeal of
any denial of such a request may be made to the mayor. (Ord. 868 § 1, 1997: prior code § 9-7-1)
12.48.015: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES RESTRICTED IN PARKS AND PUBLIC AREAS:
A. Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on the succeeding day, it is unlawful for any person to have in his or her
possession open containers or receptacles of beer, intoxicating liquor or wine, or to consume such beverages on the grounds, buildings or
thoroughfares or within a motor vehicle moving or parked within any city park or upon other premises owned or subject to exclusive management by
the city of Post Falls, except as otherwise authorized by a permit issued by the city to dispense and consume alcoholic beverages in designated city
park areas or other designated public places at certain times outside the time limits established hereby. Such permit is granted only so long as the
conduct engaged in at the site, and in the park generally, conforms to standards which do not cause inconvenience to or disturb the peace of others.
The authorization for use of alcohol until the permitted time extends only until or unless revoked by a peace officer or by an employee of the city in
which case such permission shall be deemed terminated immediately and the consumption and possession of alcohol shall be concluded upon order
of city personnel. Consumption, possession of open containers and/or dispensing of alcohol may be further restricted or prohibited in any park or
public place by posting signs providing notice of such restriction. The mayor of the city or his designee(s) shall be authorized to issue the
aforementioned permits or authorizations or to designate areas and times where and when consumption, dispensing or possession of open
containers of alcoholic beverages is prohibited.
B. The city council shall serve to hear appeals from administrative decisions regarding the issuance or denial of permits as authorized by this section or
contesting limitations on hours, possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages established for any park or public area pursuant to this section.
The council may establish fees for such permits by resolution. (Ord. 1175 § 1, 2009)
12.48.020: ANIMALS IN PARKS; EXPRESS PERMISSION REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 113/268
Notwithstanding provisions of title 6 of this code, animals may be permitted within public parks owned or operated by the city with express prior
permission of the director of parks and recreation. Any such request must be made in writing setting forth the circumstances and control measures
which will be in force if animals are permitted within a park. The director may decline the request if he believes the public interest would not be served
thereby, or he may authorize the kind, type and number of animals which may be allowed, the control measures which must be employed, and the fees
or deposits which may be required to defray costs which the city might incur by virtue of allowing animals in a park. Approval of any such request shall
be evidenced by a permit or letter of authorization to that effect which shall be exhibited to any officer of the city upon request. Any decision made by the
director in this regard may be appealed to the mayor. (Ord. 868 § 2, 1997)
Article II. Container Restrictions
12.48.030: TITLE OF PROVISIONS:
This article shall be known and may be cited as the CITY SOUTH PARK BEACH CONTAINER RESTRICTIONS ARTICLE. (Prior code § 8-6-1)
12.48.040: DESIGNATED:
It is declared unlawful for any person to carry upon, have in their possession, or cause to be deposited on the designated beach area of the South park,
any glass container, pop top type metal container or the opening tag off of the containers. "Pop top" type metal container shall be defined to include, but
not be limited to, any metal container which has an opening secured by a removable metal tag, the removal of which shall create sharpedges on the
container or on the tag removed. (Prior code § 8-6-2)
12.48.050: AREA:
The beach area shall be designated by appropriate signage, the placement of which shall be under the direction and control of the park and recreation
department, which such designated area may be designated and/or changed from time to time by resolution of the city council as the city council so
deems fit and proper. (Prior code § 8-6-3)
12.48.060: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violation hereof shall be deemed a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 8-6-4)
Article III. Reserved Areas
12.48.070: DESIGNATED:
There shall be three (3) picnic areas within the Q'emiln Riverside park that will be available for reserving. They shall be known as: a) the picnic shelter
area, b) the gazebo area, and c) the ramp area. There shall be one area within the White Pines park at Spokane and 21st Street. It shall be known as
the south picnic area. (Ord. 593 § 1, 1990)
12.48.080: RESERVATION PROCEDURE:
Any individual or group wishing to reserve one of the picnic areas shall apply to the park department of the city. The application must be approved by the
park department and all fees paid before a reservation permit will be issued for any area. (Ord. 593 § 2, 1990)
12.48.090: FEES AND DEPOSITS:
The city council may, from time to time, enact recreation and park use fees and deposits by resolution. Reservation or park use fees may be waived by
the mayor for charitable or community benefit activities that serve the public interest. The mayor shall report any such waivers to the city council. (Ord.
868 § 3, 1997: Ord. 643 § 1, 1992)
12.48.100: PROHIBITIONS:
It is unlawful for any individual or group to reserve, attempt to reserve, or in any way prevent any other person from using anyarea of the parks unless
such individual or group has first received written permission from the park department to reserve the area. Any individual or group authorized by the
park department to reserve an area shall make the permit available for inspection by any employee of the city upon request. (Ord. 593 § 4, 1990)
Article IV. Parks And Recreation Capital Development Fund
12.48.110: CREATED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 114/268
There is hereby created a parks and recreation capital development fund in the system of funds and accounts maintained by the city treasurer. Said fund
balance shall be maintained separate and apart from the general funds of the city and shall be dedicated solely to the purposes of providing and
enhancing the capital facilities for parks and recreation purposes owned or operated by the city. Said fund shall be authorized to carry an accrued
balance from year to year as such shall be authorized at the time of making the annual city budget. (Ord. 803 § 1, 1995)
12.48.120: FUNDING ESTABLISHED BY APPROPRIATION AND RESOLUTION:
A. During the budget process for each fiscal year, or at such time as the city council deems amendment of the city budget appropriate, the city council
may appropriate amounts from the parks and recreation capital development fund to finance improvements, acquisition, or capital renovation of
parks and recreation facilities.
B. The city council may from time to time, by resolution, approve the charging of fees or designate or dedicate other revenues to said fund. Any revenue
measures so designated shall remain dedicated for the purposes set forth in said resolution or as otherwise determined by formal action of the city
council, unless subsequently repealed by action of the city council. (Ord. 803 § 2, 1995)
12.48.130: FULL APPROPRIATION; CONSULTATION:
Expenditures from the parks and recreation capital fund shall be made in accordance with the annual budget appropriation process of the city after
consultation with the parks and recreation commission. The balance of the fund shall be fully appropriated each calendar year unless the city council
determines otherwise during consideration of the proposed budget. (Ord. 803 § 3, 1995)
Chapter 12.52
CEMETERY
12.52.010: ADMINISTRATION AND CARE:
A. Evergreen cemetery is owned by the city of Post Falls. The parks and recreation director, or the director's designee, shall have the authority to
enforce all regulations adopted with respect to the cemetery and to take such actions as may be necessary, including soliciting the cooperation of
any city or other public official, to maintain order upon the premises of the cemetery and has the authority to expel from the cemetery grounds any
person who violates rules established for the cemetery or who otherwise disturbs the peaceful nature of the cemetery grounds.
B. Records of all lot sales, interments and disinterments, including the lot and block of each interment and ownership thereof and the name will be made
available for public inspection by the city during normal business hours. (Ord. 1066 § 2, 2005)
12.52.020: SALE AND USE OF CEMETERY LOTS:
A. All lots shall be sold and utilized subject to rules and regulations adopted by the city council and in compliance with applicable state and federal laws.
B. The interest conveyed when a lot is sold shall be limited to the right to use the property for the burial of human dead. Only the record owner, or a
person or persons with the written approval of the record owner, may be buried in a lot in the cemetery.
C. The price of individual lots and blocks of lots shall be as established by resolution of the Post Falls city council. All sales of lots shall be by cash,
equivalent negotiable instrument, or by time sale agreement in accordance with terms established by resolution of the city council. In the event of
dishonor of any negotiable instrument or failure to perform the terms of a lot sale agreement, any sales transaction or deed shall be void. No deed for
purchase made pursuant to a time sale agreement shall be issued until the final payment is made.
D. The park and recreation director is authorized to refrain from selling additional lots to any person who is delinquent in theirpayments under a time sale
agreement.
E. Use of any single lot shall be as authorized by duly adopted cemetery regulations.
F. No conveyance of any lot shall be valid unless duly executed by the mayor.
G. A fee to disinurn cremated human remains in an amount set by resolution of the city council shall be paid prior to any disinurnment. (Ord. 1066 § 2,
2005)
12.52.030: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 115/268
Rules and regulations for the use of the Evergreen cemetery may be amended by the city council. All lots sold in the cemetery and use of the cemetery
shall be subject to the rules and regulations in effect at any given time and shall conform to those rules as made applicable by resolution of the city
council from time to time. (Ord. 1066 § 2, 2005)
12.52.040: WORK IN THE CEMETERY:
No person may do work in the cemetery without first obtaining authorization from the park and recreation director or the director's designee. (Ord. 1066
§ 2, 2005)
12.52.050: REMOVAL OF FLOWERS AND DECORATIONS:
No person, other than a city employee or an agent of the city, may remove flowers or other decorations placed on a gravesite by another person. (Ord.
1066 § 2, 2005)
12.52.060: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
The requirements established by this chapter and the regulations established by resolution authorized pursuant to this chapter may be enforced by any
city officer. Violation of the provisions of this chapter or regulations adopted pursuant hereto may be sanctioned in the same manner as authorized by
general provisions of this code, including civil action to compel compliance. Additionally, violations which result in additional costs to the city shall be
subject to reimbursement of all such costs, which costs may be pursued by civil legal action if not paid upon demand. (Ord. 1066 § 2, 2005)
Chapter 12.56
SAFE USE OF WATERWAYS
12.56.010: WATERWAY DEFINED:
"Waterway", for purposes of this chapter, means the Spokane River. (Ord. 576 § 1, 1989)
12.56.020: SWIMMING AND DIVING RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to swim or dive into any waterway within the city except in areas designated and signed as swimming areas, or when such
activity is required in the case of a bona fide emergency situation. (Ord. 576 § 2, 1989)
Chapter 12.60
COMPLIANCE WITH POSTED REGULATIONS IN PUBLIC PLACES
12.60.010: VIOLATION OF POSTED RULES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to violate posted rules, established by the owner or manager, governing orderly personal conduct on the grounds of any
public school, publicly owned building, public park, beach, picnic grounds, or other facility or lands leased or owned by any public agency, or at any
publicly sponsored assembly, recreational activity, or on the premises of any business or other commercial or not for profit enterprise where the public
has general unrestricted access. To be enforceable pursuant to this code provision the subject rules shall be clearly printed in English and posted in a
conspicuous place or places upon or within the premises affected thereby. Owner posted rules regarding parking of motor vehicles upon privately owned
premises shall not be subject to this code provision. (Ord. 768 § 1, 1994)
12.60.020: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor. An initial violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
three hundred dollars ($300.00). Any subsequent violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this
code. Each separate instance of violation shall constitute a separate offense. Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter may be accomplished by
undertaking civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1152 § 17, 2008)
Title 13
PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapter 13.04
MUNICIPAL UTILITY SYSTEM; GENERAL PROVISIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 116/268
13.04.010: ESTABLISHED:
Pursuant to authority granted by the Idaho constitution and by statutes of the state of Idaho, and in order to protect the environment and to advance the
social and economic well being of residents and businesses within the city, the city of Post Falls hereby establishes the Post Falls municipal utility
system. Included within the Post Falls municipal utility system are the water system, water reclamation system, solid waste collection system and street
lighting system operated by the city for the benefit of the city's residents. Such system, and administrative personnel given responsibility for its
operation, shall have the powers and authority designated by this code and as otherwise provided by the constitution and statutes of the state of Idaho.
Policy direction for such system shall come from the mayor and city council of the city. Administrative direction shall be provided by the city administrator
and such other city officers as may be designated by this code or by subsequent resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1251, 2013)
13.04.020: GENERAL POLICY:
A. It is the general policy of the city of Post Falls that the municipal utility system will be funded by charges upon users/beneficiaries of the municipal
utility system. Administrative staff of the city should endeavor to operate the municipal utility system on the basis of capital facilities and user charges
to be paid by those who receive benefits from the operation of the system, in whole or in part. General revenues of the city may be used in
circumstances where general community benefits are provided because of the existence and operation of the municipal utility system. It shall further
be the policy of the city to attempt to accrue and maintain adequate financial reserves to repair and replace capacity provided by municipal utility
system components to serve the best interests of the community in the present and future.
B. With respect to capital facilities needs of municipal utility system components, it shall be the general policy of the city to attempt to finance capital
expansion by a combination of development requirements applicable to new development and redevelopment and payment of capacity replacement
fees by new or expanding system users. All new municipal utility system users will be expected to bear their rough proportionate share of the costs of
any capital improvements necessary to replace the capacity of the services provided or to make other changes which should as a matter of policy be
borne by all system users. Regular operation and maintenance expenses, including those of capital replacement, should be financed by adequate
user charges sufficient to pay current operating expenses and adequate to fund reserved amounts for capital replacement.
C. The water reclamation system is intended to be managed in a unified manner addressing both surface water and sanitary sewage. Both carry the
same potential to deliver nutrients (pollutants) to streams and groundwater. Regulatory standards require the two (2) treatment systems to be
separate, even though they seek to accomplish similar ends. Within this title separate chapters address issues associated with sanitary sewage and
management of surface water. Nonetheless, in matters of regulation and funding mitigation and treatment, sanitary sewage and surface water
treatment should be addressed in a complementary way, mindful in every instance that the goals of managing each are the same.
D. Notwithstanding any provision of this code, the mayor and city council reserve the right to derive municipal utility system revenues in any lawful
manner to meet the needs of residents of the city and to maintain the solvency of the municipal utility system in perpetuity. (Ord. 1255, 2013)
13.04.030: OPERATING RESPONSIBILITY:
The responsibility to operate the municipal utility system shall rest in the offices of the various directors of municipal departments assigned to oversee
each of the utility services, subject to executive direction by the mayor and administrative direction by the city administrator. The assigned department
directors shall have authority to appoint managers within the public utility system which they oversee, subject to administrative oversight by the city
administrator. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.04.040: FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY:
The responsibility to carry out the financial policies of the city regarding the municipal utility system shall rest in the office of the finance director of the
city, subject to executive direction by the mayor and administrative supervision by the city administrator. The finance director shall have authority to
appoint subordinates to carry out the business and accounting duties of the municipal utility system. The finance director shall maintain the necessary
funds and account information, and provide reports, projections and forecasts to the mayor and city council, the city administrator and municipal utility
system operating personnel. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.04.050: FUNDS AND ACCOUNTS:
It shall be the policy of the city of Post Falls to account for revenues and expenditures for components of the municipal utility system in ways that
maintain the integrity of revenues for the services provided. The finance director of the city is hereby authorized to establish discrete funds for
maintaining the revenues and expenditures of the city's water system, water reclamation system (including sanitary wastewater and surface
wastewater), solid waste collection and disposal system and street lighting system. Further, the finance director is authorized, as appropriate, to
maintain separate accounts for capital and operational needs within each of these fund designations. Accompanying this grant of authority the city
council reserves unto itself the authority to consolidate, separate or create additional funds or accounts by resolution, upon consultation with the city
administrator or finance director. (Ord. 1251, 2013)
13.04.060: AUTHORITY TO SET MUNICIPAL UTILITY RATES; OPERATIONAL AND CAPITAL:
The city council reserves unto itself the authority to establish operational and capital facilities fee rates as necessary to fund operation and development
of the municipal utility system authorized hereby. Such fees shall be based upon the needs of the system and shall be established by resolution adopted
by the city council at a duly noticed public meeting.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 117/268
A. Operation and maintenance fees in the form of periodic charges shall be budgeted for regular operating purposes or may be reserved for capital
replacement of facilities subject to depreciation, operational wear and tear or diminished service capabilities due to the passage of time or
environmental conditions. The city council has the authority to set a minimum rate that will be charged for operation and maintenance even if service
is temporarily discontinued.
B. Capacity replacement fees (previously called capitalization fees) shall generally be onetime charges, subject to subsequent adjustment and
recalculation as appropriate, constituting a contribution to the capital reserve necessary to replace capacity consumed by the addition of new users
to an existing system. Such replacement capacity may take the form of additional capital construction or enhanced efficiency measures designed to
increase capacity in order to provide service to future users. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.04.070: LOAN OF RESERVE FUNDS:
The municipal utility system shall have authority to loan funds held in reserve as a fund balance (except for reserves otherwise committed by contract or
ordinance) to other city accounts and funds as needs dictate. Any such loans must be approved by a resolution of the city council enacted in a duly
noticed public meeting which properly documents the basis for the loan, the rate of interest which the loan will earn, if any, and the terms and conditions
of repayment of the loan. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
Chapter 13.08
MUNICIPAL UTILITY SYSTEM; FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION AND BILLING
13.08.010: USER ACCOUNTS:
The finance director is hereby authorized to establish municipal utility system user accounts for purposes of collecting and accounting for charges and
revenues associated with availability or use of the municipal utility system. Such user accounts shall consolidate the charges due for all municipal utility
system services provided by the city to a certain physical address within the city or as otherwise provided by resolution of the city council. Failure to pay
the entire bill for utility service at one physical address shall constitute grounds for termination of all terminable municipal utility services to the physical
address. The finance director is authorized to limit billing for nonresidential customers to one bill for each water meter, regardless of the number of
tenants in the property. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.08.020: BILLING SYSTEM; AGREEMENTS MAY BE REQUIRED:
Upon a request to receive services provided by the municipal utility system, the finance director is hereby authorized to establish account procedures to
ensure proper provision of services and payment therefor. Such procedures may include the requirement that the customer/owner execute a written
agreement regarding the services to be provided. Such requirements will be invoked as necessary to comply with provisions of this code and other
provisions of law and to assure that the municipal utility system will be solvent and capable of meeting the needs of the community. Service
requirements may include the payment of a minimum monthly charge necessary to have services available to the property, either to supply the direct
needs of the user or to serve the lands of the user in the context of maintaining the public health, safety and general welfare. Additionally, in order to
secure payment, the finance director may require a deposit from the owner and/or a cosignature from the owner of the property served. (Ord. 1029 § 2,
2003)
13.08.030: PAYMENT FOR SERVICE PROVIDED; OWNER RESPONSIBLE:
A. The city supplies the municipal utility system services itprovides to a specific physical address even though the facilities providing such service may
not be located directly thereon or immediately adjacent thereto. The owner of the property served shall be responsible for payment for the services
provided or available to the owner's property. Any accounts that are currently in the name of the tenant or property management company pursuant
to a letter of agreement and the account balance is current will be allowed to remain in the name of the tenant or property management company
until such time as either the property ownership changes, the tenant changes or the account is delinquent.
B. For nonresidential accounts, the finance director is authorized to establish deposit requirements in whatever amount may be deemed reasonably
necessary to assure payment of the utility charges. The finance director may waive, in writing, the requirement for a deposit as a guarantee. At any
time the finance director may give notice to the property owner that the guarantee requirements of this code have been reinstated if a guarantee was
previously waived. The city administrator and finance director are authorized to take such steps as may be necessary to implement the provisions of
this section. (Ord. 1125 § 1, 2007: Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.08.040: NONPAYMENT OF USER FEES AND TESTING FEES AND CHARGES; DISCONNECTION OR DISCONTINUANCE:
A. Failure of the owner of property receiving municipal utility service to pay for services in accordance with this chapter and resolutions adopted
pursuant hereto shall result in termination of municipal utility service to the physical address for which services have been made available or
provided. In addition to temporary disconnection of terminable municipal utility services, the finance director may initiate collection procedures or
legal action in the civil courts to discontinue service or facilitate collection of amounts due and owing for municipal utility services. City staff may take
the necessary administrative steps to implement the provisions of this section, including imposing a fee set by resolution of the city council to
reactivate services.
B. Any request by the owner of the property to have the water service temporarily terminated for the purpose of nonemergency maintenance or repairs
shall be made no less than three (3) working days prior to the termination of water service in order to allow the city to give forty eight (48) hours'
notice to the tenant of the property or property management company. The request must be in writing and state the purpose for the temporary
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 118/268
termination. The property owner shall pay a fee set by resolution of the city council for the temporary termination and reactivation of the water
service.
C. Payment of the user fees with an insufficient funds check shall be considered nonpayment and, in addition to any other remedies allowed by law,
shall result in immediate termination of municipal utility services. (Ord. 1125 § 2, 2007: Ord. 1029 § 2,2003)
13.08.050: WILL-PAY AGREEMENTS AUTHORIZED:
The finance director is authorized to enter into will-pay agreements with users of municipal utility system services that have become delinquent in
payment of their user fees as required by this title and resolutions adopted pursuant hereto. The finance director is authorized to make business
judgments about the advisability of such agreements. The city council may by resolution set limitations upon the amount of delinquent payments for
which a will-pay agreement may be authorized. The finance director is authorized to have the water service terminated without notice to the customer for
failure to comply with the will-pay agreement. (Ord. 1125 § 3, 2007: Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
Chapter 13.12
WATER SYSTEM
13.12.010: USER CHARGES:
A water service charge in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council shall be paid for every service or connection to the Post Falls
water system. The resolution may include the establishment of a base rate which shall be a minimum charge to be paid by all users. (Ord. 1029 § 2,
2003)
13.12.020: PAYMENT OF CAPACITY REPLACEMENT FEES; REQUIRED FOR CONNECTION TO MUNICIPAL SYSTEM:
Every owner of property desiring to receive municipal water service, including fire line connections for building sprinkler systems, shall pay a capacity
replacement fee prior to being allowed to connect to the system. No building permit shall be issued until the capacity replacement fee has been paid.
The capacity replacement fee may be set by resolution. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.12.030: IRRIGATION AND OUTSIDE WATERING:
The use of city water for outside watering and irrigation is prohibited from the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except when
an irrigation system is being operated temporarily for repair or maintenance purposes only. The mayor or his designee is authorized to declare a water
shortage/emergency when the circumstances and weather support the potential for water shortage/emergency. Upon making the declaration of a
shortage or emergency, the mayor or his designee has the authority to additionally restrict, in any manner deemed appropriate, the use of water from the
city's water system for irrigation and outside watering. Such restrictions may include limitations upon the hours, type and location of water usage or may
allow disconnection of users who fail to comply with restrictions. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.12.040: CONNECTION:
A. No person shall make a connection to the city's water system or otherwise modify or tamper with any part of the public water supply system without
first making application to the city and obtaining written consent from the city. The application shall be on a form provided by the city and must have
all sections completed prior to submission to the city. The application shall state fully and truthfully all purposes for which the water is to be used.
B. Connection to the city water service constitutes an authorization for city personnel to enter upon private property at reasonable times and places for
the purpose of reading water meters and with reasonable notice for the purpose of repairing, inspecting, recalibrating, replacing or removing water
meters which may be located thereon, or for terminating water service.
C. No person shall make a reconnection to the city's water system after the service has been terminated by the city. Any such reconnection must be
done by the city. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.12.050: CONSTRUCTION OF MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM:
A. It is unlawful for any person to construct or extend the city water system within the jurisdiction of the city without first having made formal application
to the city and having received written approval and having complied with all regulations of the city and regulatory agencies. Plans for construction of
the water system components shall be submitted to the city along with an application for service for the city's review and approval. A plan review and
inspection fee in an amount to be set by resolution may be assessed for the review and inspection.
B. Developers of land or property owners may be required to furnish, at no cost to the city, suitable right of way and/or easements for construction,
operation and maintenance of new, existing or future water lines.
C. The city may require city approved full or part time inspection of any water system construction and/or may require a developer to expose any section
of water line to check compliance with applicable standards. The cost of such inspection and/or excavation shall be at the expense of the developer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 119/268
D. All construction must be in compliance with the applicable city ordinances and standards (whether adopted by ordinance or resolution or specified by
the city engineer), and state and federal regulations, including the requirement to obtain the necessary permits and to pay the permit fees prior to
commencement of construction. The plans shall be designed by a professional engineer (engineer of record) licensed in the state of Idaho.
E. Prior to the city accepting dedication of any system components, the developer shall provide to the city the following:
1. Certification by the engineer of record that the system was constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications.
2. Copies of all field tests and inspection notes.
3. "As built" drawings of the system components acceptable to the city engineer.
4. Acceptance by any required outside agencies.
5. Any required easements or rights of way for the city's continued operation of the system.
6. Assurance and proof that no liens or encumbrances exist against installed system components.
F. No building permits will be issued for new development connecting to new water lines until the ownership of the sewer lines is dedicated to the city
free and clear of all liens and encumbrances and accepted by the city or as otherwise provided by city ordinance to guarantee construction. (Ord.
1029 § 2, 2003)
13.12.060: USE; CONTAMINATION:
A. No person shall use water from the city water system for any purpose other than that which is approved by the city nor shall any person obtaining
approval from the city for water service supply water to other persons. Each residence or premises shall be connected to a separate private service
with an accessible shutoff installed on each service connection to the public supply system.
B. No person shall permit water to be wasted. All outlets must be kept closed except during the time which water is being drawn for necessary use.
C. Owners of property connected to the city water system shall be responsible to keep the faucets, water closets and other fixtures in good repair and
free from leaks. The city has the authority to terminate water service to an owner's property for failure to repair any such leaks within seventy two
(72) hours notice from the city to do so. In the case of an emergency when a leak involves a substantial volume of water, the city has the authority to
enter the property without notice and terminate the water service immediately.
D. No person shall contaminate or befoul any reservoir, stream or watershed, spring or other source from which the supply of water for the city water
system is obtained, nor any pipe, fountain or any other device forming a part of the city water system. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.12.070: CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
Except as provided in this section, all cross connections, whether or not they are controlled by automatic devices such as check valves or by hand
operated mechanisms such as gate valves or stopcocks, are prohibited.
A. Cross connection shall include, but is not limited to:
1. Water to water and water to air heat exchangers;
2. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or change over devices;
3. Any other connection where the public water system is connected, directly or indirectly, to any other system which may be capable of imparting
contamination to the public water system; or
4. As provided in any state of Idaho regulations relating to public water systems. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.12.080: BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY; REQUIREMENTS:
A backflow prevention assembly is required to be installed when the city determines that such an assembly is necessary due to the nature and the
extent of the activity on the premises to prevent cross connection, or when required by state of Idaho regulations relating to public water systems.
A. All backflow prevention assemblies shall be of a type included on the University Of Southern California Foundation For Cross Connection Control And
Hydraulic Research "List Of Approved Assemblies" and approved by the city of Post Falls.
B. Each backflow prevention assembly shall be tested by a tester currently licensed by the Idaho bureau of occupational licenses and registered with the
city of Post Falls water division. In addition to annual field testing, backflow prevention assemblies shall be field tested upon installation and
whenever an assembly is relocated, repaired, or has been taken out of service and returned to service or to ensure that it functions properly. The
tester shall attach a tag stating the tester's name and date of satisfactory test to the assembly.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 120/268
C. A licensed backflow assembly tester shall be responsible for performing accurate field tests and making complete reports of such field tests to the
consumer/assembly owner and the city of Post Falls water division on a form approved by the city of Post Falls. Should the assembly pass according
to the test protocol, the tester shall provide a copy of the backflow assembly test report to the city of Post Falls water division within ten (10) days of
the date of satisfactory test. Any backflow prevention assembly left in a failed (nonpassing) condition creating a potential threat to the public potable
water supply must be reported to the city of Post Falls water division within twenty four (24) hours.
D. A permit shall be obtained prior to the installation of a backflow prevention assembly. The permit fee shall be established by resolution.
E. All commercial/industrial class accounts with backflow prevention assemblies on site shall comply with the annual backflow assembly test
requirements between January 1 and May 15 of each calendar year.
F. All residential class accounts with backflow prevention assemblies on site shall comply with the annual backflow prevention assembly test
requirements within thirty (30) days of the date the irrigation system is recharged (turned on), and prior to June 15 of each calendar year.
G. Any account which fails to comply with section 13.12.070 of this chapter and this section relating to cross connections and the other requirements of
this section will be subject to shutoff. Any account which is subject to shutoff shall be subject to placement of a hang tag delivered to the premises
where service is provided. When noncompliance proceeds to the hang tag stage, the customer shall be responsible for a hang tag fee in an amount
set by resolution of the city council, which will constitute a service charge for collection expenses. If compliance is made after the hang tag has been
placed, the hang tag fee shall be paid in addition to all current and past due water service charges, plus interest, to avoid shutoff of water service to
premises. Additionally, a fee will be charged in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council to restore water to any service which has actually
been shut off (disconnected) due to noncompliance. (Ord. 1233, 2012)
13.12.090: REINJECTION; PROHIBITED:
Any reinjection of water by individual, commercial or industrial users to the public water system is prohibited. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.12.100: EXTENSION OF WATER LINES:
Every property owner requesting an extension of the water line from the line existing at the time of the request, shall extend the exiting line from the
existing line to the owner's farthest property line at the owner's expense, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer or the property owner must pay
to the treasurer the entire cost of extending the line from the existing line to the property owner's farthest property line at such cost per foot as may be
estimated by the city engineer. Such payment allowance may also require that the property owner grant an easement or other right of way. (Ord. 1029
§ 2, 2003)
13.12.110: METERS:
A. It is unlawful for any person to construct or place upon or about any water meter or meter box any barrier, building, vehicle or other object so as to
conceal, obscure or cover, or in any other manner prevent free access to a water meter or meter box; or in any other manner to hinder, delay or
obstruct city personnel from reading or servicing a water meter.
B. Failure of the owner or occupant to remove any prohibited obstruction after notice being sent by the city to do so, constitutes authorization for the city
to enter upon the private property to remove such obstruction and to charge the cost of that removal to owner and occupant of the property to be
paid along with other water charges and/or to terminate service to the affected address, as deemed appropriate in the sole discretion of the city.
(Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.12.120: WATER SYSTEM EQUIPMENT; MAINTENANCE:
The property owner is responsible for the maintenance of the service line from the meter box/curb box to the premises. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.12.130: FIRE HYDRANTS:
A. It is unlawful for any person, other than a fireman in the performance of his duty, to open or in any way to tamper with any fire hydrant connected with
the water system, unless written permission first is obtained from the city's system operator.
B. It is unlawful for any person to place upon or about any water gate valve connected with the water system any material substance whatsoever that
will prevent access to such fire hydrant or gate and no vehicle shall be allowed to stand within fifteen feet (15') of any such hydrant.
C. The use of private hose in time of or during an alarm of fire for any purpose other than protection of property is prohibited. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.12.140: TERMINATION OF SERVICE:
A customer's service may be discontinued for nonpayment of user fee or noncompliance with any provisions of this chapter. If requested in writing, the
customer is entitled to a hearing before the mayor prior to the service being discontinued, except in the instance of an emergency. The written request
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 121/268
for such hearing must be received by the city clerk no later than ten (10) days after notice is mailed to the customer or is delivered to the premises that
the service will be discontinued. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
Chapter 13.16
SEWER SYSTEM
13.16.010: CONNECTION TO SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM:
A. All newly constructed or established residential, commercial, public or industrial development, except for that which is not required to have a
permanent water connection, shall connect to the sanitary sewer at the time of the new construction or prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy
for expansion of an existing structure in an amount equal to twenty five percent (25%) or more of the existing floor space. All existing developed land
uses which lawfully use permitted and functioning septic systems at the time of annexation into the city may continue such use until such septic
system fails or until it is determined by the city or health officials that retention of septic facilities poses a material threat to environmental resources,
unduly hinders extension of sewerage service to unserved lands which require community sewer service to develop in accordance with the city's
comprehensive plan or until sewer service is made available to the property through an LID or by other means.
B. Upon occurrence of any failure of any existing septic tank or drainfield the property should immediately be connected to any available sewer line, or if
no sewer line is available, repair and replacement shall be accomplished in accordance with health district standards. It is the policy of the city to
require or encourage extension of public sewers to serve areas where septic tanks or drainfields fail or where porous/gravelly soils fail to effectively
treat discharged wastewater on site. The provisions of this section shall not constitute justification to establish any new land use without extending
sewer lines to provide service thereto, even if wastewater treatment capacity is temporarily in short supply.
C. Water quality protection provided by the city addresses not only sanitary sewer needs but also surface water practices as well. Surface water
management by the city is for the benefit of owners of developed and undeveloped lands within the city limits in fulfilling its role of protecting
groundwater and surface waters from receiving nutrients of concern. Surface water management facilities constitute an integral part of the water
reclamation services provided by the city, even if land use of a site does not include development that is connected to the sanitary sewer system.
(Ord. 1251, 2013)
13.16.020: USER CHARGES:
A water reclamation service charge in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council shall be paid for every service or connection to the
sanitary sewer system and for every developed property that may contribute to surface water flows within the city. User charges shall be based upon
standards of system use assigned to the type of use hooked to the sanitary sewer service and roughly proportional to the wastewater produced by the
user plus the relative cost of providing surface water management by the city. User charges are the user's equitable share of the costs of the general
operating costs of the water reclamation system. No charge shall be less than that for a service unit minimum (SUM).
A. A service unit minimum shall constitute all monthly sanitary sewer flows from a single-family residence. Sanitary sewer use for commercial or
industrial users may also, at the city's sole discretion, be calculated in thousands of gallons per month equivalent to an average flow from a singlefamily
residence, as stated in an adopted rate resolution or as determined by dividing the total biochemical oxygen demand or suspended solids
discharged by thirty four hundredths (0.34) pound of biochemical oxygen demand or suspended solids (SS) per day. A fixed residential water
reclamation charge may be established by resolution based upon typical use of the sanitary and surface water reclamation system, with exceptions
considered only when data demonstrate that production of sanitary or surface wastewater significantly exceeds the norm. The city council may also
establish residential water reclamation rates based in large part upon metered consumption of water if it does so by resolution.
B. For metered nonresidential users (i.e., water or sewage metered), the monthly water reclamation service charge shall be based upon the gallons of
water used or sewage discharged as measured by the water or sewage meter reading plus a proportionally determined surface water management
charge based upon factors related to the scope of surface water management. Sewer charges are based upon the water measurement and the
water flow through the irrigation meter will not be included in the calculation for the monthly sewer charge. The property owner shall install a separate
irrigation meter for all new construction, and modifications to existing structures that would require site plan review pursuant to section 18.20.130 of
this code, in order for the city to be able to separate irrigation water use from other water uses.
C. For nonmetered users, or metered water users where the water reading is not representative of the true sewage flow, the monthly sanitary use
charges may be calculated based upon other verifiable evidence reliably demonstrating actual wastewater system use, but in no instance shall such
charge be less than the service unit minimum. Changes to the monthly charge based upon an adjustment of the actual sewer discharge rate may
become effective upon the adjustment and shall not be retroactive.
D. Any nonresidential user that discharges commercial or industrial wastes or that produces a flow, biochemical oxygen demand or suspended solids
loading in excess of the standards set in subsection A of this section, shall have water reclamation charges established by the city after consideration
of relevant data, the cost of such evaluation to be borne by the discharger. No quality discounts shall be allowed and the city may assess a
surcharge on waste flow with biochemical oxygen demand or suspended solids concentrations above two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l)
until adequate pretreatment is achieved. (Ord. 1256, 2013)
13.16.030: PAYMENT:
Where there is joint billing of sanitation charges, streetlight charges, water charges and/or water reclamation system charges, payment of part of the
billing shall not be considered as payment in full, and if not paid in full, the water department may discontinue water and/or water reclamation service
until all charges are paid in full. If a site is not connected to public water or sanitary sewer systems, building permits for that property may be withheld by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 122/268
the city and a notice to title recorded indicating that status until such time as the site is connected and all required capacity replacement fees are paid.
(Ord. 1251, 2013)
13.16.040: CAPACITY REPLACEMENT FEES; REQUIRED FOR CONNECTION TO MUNICIPAL SYSTEM:
Every owner of property desiring to receive municipal sanitary sewer service shall pay a capacity replacement fee prior to being allowed to connect to
the system. The capacity replacement fee is the owner's share of the replacement cost of the system that his use will displace. The capacity
replacement fee may be set by resolution and in no case shall be less than that for the service unit minimum. When the initial capacity replacement fee
has been underestimated by virtue of underestimating water use or wastewater flows, or has been overestimated at the time of building permit issuance
or use approval and the estimated level of use has not been reached at least three (3) years after the fee has been calculated or the use of the property
has changed, the city may charge the user an additional capacity replacement fee or reduce the capacity replacement fee amount for demonstrated
usage of the system that differs from that estimated at the time of connection or change of use. This adjusted fee amount may be added to or deducted
proportionately from the user's monthly sewer bill until paid as a sewer surcharge or credit for a period not to exceed one year. Extended surcharge
payment periods not to exceed five (5) years may be granted with city council approval. Increased flows beyond the estimates calculated at the time of
building permit or establishment of use shall perpetually serve as a basis for future capacity replacement fee responsibility with adjustments made no
more frequently than annually.
A. Residential Uses: For residential uses, any residence shall be calculated as a service unit minimum for water reclamation purposes unless evidence
demonstrates substantially greater flows.
B. Nonresidential Uses: For nonresidential uses, sewer flow measured or estimated for the highest one month or thirty (30) day period during a year
shall be the basis for calculating the user fee and the capacity replacement fee amount for a user. Annual adjustments may be made in accordance
with subsequent increases in flow. (Ord. 1251, 2013)
13.16.050: BUILDING PERMITS:
No building permit will be issued until the estimated capacity replacement fee has been paid. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.16.060: RATHDRUM SYSTEM:
Sewer services to the city of Rathdrum shall be governed by the agreement between the city of Post Falls and the city of Rathdrum dated January 9,
1996, and any subsequent modifications to that agreement. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.16.070: CONSTRUCTION OF SEWER SYSTEM:
A. It is unlawful for any person to construct a community sanitary sewer system component or surface water collection or retention facility within the
jurisdiction of the city without first having made formal application to the city and receiving written approval and having complied with all regulations
of the city and applicable regulatory agencies. Plans for construction of any water reclamation system component shall first be submitted to the city
along with the application for service for the city's review and approval. A plan review and inspection fee in an amount to be set by resolution shall be
assessed for the review and inspection.
B. Developers of land or property owners are required to furnish, at no cost to the city, suitable right of way and/or easements for construction, operation
and maintenance of new, existing or future sewer lines and surface water management facilities.
C. The city may require city approved full or part time inspection of any related construction and/or may require a developer to expose any section of
sanitary sewer or any facet of a surface water facility to monitor compliance with applicable standards. The cost of such inspection and/or excavation
shall be at the expense of the developer.
D. All construction must be in compliance with the applicable city ordinances and standards, and state and federal regulations, including the requirement
to obtain the necessary permits and to pay the permit fees prior to commencement of construction. The plans shall be designed by a professional
engineer (engineer of record) licensed in the state of Idaho.
E. Prior to the city accepting the system, the developer shall provide to the city the following:
1. Certification from the engineer of record that the system was constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and city
minimum quality control standards.
2. Copies of all field tests and inspection notes.
3. "As built" drawings of the system to current city standards.
4. A copy of the video of the interior of the lines that has been reviewed and approved by the engineer of record and the city.
5. Any additional items identified within a construction improvement agreement.
6. Acceptance by any required outside agencies.
7. Any required easements or rights of way for the city's continued operation of the system components.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 123/268
8. A warranty and maintenance bond covering the design, construction materials, and workmanship must be provided for a period of two (2) years
from the date of acceptance for maintenance by the city. The surety amount shall be a percentage of the approved construction cost estimate as
set forth in the city's subdivision regulations.
F. No building permits will be issued for new development connecting to new sewerage systems until the ownership of the sewer lines is dedicated to the
city free and clear of all liens and encumbrances and accepted for public use by the city, unless surety is otherwise committed to assure completion
pursuant to provisions of this code. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for surety backed connections until the sanitary sewer facility has
been inspected and finally accepted for public use. (Ord. 1251, 2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 13.20
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to set uniform requirements for users discharging into the sewage collection system and the city's water reclamation plant
to enable the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the federal clean water act, the general pretreatment regulations (40
CFR part 403) and the requirements of any NPDES discharge permit the city is required to maintain. (Ord. 1251, 2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.020: OBJECTIVES AND APPLICABILITY:
A. The objectives of this chapter are to:
1. Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's sanitary sewer collection system which will interfere with the normal operation of the city's
wastewater treatment plant, or contaminate the resulting sludge;
2. Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's water reclamation plant which will pass through, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or
otherwise be incompatible with the treatment plant;
3. Ensure that the quality of the water reclamation plant sludge is maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with
applicable statutes and regulations;
4. Protect the city's water reclamation system personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to
protect the general public;
5. Improve opportunities to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the water reclamation system;
6. Avoid the costs of accommodating hydraulic loads of waters that do not contain pollutants in sufficient concentration to sustain efficient treatment
operation.
B. This chapter shall apply to all users of the city's water reclamation system. This chapter authorizes the issuance of discharge permits; authorizes
monitoring compliance and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for setting of
fees for equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program herein. (Ord. 1251, 2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.030: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings herein designated:
ACT OR THE ACT: The federal water pollution act, also known as the clean water act, as amended.
APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: For any specified pollutant, means city of Post Falls prohibitive standards, state of Idaho pretreatment
standards, or EPA's categorical pretreatment standards (when effective), whichever standards are most appropriate or most stringent, as determined by
law or by the director.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER: A. If the user is a corporation:
1. The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision making function for the corporation, or
2. The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty five million dollars ($25,000,000.00), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 124/268
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures;
B. If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively;
C. If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility, a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her designee;
D. Individuals described in subsections A through C of this definition may designate another authorized representative if the authorization specifies
the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or the person having overall
responsibility for the environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the director.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), usually expressed as a concentration (milligrams per liter [mg/l]).
BUILDING SEWER: A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the water reclamation collection system.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
the U.S. EPA which applies to a specific category of users.
CATEGORICAL USER: A user regulated by one of the EPA's categorical pretreatment standards.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND: The amount of oxygen, in parts per million, consumed under specific conditions in the oxidation of organic and
oxidizable inorganic matter in wastewater, corrected for the influence of chlorides.
CITY OF POST FALLS: May be referred to as "the city", which may include any of the following: the mayor, city council members, city administrator,
director of public works, or their authorized representatives.
COLOR: The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent (100%) transmittance is
equivalent to zero optical density.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment
of either flow or time.
COOLING WATER: The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DIRECT DISCHARGE: The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Idaho.
DIRECTOR: The Public Works Director.
DOMESTIC USER: Any person who contributes, causes or allows the contribution of wastewater into the City's wastewater collection system that is of a
similar volume and/or chemical makeup as that of a residential dwelling unit. Discharges from a residential dwelling unit typically include up to one
hundred (100) gallons per capita per day, 0.2 pound of BOD per capita, and 0.17 pound of TSS per capita.
EPA: Environmental Protection Agency.
EXISTING SOURCE: For a categorical industrial user, means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the
publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards.
EXISTING USER: For noncategorical industrial users, means any user that was discharging wastewater prior to the initial effective date of this chapter
or includes a specific date, such as the date the code will become effective.
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into the water reclamation system from any nondomestic source regulated by
the Clean Water Act. The discharge into the water reclamation system is normally by means of pipes, conduits, pumping station, force mains,
constructed drainage ditches, surface water intercepting ditches, and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant thereto.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, either:
A. Inhibits or disrupts the water reclamation system, its treatment processes or operations;
B. Inhibits or disrupts its sludge processes, use or disposal; or
C. Is a cause of a violation of the water reclamation system's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent State or local regulations): the Clean Water
Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any
State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic
Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT: The maximum concentration or loading of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined
from the analysis of any discrete or composed sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 125/268
MAY: Is permissive.
MEDICAL WASTES: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT OR NPDES PERMIT: A permit issued pursuant to the clean water act.
NEW SOURCE: A. Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the enactment of this chapter providing that:
1. The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located, or
2. The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an
existing source, or
3. The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing
source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility or
installation are substantially independent or factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the
extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered;
B. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a
new building structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection A2 or A3 of this definition, but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to
existing process or production equipment;
C. Construction of a "new source" as defined herein has commenced if the owner or operator has:
1. Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site construction program:
a. Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment, or
b. Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which are necessary for
the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment, or
2. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
NEW USER: Is not a "new source" and is defined as a user that applies to the city for a new building permit or any person who occupies an existing
building and plans to discharge wastewater to the collection system after the effective date of this chapter. Any person who buys an existing facility that
is discharging nondomestic wastewater will be considered an existing user if no significant changes are made in the manufacturing operation.
PASS-THROUGH: A discharge which exits the water reclamation system into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of violation of any requirement of the city's wastewater treatment plant
NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERMITTEE: A person or user issued a wastewater discharge permit.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or
any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental entities.
pH: A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units.
POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological material, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes, and the
following characteristics of the wastewater: pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD),
toxicity or odor.
PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to (or in lieu of) introducing such pollutants into the water reclamation system. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes, by process changes, or by other means (except diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment
standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: Prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits established by the city of Post
Falls.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (WATER RECLAMATION SYSTEM): Those treatment works which are owned by the city of Post Falls. This
definition includes any sewers under the city's jurisdiction that convey wastewater to the water reclamation system, but does not include pipes, sewers
or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this chapter, water reclamation system also includes any sewer
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 126/268
piping that conveys wastewater to the water reclamation system.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE: Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
SERVICE UNIT MINIMUM: The minimum amount of monthly charge established for any type of water reclamation account by a rate resolution enacted
by the Post Falls city council.
SEWAGE: Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).
SEWER: Any pipe, conduit ditch or other device used to collect and transport sewage from the generating source.
SHALL: Is mandatory.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: A. A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
B. A user that:
1. Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the water reclamation system
(excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater), or
2. Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
water reclamation system treatment plant, or
3. Is designated as such by the Director on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the water reclamation system's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
Upon finding that a user meeting criteria in subsection B of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the water
reclamation system's operation or for violating any applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may at any time, on its own
initiative or in response to a petition received from a user (and in accordance with procedures in applicable Federal regulations) determine that
such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
SLUGLOAD: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the discharge standards in this chapter or any discharge of a
nonroutine, episodic nature including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or noncustomary batch discharge.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE: A classification pursuant to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" issued by the
United States Department of Commerce.
STORMWATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, including snowmelt.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS): The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquid, and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANT: Any one of listed pollutants, or combinations of those pollutants, listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by EPA.
USER OR INDUSTRIAL USER: A source of indirect discharge. The source shall not include "domestic user" as defined herein.
WASTEWATER: Liquid and water carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the water reclamation system.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT (INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER ACCEPTANCE PERMIT): An authorization or equivalent control document
issued by the City to users discharging wastewater to the water reclamation system, as set forth in section 13.20.070 of this chapter. The permit may
contain appropriate pretreatment standards and requirements as set forth in this chapter.
WATER RECLAMATION PLANT OR TREATMENT PLANT: That portion of the water reclamation system which is designed to provide treatment of
Municipal sewage and industrial waste.
WATER RECLAMATION SYSTEM: The integrated and complementary sewage and surface water collection and treatment system elements that
constitute the entirety of the City's facilities designed and operated to prevent nutrients or toxic substances from entering surface waters or groundwater.
The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular, as indicated by the context of its use. (Ord. 1343,
2018: Ord. 1255, 2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.040: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations are used throughout this chapter:
ASPP Accidental spill prevention plan
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CN Cyanide
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 127/268
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA Environmental protection agency
LEL Lower explosive limit
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National pollutant discharge elimination system
O&M Operation and maintenance
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource conservation and recovery act
SIC Standard industrial classifications
SIU Significant industrial user
SWDA Solid waste disposal act
TSS Total suspended solids
WTS Wastewater treatment system
(Ord. 1121 § 4, 2006: Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.050: ADMINISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the city's public works director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter on behalf of
the city. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director, except for legal authority, may be delegated to the Post Falls industrial pretreatment
compliance personnel. (Ord. 1121 § 5, 2006: Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.060: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS; GENERAL PROHIBITIONS:
A. No person or user shall discharge or cause to be discharged any surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters into the city's sanitary sewer.
B. Surface water and all other drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to surface water system
components whether private or public. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the city and health
department or IDEQ, to dry wells or other disposal areas.
C. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes into the city's sanitary sewers or any surface
water transmission channel or pipe or surface water treatment or detention facility:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, organic chemicals, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage disposal process, constitute any hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance,
or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of two milligrams per
liter (2 mg/l) as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer;
3. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than six (6) or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewage works;
4. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics,
wood, underground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or
ground by garbage grinders.
D. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes, if it appears likely in the
opinion of the city, department of environmental quality or the Panhandle health district that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
disposal process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or groundwater, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property,
or constitute a nuisance. The substances prohibited are those items listed as hazardous wastes by the environmental protection agency (EPA) in the
EPA priority pollutant list, or other substances deemed unacceptable by the city, the Panhandle health district or the Idaho department of health and
welfare, division of environment and addressed to the user by specific notice.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 128/268
E. No person shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or
performance of the water reclamation system. (Ord. 1255, 2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.070: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS; SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS:
A. Prohibited Substances: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the water reclamation system any of the following:
1. Pollutants which create, or have the potential to create, a fire or explosive hazard in the water reclamation system, including, but not limited to,
waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) or sixty degrees Celsius (60°C) using the
test methods specified in applicable federal regulations;
2. Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 10.0, or otherwise causing, or having the potential to cause, corrosive structural damage to
the water reclamation system or equipment;
3. Solid or viscous substances in amounts which may cause obstruction of the flow in the water reclamation system resulting in interference, but in
no case solids greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension;
4. Pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either
singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the water reclamation system; it shall be a violation of this chapter to
discharge "clean" water or wastewater which has been diluted by the addition of "clean" water to meet the pollutant concentration standards set
forth in this chapter;
5. Wastewater having a temperature which has the potential to inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater which causes the temperature at the point of introduction into the headworks of the water reclamation system to exceed one hundred
four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F) or forty degrees Celsius (40°C), unless the department of environmental quality, upon the request of the city,
approves alternate temperature limits;
6. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference with treatment plant operation
or pass through untreated;
7. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the water reclamation system in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems;
8. Trucked or hauled pollutants;
9. Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or a hazard to life or health, or to render hazardous entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
10. Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the water reclamation system's national
pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit. Color (in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce
the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten percent (10%) of the seasonably established norm for aquatic life;
11. Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the city in compliance with applicable state and
federal regulations;
12. Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the city;
13. Any sludge, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes or from industrial processes;
14. Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the city;
15. Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;
16. Detergents, surface active agents or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the water reclamation system;
17. Any liquid, solid or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances
to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the water reclamation system or to the operation of the system. At no time shall two
(2) successive readings on an explosion meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), be more than five percent
(5%) or any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter;
18. Grease, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dusts, metal, glass,
straw, grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud,
or glass grinding or polishing wastes;
19. Any substance which will cause the water reclamation system to violate its NPDES and/or other disposal permits;
20. Any wastewater, which in the opinion of the city can cause harm either to the collection system, sewage treatment process or equipment; have
an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance, unless allowed under
special agreement by the city, except that no special waiver shall be given from categorical pretreatment standards;
21. Contents of any tank or other vessel owned or used by any person in the business of collecting or pumping sewage, effluent, septage or other
wastewater into the water reclamation system;
22. Any hazardous wastes as defined in rules published by the state or in the EPA rules;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 129/268
23. Persistent pesticides and/or pesticides regulated by the federal insecticide, fungicide, rodenticide act (FIFRA);
24. Wastewater containing substances which are inert or nonactive with the treatment process such that they will pass through the treatment facilities
without treatment effect and be found in the effluent stream from the treatment facility;
25. Water containing PCBs in excess of 3 .g/l.
26. Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged
in the water reclamation system.
B. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards: All users shall meet the federal categorical pretreatment standards as amended and promulgated by the
EPA pursuant to the clean water act and as found at 40 CFR chapter 1, subchapter N, parts 405 - 471, which are hereby enforceable under this
chapter.
C. State Requirements: All users shall meet the state requirements and limitations on discharges to the water reclamation system when those limitations
are more stringent than either the federal standards or the local limits.
D. Local Limits:
1. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass-through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in
excess of the following (daily maximum allowable discharge limits), without obtaining a discharge permit that provides for higher discharge limits:
Substance Concentration mg/l
Ammonia 56
Oil and grease (animal or vegetable) 200
Oil and grease (petroleum base) 100
pH (standard units) 6.0 - 10.0
Phosphorus 10
Substance Concentration mg/l
Arsenic 0.123
Cadmium 0.066
Chromium (total) 1.953
Copper 0.651
Cyanide 0.768
Lead 0.088
Mercury 0.070
Silver 0.149
Zinc 0.251
Any other pollutants released in such strength or volume as to cause interference in the treatment plant are hereby deemed unlawful.
2. The following discharges are not permitted unless approved otherwise in writing by the director:
a. A standard five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand greater than four hundred fifty milligrams per liter (450 mg/l) or fifty six (56) pounds in any
one day;
b. Wastes containing more than four hundred eighty seven milligrams per liter (487 mg/l) of suspended solids or sixty one (61) pounds in any one
day;
c. A flow of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per day or a flow greater than five percent (5%) of the flow carried by the treatment
facility receiving the waste;
d. Chlorine demand of more than twenty milligrams per liter (20 mg/l).
E. Unlawful To Increase Use Of Process Water: It is unlawful for a user to increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge,
as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The city may impose mass discharge limits on users which the city
believes may be using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in cases when the imposition of mass discharge limits
is appropriate.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 130/268
F. Compliance Required: Users shall provide the necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance
with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements set out in this chapter within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state or the
city, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and
maintained at the owner's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city before
construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the
facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the water reclamation system under the provisions of this chapter.
G. Grease, Oil And Sand Interceptors: Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided by the commercial or industrial owner when it is the opinion of
the city that they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil or sand. All interception units
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be so located as to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors
shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at the user's expense.
H. Discharge Restricted: Whenever deemed necessary, the city may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods and impose such
other conditions as may be necessary to protect the water reclamation system and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
I. Deadlines: Users shall be required to comply with the pretreatment standards of this chapter by the deadlines set forth herein:
1. Existing users covered by regulations containing pollutant discharge limits set by the EPA which apply to a particular category of users (categorical
users), shall comply within three (3) years of the date the standard is effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the applicable
regulation.
2. Existing users not covered by EPA limits and categorical users for which the local limits are more restrictive than the EPA standards shall comply
within whatever standard is most restrictive. Such local compliance standards shall be contained in a compliance schedule placed in the industrial
wastewater permit to ensure compliance within the shortest time feasible.
3. New source discharges and new users shall install and have in operating condition, and shall start up all pollution control equipment required to
meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge and shall comply with applicable standards within the shortest feasible time,
but not to exceed ninety (90) days from the beginning of the discharge and at no time causing interference or bypass in violation of this code.
J. Septic Tank Waste: It is unlawful to dump septic tank waste into the city's water reclamation system without written authorization by the public works
director.
K. Notification Required: Users shall notify the city immediately upon the occurrence of a slug or accidental discharge of substances regulated by this
chapter. The notification shall include location, date and time of discharge, type, concentration and volume of waste discharged and corrective
actions. The user shall be liable for any expense, loss, damage to the water reclamation system or any fines imposed on the city as a result of the
discharge. The initial report of any accidental discharge shall be followed up within five (5) days of the discharge with a detailed written report
describing the cause of the discharge and any measures taken to prevent future occurrences.
L. Signs Posted: Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on the user's premises advising employees whom to call in the event of a
slug or accidental discharge and employees shall be instructed regarding emergency notification procedures.
M. Discharge Control Plan: The city may require any user to develop and implement an accidental spill and prevention plan (ASPP) or slug control plan.
The plan must be submitted to the city within one hundred eighty (180) days after notice from the city that such a plan is required. The plan shall
contain, at a minimum, the following:
1. Description of discharge practices, both routine and nonroutine;
2. Description of stored chemicals, including all applicable material safety data sheets;
3. Procedures for immediate notification of the treatment facility of any accidental or slug load discharge or violations of any of the standards
contained in this chapter;
4. Procedures to prevent an adverse impact from any accidental or slug load discharge. Such procedures shall include, but not be limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or
measures and equipment for emergency response.
N. Discharge Permit Application: All industrial users are required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit. Applications for a wastewater discharge
permit shall be submitted to the city at least ninety (90) days prior to the anticipated startup date and shall contain, at a minimum, the information
requested on the industrial waste survey, and the following:
1. Name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners.
2. A list of all environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
3. Description of the operation, including, but not limited to, the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the
operations; a list of all raw materials and chemicals which are stored at the facility; number and type of employees; hours of operation; description
of each product produced at the facility and the volume, process and rate of production; type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day); the time and duration of the discharge; a schematic drawing which indicates the points of discharge to the water reclamation
system; and site plans, floor plans, mechanical plans and details to show sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers
and appurtenances with size, location and elevation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 131/268
4. Categorical users, which are users subject to regulations promulgated by the U.S. EPA containing pollutant discharge limits that pertain to a
specific category of users, shall provide the measured average daily and maximum daily flow to the water reclamation system, in gallons per day,
for users in their category for regulated or manufacturing process streams; and other streams as necessary to allow the use of the combined waste
streams formula in the applicable federal regulations.
5. Categorical users shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for each regulated or manufacturing process.
6. Noncategorical users shall submit information showing the anticipated average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the water
reclamation system from the total process flow, water reclamation plant flow or individual manufacturing process flow as required by the city.
7. Signature of an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a
system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted, is to the best of
my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including
the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.
8. Categorical users shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for each regulated or manufacturing process.
9. Upon evaluation of the application by the city, the city may require additional information be submitted by the applicant.
O. Discharge Permit Content: Discharge permits shall be for a term no longer than five (5) years and should contain the following:
1. Term of duration of the permit;
2. A statement that the permit is nontransferable without the permission of the city;
3. Applicable pretreatment standards;
4. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, submittal of technical reports, compliance schedules, and recordkeeping requirements;
5. Identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state and local law;
6. Notification requirements for noncompliance and a bypass or upset of a pretreatment facility, and, if the permittee is a significant industrial user,
the requirement for repeat sampling and analysis and submission to the city within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation;
7. A statement of applicable civil, criminal and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements;
8. Any applicable compliance schedule;
9. Any other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this chapter and applicable local, state and federal regulations.
10. The city may require any user to develop and implement an accidental spill prevention plan (ASPP) or a slug control plan.
P. Conditional Discharge Permit: Significant users may apply for a conditional discharge permit which would allow discharge of elements into the water
reclamation system in a concentration or with a pH greater than the local limits contained herein, but not to exceed state regulations, federal
categorical standards or federal pretreatment prohibitions. Such conditional discharge permit shall be subject to modification by the city any time that
the city's discharge level exceeds eighty percent (80%) of the concentration allowed under the city's EPA discharge permit in any two (2) consecutive
months. In addition to the above, all conditional permits will be subject to review by the city on an annual basis and may be modified as provided in
subsection U of this section.
Q. Compliance With Discharge Permit Required: Users must comply with the terms of the discharge permit issued to the city, in addition to the
pretreatment requirements of this chapter and any applicable state and federal laws.
R. Determination Of Issuance: Within ninety (90) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the city will determine whether
or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The city may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit or approve a permit subject to
conditions.
S. Petition: Any directly affected person, including the user, may petition the city to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within ninety
(90) days of its issuance.
1. The petition will be reviewed by the public works director, or the director's designee, and the city engineer, or the city engineer's designee.
2. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.
3. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reason for this objection, and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.
4. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.
5. Failure of the city to act within ninety (90) days on a request for reconsideration shall be deemed a denial. Decisions not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final
actions.
T. Permit Transfer: Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least
one hundred twenty (120) days' advance notice to the city and the city approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. Failure to provide
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 132/268
adequate notice of the transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit voidable as of the date of the facility transfer. If adequate notice is provided
and there are no significant changes to the manufacturing operation or wastewater discharge, the new owner will be considered an existing user and
be covered by the existing limits and requirements in the previous owner's permit. The notice to the city shall include a written certification by the new
owner and/or operator which:
1. States the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes;
2. Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
3. Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit.
U. Permit Modification: The city may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements;
2. To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater
discharge permit issuance;
3. When a change in the water reclamation system requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
4. When there is information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's water reclamation system's personnel or the receiving
waters;
5. Violation in any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
6. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
7. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to applicable federal regulations;
8. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit.
V. Permit Revocation And Nonemergency Discharge Termination:
1. Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked or discharge terminated for, but not limited to, the following:
a. Failure to notify the city of significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to the changed
discharge;
b. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;
c. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge or falsifying self-monitoring reports;
d. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
e. Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility's premises and records;
f. Failure to meet discharge limitations;
g. Failure to pay fines or charges;
h. Failure to meet compliance schedules;
i. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;
j. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of the permitted facility;
k. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter;
l. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling.
2. Such user will be notified of proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause, following the procedures for show
cause hearing set forth in this chapter, why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the city shall not be a bar to, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 1300, 2016: Ord. 1255, 2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.080: PERMIT REISSUANCE:
A user required to have a wastewater discharge permit shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete wastewater
discharge permit application, a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. In addition to the
required information for an initial permit, the application for reissuance shall contain information regarding flow measurements and measurements of
pollutants that are required for user reports. A user who has submitted a timely application for reissuance and whose permit expires prior to the
determination by the city shall be deemed to have an effective permit until such time as the city issues or denies the new discharge permit. A user
whose existing permit has expired and who has failed to submit its new application in the time period specified herein, will be deemed to be discharging
without a wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 133/268
13.20.090: USER REPORT:
Users shall submit within fourteen (14) calendar days after receiving a discharge permit, and at such other times as designated by the city, a user report
containing the following:
A. The measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the water reclamation system from regulated or manufacturing process
streams and other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste streams formula provided in federal regulations, if the user is a
categorical user.
B. The measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the water reclamation system from the total process flow, water
reclamation plant flow, total plant flow or individual manufacturing process flow as required by the city.
C. Categorical users shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass) where required by the
categorical pretreatment standard or the adjusted limit required by the city of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated or
manufacturing process.
Both daily and maximum concentration shall be reported.
D. A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the user and certified by a qualified professional in the same form as required in a permit
application, indicating whether the applicable pretreatment standards are met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
E. A compliance schedule, if additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. The compliance
schedule shall be no more than ninety (90) days, except when the categorical pretreatment standard has been modified. (Ord. 1251, 2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.100: TESTING PROCEDURES:
All testing performed must meet the following requirements:
A. A minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfides and volatile organics. The city will determine
on a case by case basis whether the user will be able to composite the individual grab samples. For all other pollutants, twenty four (24) hour
composite samples must be obtained through flow proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. The city may waive flow proportional
composite sampling for any user that demonstrates that flow proportional is unfeasible. In such cases, a sample may be obtained through time
proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a
representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
B. Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated or
manufacturing process if no pretreatment exists or is determined by the city and contained in the user's wastewater discharge permit. For categorical
users, if other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the flows and concentrations
necessary to allow use of the combined waste streams' formula in the applicable federal regulations in order to evaluate compliance with the
applicable categorical pretreatment standards. For significant industrial users for which the city has adjusted its local limits to factor out dilution flows,
the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to evaluate compliance with the adjusted pretreatment standards.
C. All sample results shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is
representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges from the user. If a user sampled and analyzed more frequently than what
was required in its wastewater discharge permit, it must submit all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge as part of its self-monitoring
report.
D. All pollutant analysis, including sampling techniques, shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in applicable federal
regulations, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If federal regulations do not contain sampling or analytical
standards for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. (Ord. 1029
§ 2, 2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.110: PERMITS VOIDABLE:
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits
issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to the user. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.120: CHARGES AND FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 134/268
The city may adopt charges and fees for the recovery of costs from users of the city's water reclamation system for the implementation and operation of
the pretreatment program. The finance director is authorized to include any of these fees on the monthly billing for municipal utilities. Failure to pay the
fees in full shall constitute grounds for termination of all terminable municipal utility services to the physical address or to allow the city to discontinue
discharge into the water reclamation system. The charges and fees shall relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter, be set by resolution and
may include, but are not limited to, fees and charges for the following:
A. Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program;
B. Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures, including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing
monitoring reports submitted by users;
C. Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction;
D. Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications;
E. Consistent removal (by the city) of pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards;
F. Fees for filing appeals;
G. Other fees or charges as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. (Ord. 1251, 2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.130: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The city shall have the right to enter the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter, and any wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, is being met and whether the user is complying with all requirements thereof. Users shall allow the city ready access to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
A. Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into the premises, the user shall make
necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city will be permitted to enter without delay
for the purpose of performing specific responsibilities.
B. The city shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or
metering of the user's operations.
C. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
user at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced until after necessary access has been provided. The costs of clearing such
access shall be borne by the user.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
E. If the city has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that
there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the city designed to verify
compliance with this chapter or any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare
of the community, the city may seek issuance of a search and/or seizure warrant. Such warrant may be served at reasonable hours, if possible, by
the city in the company of a uniformed officer of the city, if available. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.140: MONITORING FACILITIES:
A. Each user shall provide and operate at its own expense a monitoring facility to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurements of each sewer
discharge to the water reclamation system. Each monitoring facility shall be situated on the user's premises, except where such a location would be
impractical or cause undue hardship for the user, the city may concur with the facility being constructed in the public street or sidewalk area, if so
located that it will not be obstructed by landscaping, traffic or parked vehicles. The city, whenever applicable, may require the construction and
maintenance of sampling facilities at other locations (for example at the end of a manufacturing line, at the entry point to the water reclamation
system).
B. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling
and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. All monitoring facilities
shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable local construction standards and specifications.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 135/268
C. The city may require that the user install monitoring equipment as necessary. That facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at user's own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality
shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. (Ord. 1251, 2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.150: VANDALISM:
It is unlawful for a person to break, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structural appurtenance or equipment, or other part of
the water reclamation system. Any person found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the civil and criminal sanctions set out in this chapter.
(Ord. 1251, 2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.160: USER'S INFORMATION:
A. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from city inspections and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically
requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city, that the methods of production are entitled to protection as trade secrets under
applicable state law.
B. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which
might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made immediately upon
request to governmental agencies for uses related to the national pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) program or pretreatment program,
and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as
defined by federal regulations will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. (Ord. 1029 § 2,
2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.170: PUBLICATION OF NONCOMPLIANT USERS:
The city may publish annually, in the city's official newspaper, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" shall mean the actions or omissions set
forth below:
A. "Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits", defined here as those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of wastewater measurements
taken during a six (6) month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount;
B. "Technical review criteria violations", defined here as those in which thirty three percent (33%) or more of a wastewater measurement taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable criteria for biochemical oxygen demand, total suspended solids, fats, oils and grease, and for all other pollutants except pH;
C. Any other discharge violation that the city believes has caused alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including
endangering the health of city personnel or the general public);
D. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, or reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
H. Any other violation(s) which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. (Ord. 1251,
2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.180: VIOLATIONS NOTICE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 136/268
When the city finds that a user has violated (or continues to violate) any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may serve upon that user a written notice of violation (via personal service or
certified mail, return receipt). Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction
and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the city. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user
of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take any
action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.190: VIOLATIONS; CONSENT ORDERS:
The city may enter into consent orders, assurances or voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user
responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period
specified by the document. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.200: VIOLATIONS; SHOW CAUSE HEARING:
The city may order a user which has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the city administrator and show cause why proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. Notice shall be served for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the
user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by regular and
certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) working days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative
of the user or left attached to the door at the entrance. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user.
A. The city administrator may himself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate a hearing officer to issue in the name of the city
administrator notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter
involved in the hearing; take the evidence; transmit a report of the evidence and hearing; and, together with recommendations to the city
administrator for action thereon.
B. At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded. The transcript, so recorded, may be made available
to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges therefor.
C. After the city administrator has reviewed the evidence, testimony and recommendations, he may issue a compliance order to the user responsible for
the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, sewer service will be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or
other related appurtenances shall have been installed or that existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly
operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the compliance, including additional self-monitoring and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.210: VIOLATION; ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
A. When the city finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may fine such user in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per violation. Such fines may be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of the monthly or other long term average
discharge limits, fines may be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
B. Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of twelve percent (12%) of the unpaid
balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum.
C. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the city to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within thirty
(30) days of being notified of the fine. Where a reconsideration request has potential merit, the city administrator may convene a hearing on the
matter promptly after receiving the request from the user. In the event the user's reconsideration request is determined to have merit, the penalty
payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, may be returned to the user. The city may add the costs of preparing administrative
enforcement actions, such as notices and order, to the civil fine. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.220: VIOLATION; INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
When the city finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may petition the first judicial district court, through the city's attorney, for the
issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 137/268
permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The city may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal
and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.230: VIOLATIONS; CIVIL PENALTIES:
A. A user which has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day.
Penalties may accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
B. The city may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.
C. In determining the amount of civil liability, the city administrator or court shall take into account all relevant circumstances including, but not limited to,
the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions
by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.240: VIOLATIONS; CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
A user which has wilfully or negligently violated any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement; a user which has wilfully or negligently introduced any substance into the water reclamation system which causes
personal injury or property damage; or a user which, or employee who, knowingly made any false statements, representations or certifications in any
application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or who has falsified, tampered with or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this
chapter, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this code for each violation. (Ord. 1255,
2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.250: DISCHARGE SUSPENSION; EMERGENCY:
The city may immediately suspend a user's discharge (after informal notice to the user) whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons or to
the integrity of operation of the water reclamation system. The city may also immediately suspend a user's discharge that presents or may present a
danger to the environment. Notice of suspension shall be provided by whatever effective means may be possible.
A. Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the water reclamation system, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The city may
allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment has
passed, unless the termination proceedings for nonemergency set forth in this chapter are initiated against the user. Any costs of disconnection and
reconnection shall be borne by the user.
B. A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the cause of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the city prior to the date of any show
cause or termination hearing provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 1251, 2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1361 - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Go to new ordinance.
13.20.260: VIOLATIONS; REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of this chapter which provide a remedy or penalty for a violation are not exclusive. The city reserves the right to take any, or all, or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant user when the circumstances warrant. Further the city is empowered to take more than one
enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently. Pursuing one type of remedy shall not be a bar against, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
Chapter 13.24
SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
13.24.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to protect the public health from contamination of the Rathdrum Aquifer, which is a drinking water source, consistent
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 138/268
with the determination of the Panhandle health district that extensive use of subsurface wastewater disposal on the Rathdrum Prairie presents a threat
to the public health. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.24.020: USE OF SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
The use of subsurface sewage disposal systems where public sewage and collection treatment are available or could be made available is declared to
be unlawful for the reason that such use poses a threat to the public health and general welfare by contamination of the Rathdrum Aquifer and is harmful
to the public health and welfare. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.24.030: DUTY OF OWNER:
It shall be the duty of any person owning or having charge of any premises using a subsurface sewage disposal system, where public sewage collection
and treatment are available to disconnect the subsurface disposal system and to connect to the city's water reclamation system, except as otherwise
provided by this code. (Ord. 1251, 2013)
Chapter 13.28
PRIVIES AND OUTHOUSES PROHIBITED
13.28.010: RESTRICTION:
It is unlawful for any person to construct, erect or maintain for sustained use within the municipal limits any outhouse or privy. In all places where
connection to the sewer system is not possible the same shall be equipped with septic tank constructed with a drain field or acceptable alternative
design in such manner and workable condition as to conform to accepted sanitary standards. This restriction is not applicable to construction sites
where portable toilets are required during the construction period, special events which necessitate temporary bathroom facilities during the event and to
city parks. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
Chapter 13.32
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
13.32.010: DEFINITIONS:
Words not defined herein shall be given the meaning ordinarily applied to such words.
COLLECTOR: Whenever used herein, means the person holding a license or contract with the city, or employed by the city, and thereby authorized and
designated by the city to collect, handle, transport and dispose of refuse and waste.
GARBAGE: Includes all putrescible waste, except sewage and body waste, including waste accumulated of animal food or vegetable matter, and
including waste that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing meat, fish, fowl, fruit and vegetables, and shall include all of such wastes
or accumulations of vegetable matter of residences, restaurants, hotels and places where food is prepared for human consumption. The term "garbage"
shall not include recognized industrial byproducts.
OWNER AND OCCUPANT: Wherever herein used may be used interchangeably, and mean every person in possession, charge or in control of any
dwelling, flat, rooming house, or any eating place, shop, place of business, manufacturing or business establishment where garbage or other refuse is
created or accumulated.
REFUSE: Solid wastes, including garbage and rubbish.
RUBBISH: Refuse other than garbage (tin cans, bottles, ashes, paper, pasteboard, cardboard, or wooden boxes, brush, leaves, weeds, and cuttings
from trees, lawns, shrubs, and gardens or other waste materials produced in normal course of doing business or everyday living). The term "rubbish"
shall not include recognized industrial byproducts.
WASTE: Unwanted solid, liquid or gaseous materials. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.32.020: COLLECTION SYSTEM ESTABLISHED:
There is established a municipal system of refuse collection, transportation and disposal. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
collecting, transporting, hauling or conveying for commercial purposes any refuse over the streets or alleys unless and until such person has a contract
therefor as an authorized representative of the city. The city has the authority to contract with more than one entity as an authorized representative of
the city. Solid waste haulers serving lands annexed by the city may continue to haul upon city streets after obtaining a franchise approved by the city
council. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.32.030: COLLECTION; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Every owner or occupant of premises within the city limits must use the refuse collection and disposal system herein provided, and shall deposit or
cause to be deposited in accordance with this regulation all rubbish and garbage that is of such nature that it is perishable, or may decompose, or may
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 139/268
be scattered by wind or otherwise. Compost piles may be maintained for fertilization purposes, and matter used for fertilization purposes only may be
transported, kept and used, providing the same shall not constitute a nuisance by virtue of offensive odor or runoff. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.32.040: DEPOSIT OF RUBBISH AND GARBAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or dispose of garbage or solid or liquid waste in any solid waste disposal containers or at any
location for solid waste collection pick up unless said containers or pick up location are designated for that person's use. This chapter prohibits
placement of solid waste at a pick up location on one's own property or on the property of another for purposes of disposal by municipal solid waste
collection if one does not maintain an active solid waste disposal account with the city and if one does not have the express permission of the landowner
upon whose land the solid waste is placed for municipal collection. Such prohibition shall not apply to solid waste generated in the ordinary course of
conducting recreational activities in the city's parks which is deposited in park provided waste containers designated for such purpose. (Ord. 1029 § 2,
2003)
13.32.050: CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of any place where garbage or rubbish is created or accumulated to at all times keep or cause to be kept
portable nonleaking containers for the deposit therein of rubbish and garbage and except as otherwise provided to deposit or cause to be deposited all
rubbish and garbage therein.
A. All such containers shall be made of a rigid material, watertight and not easily corrodible, rodent and fly proof, and shall be equipped with handles and
a close fitting lid.
B. Containers, when full, shall be limited to seventy five (75) pounds in weight and thirty two (32) gallons in size, unless renting a toter specified by the
city.
C. The container lid shall not be removed except when necessary to place garbage and rubbish into such container or to take the same therefrom and
shall be replaced by the person placing or taking therefrom such garbage or rubbish.
D. Containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition and free inside and out from accumulating grease and decomposing material so that no odor
nuisance is created.
E. All garbage and refuse cans shall be placed in a place accessible to the collector; provided that in the case of isolated dwellings or places of business
or where reasonable access cannot be had by truck, the cans may be kept in such places as may be agreed upon by the owner and the collector.
Provided further, that where there is no alley entrance, such cans shall be placed on the street curb on collection days, but must be removed by the
end of the day.
F. Rubbish consisting only of cardboard, or wooden boxes, brush, leaves, weeds, and cuttings from trees, lawns, shrubs and gardens, may be kept
separately without depositing in such containers providing that bulk materials, such as leaves, shall be in a can, box, sack, or receptacle for ease of
loading and that brush or any bulky material shall be tied in bundles not to exceed four feet (4') in length.
G. Recyclable portions of solid waste shall be separated from the other materials and deposited in the containers provided for recyclable materials.
Deposit of recyclable materials in the designated container shall be considered relinquishment of ownership of the recyclables and the transfer of
ownership to the city's designated collector. (Ord. 1227, 2011)
13.32.060: CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS; BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS:
Business establishments which generate large amounts of garbage may have a dumpster in lieu of using the type and size of garbage cans specified in
this chapter. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.32.070: COLLECTION; FEES:
A fee schedule for the collection of garbage shall be set by the city council by resolution and amended in the same manner. In addition to the monthly
collection fee, all sanitation only accounts shall be required to pay a deposit fee as security in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city
council prior to the commencement of services. The deposit will be held by the city until such time as the account is closed and will be applied to the
final billing statement. Fees for garbage collection shall be on the consolidated utility bill and the same shall be paid as part of said bill. (Ord. 1125 § 4,
2007: Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.32.080: TERMINATION OF SERVICE:
The finance department is authorized to discontinue water service to any premises if the entire consolidated utility bill is not paid, said charges to
become delinquent as provided for water for water charges, and shall be subject to the same penalties provided for in the case of water collections. The
customer's utility services may be discontinued for noncompliance with any provisions of this chapter. If requested in writing, the customer is entitled to a
hearing before the mayor prior to utility service being discontinued. The written request for such hearing must be received by the city clerk no later than
ten (10) days after notice is mailed to the customer or is delivered to the premises. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 140/268
13.32.090: UNACCEPTABLE MATERIALS:
A. Dirt or earth debris from construction or lawn renovation, rocks, stones, automobile bodies and parts, dead animals, building materials such as
masonry, plaster, scrap lumber, wood shavings, are not acceptable for collection, and such items shall be collected and disposed of by the building
contractor, owner or occupant of the premises.
B. Paint, flammable liquids, burning ashes, explosive materials, and any materials designated as hazardous waste by state or federal statutes and
regulations. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.32.100: DISCARDING REFUSE PROHIBITED:
No persons shall throw, discard or deposit rubbish, garbage or refuse in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or vacant ground or in or upon any canal,
irrigation ditch, drainage ditch or other watercourse. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.32.110: INSPECTION:
Any person designated by the city administrator to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall have the right of ingress and egress to any premises for
the purpose of inspecting all places and containers where rubbish or garbage is accumulated or kept. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.32.120: COLLECTION; LICENSE AND CONTRACT:
The mayor and council shall have the sole authority to license, contract or perform all services pertaining to sanitary collection and disposal, and have
the authority to establish reasonable fees for licenses or franchises and to establish reasonable rules and regulations governing the conduct and
operation of such licensees or contractors. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
Chapter 13.36
STREET LIGHTING
13.36.010: FINANCING; PAYMENT:
A. The costs of street lighting within the city may be financed by user fees assessed to the owners and occupants of improved real property. The user
fees assessed shall be included in the general utility billing as a separate item and as hereinafter set forth; provided, however, that the costs of
lighting to illuminate public parks and play fields, herein called "public land zone", shall be excluded and paid for from the city general fund.
"Improved real property" within the meaning of this chapter, shall include real estate which has city or district water service, is paved, is landscaped,
or has erected thereon any construction for which a building permit would be required.
B. Street lighting charges to be paid by the owners and occupants of improved real property shall be set by the city council by resolution and shall be
based upon the lighting intensity/use zone in which the property is located.
C. Fees for streetlights shall be on the consolidated utility bill and the same shall be paid with said bill. The finance department is authorized to
discontinue water service to any premises if the entire consolidated utility bill is not paid, said charges to become delinquent as provided for water
charges, and shall be subject to the same penalties provided for in the case of water collections. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.36.020: ZONE DETERMINATIONS:
The street lighting system and the city is divided into separate zones to reflect the intensity of illumination required to provide safe travel and protection
of property within each zone. These zones shall be as follows:
A. Commercial Illumination Intensity Zone: This zone includes property which is zoned commercial or industrial for land use purposes. Increased lighting
needs in this zone are related to higher traffic levels and an increased need for commercial security.
B. Residential Illumination Intensity Zone: This zone includes property which is zoned residential for land use purposes. Primary lighting needs in
residential areas are to establish increased safety associated with street travel. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
13.36.030: DETERMINATION REVIEW:
Property owners in a commercial/industrial land use zoning district, which has been developed primarily as residential use and which has not had street
lighting installed substantially consistent with a commercial/industrial illumination intensity zone, may file a written request to have their land categorized
as residential for the purposes of the streetlight fee. Such written request shall be reviewed and a determination by the city administrator as to whether
the request shall be approved. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 141/268
13.36.040: VIOLATIONS:
It is unlawful to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Violations shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this
code. This chapter may also be enforced by appropriate civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1152 § 19, 2008)
Chapter 13.40
SUBSEQUENT USER FEES
13.40.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of subsequent user fees is to promote equity and fairness when facilities are installed through the efforts of specially benefited private
parties through local improvement districts, through private development undertakings, or through other efforts where systems are extended or
expanded through the contributions of specific parties rather than the public at large. This chapter is not intended to provide for payment of subsequent
user charges when the extension of streets, utilities, or surface drainage facilities occurs as an orderly continuation of community development patterns.
It is intended to address the equity of public or private costs borne as a consequence of extending service or access into areas not previously served or
for which oversizing has been provided by prior acts of private developers or by public projects funded pursuant to local improvement district statutes or
otherwise. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003: Ord. 863 § 1, 1997: Ord. 837 § 1, 1996)
13.40.020: ESTABLISHMENT OF SUBSEQUENT USER FEES:
Subsequent user fees are hereby created and established. Subsequent user fees are additional to the connection and capacity charges which each new
system user is obligated to pay prior to connecting to the city's utility systems or to impact fees should such charges be implemented by the city
pursuant to authority granted by Idaho Code title 67, chapter 82. Subsequent user fees are charges based upon the cost of constructing or extending
water distribution lines, constructing additional water storage capacity, constructing or extending sewer collection lines, constructing street extensions or
similar street improvements, installing traffic signals and related channelization, constructing surface water handling facilities and otherwise constructing
or installing additional features for the water distribution or waste or surface water collection and treatment systems which will enable service to be
provided to new users who would benefit from the improvements, but did not share in the cost of construction either by virtue of providing new capacity
or by extending service or facilities into areas not previously served. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003: Ord. 863 § 2, 1997: Ord. 837 § 2, 1996)
13.40.030: BASIS FOR CALCULATION:
The subsequent user fee shall generally reflect the proportionate or marginal cost of engineering, construction, and right of way or easement
procurement, etc., incurred to extend the street, traffic management, drainage, water or sewer system which will enable providing capacity or access to
previously unserved property, including costs incurred through a local improvement district or by a private developer and/or property owner. (Ord. 1029
§ 2, 2003: Ord. 863 § 3, 1997: Ord. 837 § 3, 1996)
13.40.040: PAYMENT REQUIRED BEFORE CONNECTION OR SUBSEQUENT USE:
No connection to a newly constructed public water or water reclamation facility, access to a street or surface water management facility, or benefit of
traffic management devices governed by this chapter, other than by one who contributed proportionately to its construction or costs of installation, shall
be allowed until a subsequent user fee analysis has been completed and accepted by resolution of the city council or until a preliminary subsequent user
fee has been paid as estimated by the director of public works, subject to final determination by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1251, 2013)
13.40.050: FEES ESTABLISHED BY RESOLUTION; ANALYSIS REQUIRED:
All subsequent user fees shall be fixed by resolution after submission by the director of public works of a proposed subsequent user fee analysis. Such
analysis shall include a compilation of costs which have been incurred, the basis of their calculation, the manner of their distribution and source of their
payment, and the proposed distribution of proceeds from any subsequent user fees collected, which may include payment to private parties. The costs
of construction, installation, and extension shall be ascertained by the director of public works at the time of completion of such project and final
computation of the costs through the local improvement district or by reasonable costs provided and certified by the developer and/or property owner.
Such costs shall be limited to the direct expenses of engineering design, construction, and acquisition of easements and rights of way, excluding
therefrom rights of way dedicated and improvements installed pursuant to subdivision or other ordinance requirements. Costs do not include
administration or overhead of a private developer or property owner, although administrative costs of a local improvement district may be included in
such calculations.
Each resolution of the city council establishing a subsequent user fee shall establish the fees to be charged and their manner of calculation, the physical
area subject to payment of the subsequent user fees, the disposition of the proceeds from such fees, and the duration of such charges, with such
duration not to exceed five (5) years from the date of the resolution, subject to subsequent action by the city council in the final year of the initial period,
extending the initial duration by not more than five (5) years. Payment of the required subsequent user fee shall be a necessary prerequisite to issuance
of a building permit for construction of a new building or to expand the square footage of a benefited existing building by more than twenty five percent
(25%).
Except in the case of a local improvement district, a copy of the subsequent user fee analysis shall be provided to the private party(ies) who paid for
installation of the specific facilities which are the subject of the analysis no less than seven (7) days prior to the city council meeting at which the analysis
will be considered. Such party(ies) may be heard at said meeting. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003: Ord. 863 § 5, 1997: Ord. 837 § 5, 1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 142/268
13.40.060: FEES COLLECTED; WHEN:
The subsequent user fees authorized by this chapter shall be paid by benefited parties prior to recordation of new subdivisions, initiation of new building
construction, or establishment of a new or changed land use which would receive benefit from the installed improvements. No final subdivision plat shall
be recorded, no building permit shall be issued, and no new or substantially modified land use shall be established within the benefit area defined in any
subsequent user fee resolution until the user fee called for thereby has first been paid as required. Failure to comply with this chapter shall constitute a
criminal misdemeanor. Officers of the city are also authorized to undertake civil legal action to compel compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 1029 § 2,
2003: Ord. 863 § 6, 1997)
13.40.070: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIALS ENABLED:
The mayor, city administrator, public works director, finance director, and city attorney are hereby authorized to take such actions as may be necessary,
including developing contracts with those who have initially paid for the installation of street, drainage, traffic management and utility system
improvements, to carry out the provisions of any resolution of the city council establishing a subsequent user fee. (Ord. 1029 § 2, 2003: Ord. 863 § 7,
1997: Ord. 837 § 6, 1996)
Chapter 13.44
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
13.44.010: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE of the city of Post Falls. (Ord. 1188 § 2, 2010)
13.44.020: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to require implementation of stormwater management techniques which rely upon natural on site treatment and
recycling of stormwater as opposed to collection and conveyance of untreated stormwater into groundwater sources or into surface bodies of water, and
to prohibit illicit discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. The underlying purpose to be achieved by implementation of such regulations
is the protection of groundwater quality through pretreatment of stormwater prior to infiltration and protection of surface water resources from the effects
of contaminants, sedimentation and erosion. (Ord. 1188 § 2, 2010)
13.44.030: APPLICABILITY:
The requirements of this chapter shall be applicable in the following circumstances:
A. Development of every subdivision of land within the jurisdiction of the city of Post Falls.
B. All commercial and industrial site development for which grading, site development, construction or building permits may be required pursuant to the
land use regulations of the city of Post Falls.
C. Every building permit where the proximity of any land disturbing activity to environmentally sensitive areas, including, but not limited to, wellhead
protection areas and saturated aquifer recharge areas, or to surface water in the form of perennial or intermittent streams, rivers, ponds, lakes, or
wetlands, is less than three hundred feet (300') in a downhill direction.
D. Construction of utilities, roads and road improvements.
E. The use of the municipal separate storm sewer system. (Ord. 1188 § 2, 2010)
13.44.040: DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS:
CONSTRUCTION GENERAL PERMIT (CGP): The NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges for construction activity in Idaho.
DIRECTOR: The director of public works or the duly authorized representatives designated to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
DISCHARGE: Any release, spill, leak, flow, escape, dumping or disposal of any liquid, semisolid or solid substance.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA): The United States environmental protection agency.
ILLICIT CONNECTION: Any manmade conveyance that is connected directly to the MS4 and serves as a pathway for any illicit discharge.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit,
discharges resulting from firefighting activities, and discharges resulting from other activities approved by the director.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 143/268
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): The city owned or operated stormwater conveyance or system of conveyances including
roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains that discharges to waters of the United
States.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES): The EPA program for authorizing discharges pursuant to the clean water act.
NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI): The official notice of a property owner, developer, or contractor to the EPA or its delegated authority that site disturbance
activities will commence and that activities will be in accordance with the CGP.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): A plan for controlling or preventing the discharge of pollutants in stormwater in
accordance with the CGP or other NPDES permit. (Ord. 1188 § 2, 2010)
13.44.050: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Unless relief from the standards set forth in this chapter are granted by properly approved variance, all development to which this chapter is applicable
shall comply with the following requirements and methods for stormwater management control:
A. Stormwater, in accordance with the performance standards set forth herein, shall be directed by protected means to grass infiltration areas or to
another, functionally equivalent, approved collection, treatment and disposal system in accordance with an approved stormwater management plan,
subject to review and approval by the city engineer. The plans shall follow the adopted city stormwater management and design policies. Said grass
infiltration areas or other functionally equivalent alternative stormwater systems may be approved in either nodal or distributed form subject to
specific approval by the city engineer during the development process.
B. All development subject to this chapter shall be carried out such that the runoff of storm or other surface waters shall not be accelerated,
concentrated or otherwise conveyed beyond the exterior property lines or project boundaries of the project in question except in compliance with the
provisions of city stormwater management and design policies adopted by resolution of the city council. The quality of surface runoff shall be
protected by strict compliance with the city stormwater management and design policies or implementation of measures shown to have a design
capability which exceeds the city stormwater management and design policies adopted hereby and approved by the city engineer.
C. Each landowner developing property shall develop a comprehensive stormwater management plan which addresses and complies with the
requirements and standards established by this chapter and the plan criteria of the city stormwater management and design policies adopted by
resolution of the city council. Each plan shall be approved by a qualified licensed professional, which professional shall submit both finished design
drawings and supporting calculations for review and approval by the city engineer prior to start of construction. Each stormwater management plan
shall also identify necessary maintenance requirements.
D. Each developer who proposes and implements a grass infiltration area for collection of treatment of stormwater in accordance with this chapter shall
also establish the necessary maintenance mechanism, including acceptable plans for sustained functionality of the collection and treatment system.
E. As a condition to obtaining a building or development permit, a person who proposes to develop a property shall, at the time of permit application,
provide a copy of the notice of intent as proof of project coverage under the construction general permit, or provide the project design professional's
certification that the project is exempt from the CGP. For projects subject to the CGP, a copy of the SWPPP must be maintained at the project site
and made available for inspection by the city during construction hours. (Ord. 1188 § 2, 2010)
13.44.060: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following performance standards shall be applicable to all design, construction, implementation and maintenance of stormwater management
systems required by this chapter:
A. There shall be no increase in rate of runoff from the site when compared with the dissipation of stormwater in the undeveloped state for a 25-year
storm of two (2) hour duration. Within the project boundaries, sufficient retention capacity shall be constructed to detain surface flow to meet the
performance standard established by this section. For purposes of this chapter, "undeveloped state" shall mean the natural soils and vegetation in
place prior to the start of any construction or clearing activity.
B. No stormwater shall be collected or concentrated except within a channel protected against erosion and containing energy dissipation measures to
prevent further erosion. Existing unprotected channels shall be protected against further erosion in the course of site development. Any site
development or construction shall preserve installed components of a stormwater management plan.
C. Any and all collected stormwater shall be directed to grass infiltration areas which shall be established with grass and other approved plant materials
or to an acceptable alternative stormwater management design. Grass infiltration areas or their acceptable alternatives shall be sized in accordance
with the city stormwater management and design policies. (Ord. 1188 § 2, 2010)
13.44.070: GUARANTEE OF INSTALLATION:
No final plat shall be signed until the stormwater management facilities are constructed and functioning as designed and accepted by the city engineer.
No certificate of occupancy will be issued until the stormwater management system has been installed and is functioning as designed. (Ord. 1188 § 2,
2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 144/268
13.44.080: ADOPTION OF DESIGN STANDARDS:
The city council may adopt by resolution city stormwater management and design policies intended to implement the general requirements and
performance standards set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1188 § 2, 2010)
13.44.090: VARIANCE:
A variance from the requirements of this chapter or from design standards adopted pursuant to this chapter may be granted by the city engineer only
upon a showing of undue hardship due to unique site characteristics. Said variance may only be granted in such circumstances if the approval of the
variance would not otherwise impair achievement of the standards or purposes of this chapter, would not impose additional burden upon adjoining lands
or landowners, or would not otherwise disrupt the scheme of stormwater management in the community. It shall be incumbent upon anyone requesting a
variance to provide data showing that alternative methods of stormwater handling proposed will produce comparable efficacy of the stormwater
management measures required by this chapter. No variance shall be granted unless all elements of this section are met. (Ord. 1188 § 2, 2010)
13.44.100: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
A. No person shall cause, permit or contribute to illicit discharges to the MS4.
B. No person shall damage, harm, fail to install or complete, or otherwise impair the grass infiltration areas, approved methods of transmission of
stormwater to grass infiltration areas or any portion of the stormwater management system required to be installed pursuant to this chapter. Unless
other provisions are made in the process of development review and approval, responsibility for maintenance of stormwater system elements
remains with the property owner and violation of these maintenance requirements shall also constitute a violation of this chapter. Occupancy of a
dwelling or building without having first obtained a certificate of occupancy, when compliance of this chapter is a condition precedent to issuance of
the certificate of occupancy, is a violation of this chapter, in addition to any building and zoning ordinance from which the occupancy requirement
derives. (Ord. 1188 § 2, 2010)
13.44.110: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT:
A. The city is authorized to inspect sources of stormwater and illicit discharges and connections to the MS4 to ascertain whether the purpose of this
chapter or an order issued hereunder is being met and whether the owner of the real property is complying with all requirements thereof. During
reasonable times, owners shall allow the director ready access to all areas of the property from which discharges to the MS4 do or might occur for
the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties provided herein.
B. Unreasonable delays in allowing the director access to the subject premises shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1188 § 2, 2010)
13.44.120: ENFORCEMENT:
Provisions of this chapter may be enforced in the following manner:
A. Criminal prosecution as a misdemeanor, with a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or incarceration not to exceed six (6) months, or
by both fine and incarceration.
B. Civil action to compel compliance.
C. Denial or revocation of building permits or certificate of occupancy, as the appropriate case may be. (Ord. 1188 § 2, 2010)
Title 14
RESERVED
Title 15
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 15.04
BUILDING AND RELATED CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE CODES
15.04.010: INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
A. Adoption: In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public and to prescribe regulations governing building and other construction, the
City Council hereby adopts the 2015 International Building Code (IBC), prepared by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted by the State of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 145/268
Idaho through the Idaho Building Code Board, together with any amendments or revisions to the IBC made by the Idaho Building Code Board
through the negotiated rulemaking process, is adopted with the following exceptions or amendments:
1. Section 103.2 is not adopted.
2. Section 103.3 is not adopted.
3. Section 107.1 is amended to read as follows:
107.1 General. Submittal documents consisting of construction documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical report, structural
observation programs and other data shall be submitted in one (1) paper set and one (1) PDF of the plan set on a CD for each application for a
permit. The architectural construction documents shall be prepared by an architect licensed to practice by the state of Idaho. The building official
shall have the option to stipulate that an Idaho licensed architect may submit construction documents that are proven to strictly adhere to the IBC
provisions of section 2308; Conventional Light-Frame Construction. The building official shall have the option to stipulate that an Idaho licensed
engineer in the appropriate engineering discipline (structural, mechanical, electrical, civil, geotectonic, acoustical, etc.) of his or her expertise may
submit supplemental construction documents supportive and complementary to the architect's construction documents. Where special conditions
exist, the building official may authorize a registered professional engineer acting within the discipline of his or her expertise and at the stipulation
of the building official acting jointly or in association with a licensed architect to prepare construction documents and require site construction
observation for buildings or shelters not intended, designed or constructed for human habitation or occupancy.
Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a
registered design professional of any architectural or engineering service in the erection, enlargement, alteration or repair of any building where
such building to be or is used as a single family residence not exceeding three (3) stories in height and multiple height and multiple family
residence of three adjoining dwelling units not exceeding three (3) stories in height or as a farm building or for the purpose of out buildings or
auxiliary building in connection with such residence or farm premises or if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of
construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code.
Those individuals who furnish only interior design or decoration or space planning or space design services within existing structures which do not
involve the construction or adherence to requirements of the international building code (IBC) including the Americans with disabilities act (ADA),
American national standard accessible and usable building and facilities ICC/ANSI-A117 will not be required to be a registered design
professional. This exemption only allows the use of moveable partitions, rails, counters, cabinets, space dividers, furniture and similar types of
equipment which do not exceed a height of five feet, nine inches above floor in the execution of the plans or design of a particular space or the
creation of exits corridors, stairways and disturbances of existing structural components as defined by the IBC.
4. Section 107.3.4.1 is amended to read as follows:
107.3.4.1 General. When it is required that documents be prepared by a registered architect, the building official shall be authorized to require that
the owner engage and designate on the building permit application a registered architect who shall act as the registered design professional in
responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute registered architect or professional engineer in responsible
charge who shall perform the duties required by the building official. The building official shall be notified in writing by the owner or the architect of
record if the person who is in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the required duties.
5. Section 406.3.4 Separation. Replace section 1 with the following:
The private garage shall be separated from the dwelling unit and its attic area, including supporting members with materials approved for one-hour
fire-resistive construction on the garage side and a self-closing, tight-fitting solid-wood door 13/8 inches in thickness, or a self-closing, tight-fitting
20-minute fire-rated door, or solid or honeycomb steel doors not less than 13/8 inches (34.9 mm) thick, or doors in compliance with section 716.5.1
and 716.5.3.1. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted.
6. Table 1020.1 Corridor Fire-Resistance Rating. For an R occupancy, replace "0.5" hour required fire-resistance rating with a sprinkler system with
"1" hour.
7. Section 1809.5 Frost Protection. Delete method 1 and replace with the following:
1. Extending below the frost line of the locality, with a minimum twenty-four (24) inches from ground surface to the bottom of a footing.
8. Add a new section 1905.1.9 Minimum Reinforcement as follows:
All continuous footings will require a minimum of two (2) continuous horizontal reinforcing bars. Footings supporting columns and piers shall
contain no less than two (2) #4 rebar installed each way, not to exceed twelve (12) inches maximum spacing.
Minimum reinforcement for foundation walls (unless closer spacing is specified by design or engineering specifications) which do not exceed four
(4) feet in height shall be four (4) feet on center for vertical reinforcement and two (2) feet on center for horizontal reinforcement. One (1)
continuous row of horizontal #4 rebar shall be located between three (3) inches and six (6) inches of top and bottom of wall.
Foundation walls over four (4) feet in height (unless closer spacing is specified by design or engineering specification) shall be eighteen (18)
inches minimum on center for horizontal and vertical reinforcement. Reinforcing bars shall be a minimum size of #4 and may be a minimum grade
forty (40). One continuous row of horizontal #4 rebar shall be located between three (3) inches and six (6) inches of top and bottom of wall. No less
than two (2) #4 rebar shall be installed around door, window, and similar sized openings.
(Ord. 1328, 2017)
15.04.020: INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED:
A. Adoption: The 2012 International Residential Code (IRC), prepared by the International Code Council, Inc., as adopted by the State of Idaho through
the Idaho Building Code Board, together with any amendments or revisions to the IRC made by the Idaho Building Code Board through the
negotiated rulemaking process, is adopted with the following exceptions or amendments:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 146/268
1. Section R101.2. Delete the exception and add the following sentence to the end of the section:
Detached one-and-two-family dwellings and townhouses will be classified as an R-3 occupancy. All garages, shops, and accessory structures will
be classified as a U occupancy.
2. Section R103.2 is not adopted.
3. Section R103.3 is not adopted.
4. Section R104.10.1. Delete entire section.
5. Section R106.1 is amended to read as follows:
R106.1 General. Submittal documents consisting of construction documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical report, structural
observation programs and other data shall be submitted in one (1) paper set and one (1) PDF of the plan set on a CD for each application for a
permit. The architectural construction documents shall be prepared by an architect licensed to practice by the state of Idaho. The building official
shall have the option to stipulate that an Idaho licensed engineer in the appropriate engineering discipline (structural, mechanical, electrical, civil,
geotectonic, acoustical, etc.) of his or her expertise may submit supplemental construction documents supportive and complementary to the
architect's construction documents.
Where special conditions exist, the building official may authorize a registered professional engineer acting within the discipline of his or her
expertise and at the stipulation of the building official acting jointly or in association with a licensed architect to prepare construction documents
and require site construction observation for buildings or shelters not intended, designed or constructed for human habitation or occupancy.
Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a
registered design professional of any architectural or engineering service in the erection, enlargement, alteration or repair of any building where
such building to be or is used as a single family residence not exceeding three (3) stories in height and multiple height and multiple family
residence of three adjoining dwelling units not exceeding three (3) stories in height or as a farm building or for the purpose of out buildings or
auxiliary building in connection with such residence or farm premises or if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of
construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code.
Those individuals who furnish only interior design or decoration or space planning or space design services within existing structures which do not
involve the construction or adherence to requirements of the international residential code (IRC) including the Americans with disabilities act (ADA)
American national standard accessible and usable building and facilities ICC/ANSI-A117 will not be required to be a registered design
professional. This exemption only allows the use of moveable partitions, rails, counters, cabinets, space dividers, furniture and similar types of
equipment which do not exceed a height of five feet, nine inches above floor in the execution of the plans or design of a particular space or the
creation of exits corridors, stairways and disturbances of existing structural components as defined by the IRC.
6. Section R106.1.3. Delete entire section.
7. Section R109.1.3. Delete entire section.
8. Section R301.2.3 Snow Loads. Delete section and replace with the following:
Wood framed construction, cold-formed steel framed construction and masonry and concrete construction in regions with ground snow loads 70
psf (3.35 kN/m2) or less, shall be in accordance with chapters 5, 6 and 8 of the IBC. Buildings in regions with ground snow loads greater than 70
psf (3.35 kN/m2) shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice. The minimum roof design snow load shall be forty (40)
pounds per square foot. A ground snow load of fifty six (56) pounds per square foot shall be used for roof drifting snow load design. No
manufactured home, commercial coach or modular building shall be placed that has not been constructed to withstand a minimum forty (40) pound
per square foot roof load, or the owner has provided for a separate roof cover that is constructed to provide the required roof load, except that
manufactured homes that are already installed in a location within the city limits at the time of the passage of this section may remain without
having to meet the minimum roof load set forth herein. Any manufactured home allowed to remain under this section may be moved to a different
location within the city limits without having to meet the forty (40) pound roof load providing that it meets all zoning requirements contained in title
18 of the city code.
9. Section R302.2 Townhouses. Delete the exception and replace with the following:
Exception: A two (2) 1-hour fire-resistance rated wall assembly or a common 2-hour fire resistance rated wall assembly tested in accordance with
ASTM E 119 or UL 263 is permitted for townhouses. If two (2) 1-hour walls are used, plumbing and electrical installations within the wall cavity
shall conform with fire-resistance penetration requirements in accordance with section R302.4 through R302.4.2 for each of the two (2) 1-hour
rated walls. The 2-hour fire-resistance rated common wall shall not contain plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts or vents within its wall cavity.
The wall shall be rated for fire exposure from both sides and shall extend to and be tight against the exterior walls and the underside of the roof
sheathing. Penetrations of electrical outlet boxes shall be in accordance with section R302.4.
10. Section R302.6 Separation Required. Delete section and replace with the following:
The private garage shall be separated from the dwelling unit or any conditioned space, including attic areas and supporting members with no less
than one (1) layer of 5/8" type `X' gypsum wallboard or equivalent on the garage side. The garage side of a roof/ceiling assembly, floor/ceiling
assembly, and steel supporting members shall be protected with not less than two (2) layers of 5/8" type `X' gypsum wallboard or equivalent. If a
common door is provided, it shall be a self-closing, tight-fitting solid-wood door 13/8 inches in thickness, or a self-closing, tight-fitting 20-minute firerated
door, or solid or honeycomb steel doors not less than 13/8 inches (34.9 mm) thick.
Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted.
Garages, including the attic space, located less than 3 feet from a dwelling unit on the same lot shall be protected with not less than one (1) layer
of 5/8" type `X' gypsum wallboard or equivalent on the garage side.
11. Section R302.5.3. Delete section and replace with the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 147/268
Penetrations through the separation required in section R302.6 shall be protected with approved materials to resist the passage of flame and
products of combustion. The materials filling the penetration annular space shall meet the requirements of ASTM E 814 or UL 1479.
12. Section R302.7. Under Stair Protection. Delete section and replace with the following:
Enclosed accessible space under stairs shall have walls, under stair surface and any soffits protected on the enclosed side with 5/8-inch type X
gypsum board.
13. Section R313.1 Townhouse Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. Delete the exception and replace with the following:
Exception: Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems shall not be required in townhouses where either two (2) 1-hour fire-resistance rated walls
or a common 2-hour fire-resistance rated wall is installed between dwelling units or when additions or alterations are made to existing townhouses
that do not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed.
14. Section R322 Flood-Resistant Construction is deleted.
15. Section R403.1.4.1 Frost Protection. Delete method 1 and replace with the following:
1. Extending below the frost line specified in table R301.2(1); with a minimum twenty-four (24) inches from ground surface to the bottom of a
footing.
16. Delete tables R404.1.1(1), R404.1.1(2), and R404.1.1(3).
17. Section R404.1.2 Concrete Foundation Walls. Delete section and replace with the following:
All continuous footings will require a minimum two (2) continuous horizontal reinforcing bars.
Footings supporting columns and piers shall contain no less than two (2) #4 rebar installed each way, not to exceed twelve (12) inches maximum
spacing.
Minimum reinforcement for foundation walls (unless closer spacing is specified by design or engineering specifications) which do not exceed four
(4) feet in height shall be four (4) feet on center for vertical reinforcement and two (2) feet on center for horizontal reinforcement. One continuous
row of horizontal #4 rebar shall be located between three (3) inches and six (6) inches of top and bottom of wall.
Foundation walls over four (4) feet in height (unless closer spacing is specified by design or engineering specification) shall be eighteen (18)
inches minimum on center for horizontal and vertical reinforcement. Reinforcing bars shall be a minimum size of #4 and may be a minimum grade
forty (40). One (1) continuous row of horizontal #4 rebar shall be located between three (3) inches and six (6) inches of top and bottom of wall. No
less than two (2) #4 rebar shall be installed around door, window, and similar sized openings.
18. Section G2406.2. Delete items 3 and 4.
19. Section G2445 is not adopted.
20. Part VII. Plumbing and part VIII. Electrical are not adopted.
21. Appendices are not adopted except for:
Appendix G as it applies to swimming pools only; and
Appendix K Sound Transmission with the STC rating of 45 in sections AK102.1 and AK103 amended to: 50 (45 if field tested).
(Ord. 1328, 2017)
15.04.030: INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED:
A. Commercial: The 2015 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), commercial provisions, prepared by the International Code
Council, Inc., together with any amendments or revisions to the IECC made by the Idaho Building Code Board through the negotiated rulemaking
process, is adopted and shall be the Energy Conservation Code of the Municipality.
B. Residential: The 2012 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), residential provisions, prepared by the International Code
Council, Inc., together with any amendments or revisions to the IECC made by the Idaho Building Code Board through the negotiated rulemaking
process, is adopted and shall be the Energy Conservation Code of the Municipality. (Ord. 1328, 2017)
15.04.040: INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED:
A. Adoption: The 2012 International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), prepared by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted and shall be the Fuel Gas Code
of the Municipality with the following amendments or exemptions:
1. Section 103.2 is not adopted.
2. Section 103.3 is not adopted.
3. Section 303.3 Prohibited Locations. Delete items 3 and 4.
4. Section 621.4 Prohibited Locations. Add group R to the prohibited locations that includes groups A, E, I.
(Ord. 1328, 2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 148/268
15.04.050: INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED:
A. Adoption: The 2012 International Mechanical Code (IMC), prepared by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted and shall be the Mechanical
Code of the Municipality with the following amendments or exemptions:
1. Section 103.2 is not adopted.
2. Section 103.3 is not adopted.
(Ord. 1328, 2017)
15.04.060: INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
A. Adoption: The 2015 International Existing Building Code (IEBC), prepared by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted and shall be the Existing
Building Code of the Municipality with the following amendments or exemptions:
1. Section 103.2 is not adopted.
2. Section 103.3 is not adopted.
(Ord. 1328, 2017)
15.04.070: IDAHO STATE PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
A. Adoption: There is adopted by the City, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing plumbing and construction to protect the health, safety,
and welfare of the public, the 2017 Idaho State Plumbing Code, including appendices A, B, D, E, G, H, I, J, K, and L (herein ISPC), as adopted by
the State of Idaho at IDAPA 07, title 02, chapter 06 with amendments except such chapters, or portions as are herein deleted, modified, amended or
added as follows:
1. Delete ISPC section 104.5.
2. Delete ISPC section 1002.3 and replace with the following:
For trap arms two (2) inches in diameter and larger, the change in direction shall not exceed one hundred eighty (180) degrees without the use of a
cleanout.
3. IDAPA 07.02.06.011.23 is not adopted (amendment to section 610.2).
4. IDAPA 07.02.06.011.08 is not adopted. (Reinstate shower pan test per ISPC 408.7.5.)
5. IDAPA 07.02.06.011.13 (a) is not adopted. (Reinstate freeze resistant yard hydrant backflow.)
6. Delete ISPC Combined Systems section 1104.12.2.2.2.
(Ord. 1328, 2017)
15.04.080: NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
A. Adoption: The City is authorized by Idaho Code section 54-1001B to perform electrical inspections and to adopt an Electrical Code for the City
provided that the National Electrical Code is used as the minimum standard for the adopted Electrical Code. As such, the City adopts the National
Electrical Code, 2017 edition, as adopted and revised by the State of Idaho under IDAPA 07.01.06.011, as the Electrical Code for the City of Post
Falls, which will serve as the basis for electrical inspections conducted by the City. (Ord. 1328, 2017)
15.04.090: INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED:
A. Adoption: The 2009 International Property Maintenance Code prepared by the International Code Council, Inc., and appendix A, are adopted, with
the following additions, deletions or amendments:
1. Section 102.3 is amended to read as follows:
Application of Other Codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or change of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the international building code, international residential code, international fuel gas code, and international
mechanical code. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any requirements of the city's zoning code.
2. Section 102.8 is deleted.
3. Section 103 is deleted.
4. Section 104.4 is deleted.
5. Section 108.1.4 is amended to read as follows:
6. Unlawful Structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or part to be erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.
7. Section 111.1 is amended to read as follows:
Application for Appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 149/268
right to appeal to the building code board of appeals following the procedures set out in the international residential building code in effect at the
time of the appeal, provided that an appeal is filed with the city clerk within twenty (20) days after the decision, notice or order was served. This
appeal process shall not apply to orders issued by a court.
8. Section 111.2 through 111.8 are deleted.
9. Section 112.4 is amended to read as follows:
Failure to Comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine imposed by the jurisdiction in the amount of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for the first violation and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each subsequent violation.
10. Section 202 General Definitions, the definition of inoperable motor vehicle is amended to read as follows:
Inoperable Motor Vehicles. A vehicle which:
1. Does not carry a current valid state registration and license plates, or
2. Cannot be safely operated under its own power, or
3. Is visibly missing any part essential for movement, or on which such essential parts are broken or defective, including but not limited to missing
or flat tires, defective foot brakes, hand brakes, headlights, taillights, horn, muffler, rearview mirrors, windshield wipers or adequate fenders.
11. Section 301.3 is amended to read as follows:
Vacant Structures and Land. All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary
condition as provided herein so as not to adversely affect the public health and safety.
12. Section 302 is deleted.
13. Sections 304.2, 304.3, 304.5, 304.6, 304.7, 304.8, 304.9, 304.13, 304.14, 304.15, 304.16, 304.17, and 304.18 are deleted.
14. Sections 305.3 and 305.6 are deleted.
15. Sections 308 and 309 are deleted.
16. Section 404.5 is deleted.
17. Section 505.4 is deleted.
18. Section 506.3 is deleted.
19. Section 507.1 is deleted.
20. Section 602.1 is amended to read as follows:
Facilities Required. Heating facilities shall be provided in all inhabitable structures.
21. Sections 602.2 through 602.5 are deleted.
22. Section 603.6 is deleted.
23. Section 606 is deleted.
24. A102.3 is amended to read as follows:
Boarding Fasteners. Boarding fasteners consist of a minimum of 6 wood screws of such a length as required to penetrate the assembly.
(Ord. 1328, 2017)
15.04.100: EXCAVATION AND GRADING:
A. Adoption: Appendix chapter 33 of the 1997 Uniform Building Code is hereby adopted to regulate excavation and grading within the City in addition to
any grading requirements contained in the adopted International Building Code and Residential Building Code, except for section 3310, with the
following amendments:
1. All references to the building official in Appendix Chapter 33 of the 1997 Uniform Building Code are amended to read city engineer.
2. Section 3317.6 is amended to read as follows:
City Engineer. The city engineer may review the project at the various stages of work requiring approval to evaluate whether adequate controls are
being exercised by the professional consultants.
(Ord. 1328, 2017)
15.04.110: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Administration: Unless otherwise noted, the building official is the administrative authority authorized to enforce the codes adopted in this chapter.
B. Fees: All fees authorized by the codes adopted by this chapter will be set by resolution of the City Council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 150/268
C. Conflicts: Any provision contained in the codes adopted by this chapter that are more restrictive than the provisions of other local or State codes take
precedence over such local or State Code. (Ord. 1328, 2017)
Chapter 15.09
MANUFACTURED HOMES
15.09.010: INSTALLATION PERMITS:
Placement of manufactured homes, commercial coaches or modular buildings shall require an installation permit. No manufactured home, commercial
coach or modular building shall be placed at a location outside of a manufactured/mobile home park that has not been constructed to withstand a
minimum forty (40) pound per square foot roof snow load, or that the owner has provided for a separate roof cover that is constructed to provide the
required roof load, except that manufactured homes that are already installed in a location within the city limits at the time of the passage of this section
may remain without having to meet the minimum roof snow load set forth herein. All manufactured homes, commercial coaches or modular buildings
allowed to be placed in manufactured/mobile home parks with a snow load capability of less than forty (40) pounds per square foot shall meet HUD
standards applicable at the time of their initial construction and shall meet the minimum snow load requirements established by HUD for the state of
Idaho, and the owner of any such manufactured home must execute a liability waiver agreement holding the city harmless as respects occupancy of the
manufactured home as a condition precedent for obtaining a setting permit within a manufactured home park. Such liability waiver and hold harmless
agreement shall be in a form prescribed by the city attorney. The permit applicant shall supply to the building official the same site information required
from an applicant seeking a building permit for a single-family dwelling and shall pay a permit fee as set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1163 § 1,
2008)
Chapter 15.44
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Article I. Statutory Authorization, Findings Of Fact, Purpose, And Objectives
15.44.010: STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
The legislature of the state of Idaho in Idaho Code 46-1020 through 46-1024, authorized local government units to adopt a floodplain map and floodplain
management ordinance that identifies floodplains and that sets forth minimum development requirements in floodplains that are designed to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.020: FINDINGS OF FACT:
The flood hazard areas of the city of Post Falls are subject to periodic inundation that results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all
of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
A. These flood losses are caused by structures in flood hazard areas, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from
flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
B. Local government units have the primary responsibility for planning, adoption and enforcement of land use regulations to accomplish proper
floodplain management. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.030: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions
in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. Require that development that is vulnerable to floods, including structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety and welfare of
citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
B. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights,
velocities, or erosion;
C. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion;
D. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert floodwaters or that may increase flood hazards to other lands;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 151/268
E. Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which carry and store floodwaters. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.040: OBJECTIVES:
The objectives of this chapter are to:
A. Protect human life, health and property;
B. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric, telephone and
sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
C. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas;
D. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
E. Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
F. Minimize prolonged business interruptions. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
Article II. Definitions
15.44.050: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND TERMS:
Unless specifically defined in this article, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted according to the meaning they have in common
usage.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure on the same lot or parcel as a principal structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate to the principal
structure. An insurable building should not be classified as an accessory or appurtenant structure.
APPEAL: A request for review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of provisions of this chapter or request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to
three feet (3'), and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity
flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. Zone designations on FIRMs include the letters A, AE, V. Also known as the special flood hazard area (SFHA).
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded each year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The water surface elevation during the base flood in relation to a specified datum. The base flood elevation (BFE) is
depicted on the FIRM to the nearest foot and in the FIS to the nearest 0.1 foot.
BASEMENT: The portion of a structure including crawl space with its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING: See definition of Structure.
CRITICAL FACILITY: A facility that is critical for the health and welfare of the population and is especially important following hazard events. Critical
facilities include essential facilities, transportation systems, lifeline utility systems, high potential loss facilities and hazardous material facilities.
DATUM: The vertical datum is a base measurement point (or set of points) from which all elevations are determined. Historically, that common set of
points has been the national geodetic vertical datum of 1929 (NGVD29). The vertical datum currently adopted by the federal government as a basis for
measuring heights is the North American vertical datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, and permanent storage of equipment or materials.
DIGITAL FIRM (DFIRM): Digital flood information rate map. It depicts flood risk and zones and flood risk information. The DFIRM presents the flood risk
information in a format suitable for electronic mapping applications.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: A structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before May 3, 2010.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision where the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 3, 2010.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 152/268
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA): The agency with the overall responsibility for administering the national flood insurance
program.
FLOOD FRINGE: The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway covered by floodwaters during the regulatory flood.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the federal insurance administration or U.S. department of
housing and urban development, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been designated as zone A. The FHBM usually is the
initial flood hazard map.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, issued by the federal insurance administration, delineating the areas of
special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): The official report by the federal insurance administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles,
floodway boundaries and water surface elevations of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
B. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): An elevation that corresponds to the elevation of the one percent (1%) chance annual flood (base flood),
plus any increase in flood elevation due to floodway encroachment, plus two feet (2') of freeboard.
FLOODPLAIN: The land that has been or may be covered by floodwaters, or is surrounded by floodwater and inaccessible, during the occurrence of the
regulatory flood. The riverine floodplain includes the floodway and the flood fringe1.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel
required to discharge and store the floodwater or flood flows associated with the regulatory flood.
FREEBOARD: A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams and the hydrologic effects of urbanization in a watershed.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY: A facility that cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair facilities. The term
does not include long term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG): The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a
structure. Refer to the elevation certificate, FEMA form 81-31, for HAG related to building elevation information.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: A structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a listing maintained by the U.S. department of interior) or preliminarily determined by
the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register.
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or to
a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been
approved by the secretary of the interior, or
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have
been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior, or
2. Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs.
LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC): An official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary
and floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMCs are issued in the following categories:
A. Letter Of Map Amendment (LOMA): A revision based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special
flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property is not located in a
special flood hazard area.
B. Letter Of Map Revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data showing that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood
zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination
that a structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is excluded from the special flood hazard area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 153/268
C. Conditional Letter Of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the
minimum national flood insurance program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does not amend or revise effective flood insurance rate
maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, or flood insurance studies.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed according to sound engineering practices, to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG): The lowest point of the ground level next to the structure. Refer to the elevation certificate, FEMA form 81-31, for
LAG related to building elevation information.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) used for living purposes, which includes working, storage, cooking
and eating, or recreation, or any combination thereof. This includes any floor that could be converted to such a use including a basement or crawl space.
An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not
considered a structure's lowest floor. The lowest floor is a determinate for the flood insurance premium for a building, home or business.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which
base flood elevations shown on a community's FIRM are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: A structure for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 3, 2010, and includes subsequent improvements to the
structure.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A place where the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads) is completed on or after May 3, 2010.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is:
A. Built on a single chassis,
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection,
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty truck, and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects
the external dimensions of a building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of its market value before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of the structure should be: a) the appraised value of the
structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or b) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This
term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. The term does not include
either:
A. A project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications, which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
B. Alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 154/268
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by the Governing Body from a requirement of this chapter.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other specified datum) of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
Article III. General Provisions
15.44.060: LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES:
This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Post Falls. Nothing in this chapter is intended to allow uses
or structures that are otherwise prohibited by the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.070: BASIS FOR AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS) for Kootenai County, dated
May 3, 2010, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) or digital flood insurance rate maps (DFIRM), and other supporting data, are
adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. The FIS and the FIRM are on file at the Office of the City of Post Falls Clerk, 408 N. Spokane
Street. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.080: ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A floodplain development permit shall be required prior to development activities in special flood hazard areas established in section 15.44.070 of this
chapter. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.090: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be:
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State Statutes. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.100: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land
outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the City of Post Falls or by any officer or employee thereof for flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or an
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
Article IV. Administration
15.44.110: DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATOR:
The Public Works Director, or designee, is hereby appointed as the Floodplain Administrator who is responsible for administering and implementing the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1343, 2018: Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.120: PERMIT PROCEDURES:
Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by the Administrator or the
Administrator's designee prior to starting development activities. Specifically, the following information is required:
A. Application Stage:
1. Plans in duplicate drawn to scale with elevations of the project area and the nature, location, dimensions of existing and proposed structures,
earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment and drainage facilities;
2. Elevation in relation to the flood protection elevation, or highest adjacent grade, of the lowest floor level, including crawl spaces or basement, of all
proposed structures;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 155/268
3. Elevation to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed;
4. Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection 15.44.200B of this chapter;
5. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and
B. Construction Stage:
1. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the floodplain administrator an as built certification of the
floor elevation or floodproofing level, using appropriate FEMA elevation or floodproofing certificate, immediately after the lowest floor or
floodproofing is completed. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same.
2. Certificate deficiencies identified by the floodplain administrator shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to work proceeding.
Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections shall be cause for the floodplain administrator to issue a stop work order for the
project.
C. Technical Review:
1. If the community does not have the expertise to evaluate the technical data that is part of the application, the community may contract for an
independent engineering review or require a review by FEMA through the letter of map revision process. The applicant will pay the costs of an
independent technical review.
D. Expiration Of Floodplain Development Permit:
1. All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the commencement of work within one hundred eighty (180) days. A floodplain
development permit shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance unless the permitted activity has been substantially begun and
thereafter is pursued to completion. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.130: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE ADMINISTRATOR:
Duties of the floodplain administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to:
A. Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
B. Review proposed development to assure that necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by
federal or state law, including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334; the endangered species act
of 1973, 16 USC 1531-1544; and state of Idaho stream channel alteration permits, Idaho Code 42, chapter 38 require that copies of such permits be
provided and maintained on file.
C. When base flood elevation data or floodway data are not available, then the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of this chapter.
D. When base flood elevations or other current engineering data are not available, the floodplain administrator shall take into account the flood hazards,
to the extent they are known, to determine whether a proposed building site will be reasonably safe from flooding.
E. Obtain, verify and record the actual elevation in relation to the vertical datum on the effective FIRM, or highest adjacent grade, of the lowest floor
level, including basement, of all new construction or substantially improved structures.
F. Obtain, verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to the vertical datum on the effective FIRM to which any new or substantially improved
structures have been floodproofed.
G. When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the floodplain administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional
engineer or architect.
H. Where interpretation is needed of the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard including regulatory floodway (for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the
interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
this chapter.
I. All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk or his/her designee and shall be open for public
inspection. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
Article V. Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 156/268
15.44.140: SUBDIVISION STANDARDS:
A. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All subdivision preliminary plats/development plans shall include the mapped flood hazard zones from the effective FIRM.
C. Base flood elevation data shall be generated and/or provided for subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including manufactured
home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less.
D. All subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood
damage.
E. All subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.150: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required:
A. New construction and substantial improvements of an existing structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
B. New construction and substantial improvements of an existing structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
C. New construction or substantial improvements of an existing structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
D. All new construction or substantial improvements of an existing structure, including a structure that has been substantially damaged, that includes a
fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by the foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed to be an unfinished or flood
resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit
of floodwater. Designs for complying with this requirement must be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet the following
minimum criteria:
1. Provide a minimum of two (2) openings meeting the following criteria:
a. A total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above the higher of the exterior or interior grade or floor immediately below the
opening;
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in
both directions without manual intervention.
2. To comply with the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles,
limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area.
3. The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms.
4. For crawl space foundation types, construction must follow the guidelines in FEMA TB 11-01, crawl space construction for structures located in
special flood hazard areas: national flood insurance program interim guidance, specifically:
a. Below grade crawl spaces are prohibited at sites where the velocity of floodwaters exceed five feet (5') per second;
b. Interior grade of the crawl space below the BFE must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent exterior grade (LAG);
c. Height of the below grade crawl space, measured from the lowest interior grade of the crawl space to the bottom of the floor joist must not
exceed four feet (4') at any point;
d. Contain an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space.
E. All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other facilities shall be designed and/or elevated
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during flooding.
F. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or to eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
G. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or to eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 157/268
H. On site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid functional impairment, or contamination from them, during flooding.
I. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure that is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if
the nonconformity is minimal in order to meet health and safety standards. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.160: MANUFACTURED HOME STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazard where the flood protection elevation is established, these standards for manufactured homes and recreational
vehicles that are an allowed use under the zoning ordinance shall apply:
A. Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved:
1. On individual lots or parcels.
2. In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions.
3. In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a
manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the
flood protection elevation.
B. Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either:
1. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to the flood protection elevation or one foot (1') above the level of the base flood elevation,
whichever is higher.
2. The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of
no less than thirty six inches (36") above the highest adjacent grade.
C. Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to, and consistent with, applicable state requirements.
D. Manufactured homes placed on solid perimeter walls shall meet the flood vent requirements in subsection 15.44.150D of this chapter. (Ord. 1196 § 2,
2010)
15.44.170: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
Relief from the elevation or dry floodproofing standards may be granted for an accessory structure containing no more than one hundred twenty (120)
square feet. Such a structure must meet the following standards:
A. It shall not be used for human habitation;
B. It shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
C. It shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
D. It shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
E. Services such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to or above the flood protection elevation;
F. It shall meet the opening requirements of subsection 15.44.150D of this chapter. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.180: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazard, recreational vehicles, that are an allowed use or structure under the zoning ordinance, must either:
A. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security
devices, and have no permanently attached structures or addition, or
C. The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements. (Ord. 1196 § 2,
2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 158/268
15.44.190: FLOODWAY STANDARDS:
The following provisions shall apply in a floodway:
A. A project in the regulatory floodway must undergo an encroachment review to determine its effect on flood flows. An encroachment analysis must
include:
1. Determination and documentation that the filling, grading or construction of a structure will not obstruct flood flows and will not cause an increase
in flood heights upstream or adjacent to the project site;
2. Determination and documentation that grading, excavation, channel improvements, bridge and culvert replacements that remove an obstruction,
do not cause increases in downstream flood flows;
3. Certification and documentation by a licensed professional engineer that the project will not result in a rise in flood heights;
4. The administrator may make the encroachment determination for minor projects.
B. An encroachment in the floodway or floodplain that will cause an increase in the base flood elevation in excess of the allowable level must have a
conditional letter of map revision granted by FEMA before it will be permitted. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.200: STANDARDS FOR ZONES WITH BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS:
In special flood hazard areas designated A1-30, AE, AH, A (with estimated BFE), the following provisions are required.
A. New Construction And Substantial Improvements:
1. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, constructed at or above the community's flood protection elevation. If solid foundation perimeter walls are used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the construction
standards in subsection 15.44.150D of this chapter.
B. Nonresidential Construction:
1. New construction or the substantial improvement of any nonresidential structure located in zones A1-30, AE, or AH must be floodproofed if the
new construction or improvement is not elevated. The structure and attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the
flood protection elevation or to one foot (1') above the base flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A
licensed professional engineer or architect must certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for meeting these provisions, and shall provide certification to the administrator.
C. Floodway Undetermined: Where the floodway has not been determined, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development
(including fill) shall be permitted in zones A1-30 and AE on the effective FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot (1') at any point within the community. Applicants of proposed projects that increase the base flood elevation more than one foot
(1') are required to obtain and submit to the floodplain administrator, a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) preconstruction.
D. Application For CLOMR: Postconstruction, the applicant must apply to FEMA for a letter of map revision for changes to the flood hazard map
proposed in the CLOMR.
E. Drainage Paths In AH Zones: In AH zones, drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from proposed and existing
structures. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.210: STANDARDS FOR ZONES WITHOUT BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS AND/OR FLOODWAY (A ZONES):
These standards apply in special flood hazard areas where streams exist but no base flood elevation data have been provided (A zones), or where base
flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated.
A. When base flood elevation or floodway data have not been identified by FEMA in a flood insurance study and/or flood insurance rate maps, then the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state, or other source, in order to administer this chapter. If data are not available from any source, only then subsections B and C of this
section shall apply.
1. Where the floodplain administrator has obtained base flood elevation data, applicants of proposed projects that increase the base flood elevation
more than one foot (1') shall obtain a conditional letter of map revision preconstruction and a letter of map revision postconstruction.
B. No encroachments, including structures or fill, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or fifty feet (50'), whichever is greater,
measured from the ordinary high water mark, unless certification by a licensed professional engineer documents that the encroachment will not result
in any increase in flood levels during the base flood.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 159/268
C. In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the
lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement or crawl space) elevated no less than two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade at
the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the construction
standards in subsection 15.44.150D of this chapter. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.220: STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO ZONES):
Shallow flooding areas designated AO zones, are areas of special flood hazard that have base flood depths of one to three feet (3'), with no clearly
defined channel. The following provisions apply:
A. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated above the adjacent grade at least as high as the flood depth number specified in feet on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). If no flood
depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade. Openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the construction standards in subsection
15.44.150D of this chapter.
B. New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure and attendant
utility and sanitary facilities must be designed to be watertight to the specified base flood level or at least two feet (2') above highest adjacent grade,
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting these provisions, and shall provide certification to the floodplain
administrator.
C. Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from all proposed and existing structures. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.230: ALTERATION OF A WATERCOURSE:
A watercourse is considered altered when any change occurs within its banks.
A. The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development and submit certification by a registered professional engineer that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will
not be diminished.
B. Adjacent communities, the U.S. army corps of engineers and the Idaho department of water resources stream channel alteration program must be
notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a water source. Evidence of notification must be submitted to the floodplain administrator and to the
federal emergency management agency.
C. The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood
carrying capacity will not be diminished.
D. The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data in subsections 15.44.240A and B of this chapter when an alteration of a
watercourse results in the relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of culverts. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.240: REQUIREMENT TO SUBMIT NEW TECHNICAL DATA:
A. For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data reflecting
such changes be submitted to FEMA within six (6) months of the date such information becomes available. These development proposals include:
1. Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
2. Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard area;
3. Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of culverts;
4. Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring establishment of base flood elevations according to subsection 15.44.140C of this
chapter.
B. It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data prepared in a format required for a conditional letter of map revision or letter of map
revision and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall be the responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. 1196 § 2,
2010)
Article VI. Variances And Appeal Procedures
15.44.250: VARIANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 160/268
A. An application for a variance must be submitted to the city of Post Falls clerk on the form provided by the city of Post Falls and include, at a minimum,
the same information required for a development permit and an explanation for the basis for the variance request.
B. Upon receipt of a completed application for a variance, the variance request will be set for public hearing at the next planning and zoning commission
meeting in which time is available for the matter to be heard.
C. Prior to the public hearing, notice of the hearing will be published in the official newspaper of the city of Post Falls at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
hearing. In addition to the newspaper publication, written notice shall be provided to all adjoining property owners.
D. The burden to show that the variance is warranted and meets the criteria set out herein is on the applicant. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.260: CRITERIA FOR VARIANCES:
A. Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements
to be erected on a small or irregularly shaped lot contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood
level. As the lot size increases the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
D. Variances may be issued upon:
1. A showing by the applicant of good and sufficient cause;
2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances.
E. Variances pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or
financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods.
F. Variances should be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.270: VARIANCE DECISION:
The decision to either grant or deny a variance shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for such approval and denial. If the variance is granted,
the property owner shall be put on notice along with the written decision that the permitted building will have its lowest floor below the flood protection
elevation and that the cost of flood insurance likely will be commensurate with the increased flood damage risk. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.280: APPEALS:
The planning and zoning commission shall hear and decide appeals from the interpretations of the administrator.
A. An appeal must be filed with the Post Falls city clerk within fourteen (14) days of the date of any permit denial or interpretation of the administrator.
Failure to timely file an appeal shall be considered a failure to exhaust the administrative remedies. The appeal must set out the interpretation of the
administrator and a narrative setting forth the facts relied upon by the appellant and the appellant's claim regarding the error in the interpretation.
B. Upon receipt of a completed appeal, the appeal will be scheduled for the next available planning and zoning commission meeting to be heard. The
commissioners shall consider the following in ruling on an appeal:
1. All technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, including:
a. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
b. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
c. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effects of such damage on the individual landowner;
d. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
e. The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, where applicable;
f. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
g. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 161/268
h. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
i. The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
j. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site; and
k. The cost of providing government services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
15.44.290: DECISION:
The planning and zoning commission decision on appeal shall be in writing and set out the facts, technical information and the legal basis for the
decision. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
Article VII. Penalties For Violation
15.44.300: PENALTIES:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered unless in full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than one
hundred eighty (180) days, or both. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
city of Post Falls from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2010)
Footnote 1: IC § 46-1021.
Chapter 15.60
CONSTRUCTION SITE REQUIREMENTS
15.60.010: REQUIREMENTS:
The building contractor, during the building construction process, and the developer during the subdivision construction process, shall without further
order and at the contractor's or developer's expense, be responsible to keep the property on which work is in progress free from accumulation of waste
material or rubbish caused by the contractor's or developer's employees or agents or by the work, and at all times during the building or development
construction period shall maintain the public rights of way, easements, sidewalks and the surfaces of streets and roads adjacent to the property being
developed free and clear of construction materials, waste materials or dirt from the construction site. The contractor or developer shall take appropriate
action to control dust caused by the builder or contractor's operations. This shall include, but not be limited to, watering of exposed areas, cleaning of
roadways, etc. This requirement shall be a continuing obligation from the start of construction until a certificate of occupancy is issued or acceptance of
the subdivision improvements, whichever is applicable, is issued. (Ord. 1076 § 1, 2005)
15.60.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall be applicable:
BUILDING CONTRACTOR: The person or company named on the building permit application as the builder.
DEVELOPER: The owner of property being developed through the subdivision process, as named on the subdivision application.
RUBBISH: Junk, trash or debris.
WASTE MATERIAL: Lumber scraps and other building materials, including electrical and plumbing materials, which are no longer intended to be
incorporated into the building. (Ord. 1076 § 1, 2005)
15.60.030: NOTICE:
Prior to initiating prosecution for violation of this chapter, city staff shall attempt to provide notice to contractor. Said notice shall describe the location of
the property as accurately as possible and shall specify the nature of the violation and provide the contractor twenty four (24) hours to abate the
violation. Said notice shall be posted upon a conspicuous place on the building site or delivered to the contractor. (Ord. 1076 § 1, 2005)
15.60.040: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 162/268
If the contractor fails to abate the violation, the contractor shall be guilty of an infraction and upon being found liable therefor shall be subject to an
infraction penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Any violation of this section which continues to exist after a finding of guilt or liability in two (2) or
more prior infraction proceedings shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided in title 1 of this code. Each day that a violation of this chapter
exists may be charged as a separate infraction or misdemeanor violation, as appropriate. (Ord. 1076 § 1, 2005)
Title 16
ANNEXATION REGULATIONS
Title 17
SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 17.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
17.04.010: TITLE:
These regulations shall officially be known, cited, and referred to as the SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF POST FALLS, IDAHO. (Ord. 937
§ 2, 1999)
17.04.020: AUTHORITY:
A. This title is adopted pursuant to the authority delegated to the city pursuant to article 12, section 2 of the Idaho constitution, Idaho Code, title 67,
chapter 65 and title 50, chapter 13.
B. The provisions of this title shall be administered to ensure orderly growth and development and shall supplement and implement provisions of the
Post Falls comprehensive plan, this code, and capital improvements plan. By virtue of provisions of this title the city council, planning and zoning
commission and administrative staff of Post Falls are vested with the authority to review, approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove
applications for the subdivision of land. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.04.030: APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION:
A. These regulations shall apply to all subdivision of land within the city limits and within the city's area of city impact unless exempt as provided in this
title. All divisions of land that were the result of a legal conveyance in compliance with prior subdivision ordinances of the city or county prior to the
effective date hereof, and which meet the requirements of the underlying zoning classification, shall be considered eligible to apply for building
permits. Certain provisions of this title shall apply to the division of any tract of land outside the corporate limits of the city, but within the area of city
impact as agreed between the city and Kootenai County pursuant to Idaho Code.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry out actions constituting the subdivision of land without first complying with the provisions of this title, and
any other provisions of this code.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer ownership of lots constituting the subdivision of land as defined or required by this title before a plat has
been prepared and recorded pursuant to procedures in Idaho Code, title 50, chapter 13, or its successor, and all required improvements have been
constructed and accepted by the city or suitably guaranteed.
D. Exemptions to the subdivision ordinance include:
1. Divisions of a tract of land made pursuant to testamentary provisions, the laws of descent, or similar orders of partition entered by court
proceedings to distribute undivided interests. Parcels of land so created must comply with lot size, frontage, and other standards established by
this code and other applicable laws to be eligible for a building permit or to qualify for establishment of a regulated land use.
2. Divisions made for the purpose of lot line adjustments where no additional lots are created and where the resultant tracts comply with the
requirements of the underlying zoning classification and the following requirements:
a. Existing lots or parcels may not be reduced in size below the minimum lot dimensions established by the applicable zoning district.
b. Adjusted lots or parcels must meet lot coverage requirements and must accommodate minimum required setbacks.
c. Such adjustments may necessitate access and utility easements to be recorded.
d. If lot line adjustments are conducted on "nonstandard" lots then the resulting adjusted lots should better conform to the applicable zoning
standards.
3. Divisions made as the result of exercise of the powers of eminent domain as defined and allowed for by Idaho Code.
4. Divisions made for the expansion or acquisition of road rights of way by a public agency.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 163/268
5. Divisions for conveyance of land to the city, a public entity, homeowners' association or public utility for a public or common purpose (well site,
drainage site, fire station, school site, park site, etc.).
6. Divisions made for cemeteries or burial plots. (Ord. 1147 § 1, 2008)
17.04.040: PURPOSES:
A. Land proposed for subdivision must be suitable and safe for building without danger from flood, or other natural or manmade hazard. Proposed public
improvements shall conform to and not be in conflict with goals and policies set forth in the comprehensive plan and provisions of the capital
improvements plan of Post Falls. It is intended that these regulations shall complement and implement provisions and standards contained in
building codes, zoning ordinances, the comprehensive plan and the capital improvements plan of Post Falls.
B. These provisions are adopted to provide for the orderly division of land within the city, and:
1. To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of Post Falls.
2. To guide the future growth and development of the city in accordance with the comprehensive plan.
3. To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the city and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of
the community's lands.
4. To guide public and private policy in order to provide adequate and efficient streets, water, sewerage, drainage, parks, and other public facilities.
5. To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and use of land, and to ensure
proper legal description and monumentation of subdivided land.
6. To ensure that public facilities and services are available concurrent with development and will have sufficient capacity to serve the subdivision.
7. To ensure that the community will bear no more than its fair share of any cost of providing services by requiring the developer to pay fees, furnish
land, or establish mitigation measures to provide a fair share of capital facilities needs generated by the development.
8. To assure the adequacy of drainage facilities to safeguard the water table, and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources
to preserve the stability and beauty of the community and the value of the land.
9. To provide open space through the most efficient design and layout of the land, while preserving the density of development as established in the
zoning ordinance of Post Falls. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.04.050: ENACTMENT:
In order that land may be subdivided in accordance with these purposes and policies, this title is hereby adopted and shall become effective upon its
passage and publication according to law. All applications for subdivision approval, including final approval, pending on the effective date of these
regulations shall be reviewed pursuant to the ordinances in effect at the time an original completed application was accepted for processing. Pending
applications which are allowed to lapse due to inaction by the applicant shall be governed by this title if refiled after it becomes effective. (Ord. 937 § 2,
1999)
17.04.060: AMENDMENTS:
When necessary to further its purposes, this title may be amended in the manner prescribed by Idaho Code. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.04.070: FEES AND MITIGATION:
A. Reasonable fees sufficient to recover incurred costs may be charged. The city council may, by resolution, adopt fees for services associated with
review, processing and inspection of subdivisions. Such fees shall be reasonably related to the costs of services provided by the city with respect to
the subdivision of land.
B. The city may, as a condition of approval of a subdivision, require mitigation of the effects of development on the ability of the city, and other political
subdivisions, to deliver services without compromising quality or imposing substantial additional costs to current residents. Such conditions may not
exceed the actual impact of the development unless the developer agrees to such conditions. In lieu of such mitigation or as a complement thereto,
the developer may pay fees which will be used by the city to mitigate such impacts. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.04.080: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. It shall be the authority of the planning and building director and the public works director or his/her designees to enforce the provisions of this title.
B. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the
provisions of these regulations, nor shall the city have any obligation to issue certificates of occupancy or to extend utility services to any parcel
created or established in violation of these provisions.
C. Violations of the provisions of this title may be deemed an infraction, or a misdemeanor crime, punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 164/268
this code, with each day such violation continues constituting a separate offense. The city shall have recourse to such civil remedies in law and
equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of these regulations. (Ord. 1152 § 20, 2008)
17.04.090: INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT, AND SEPARABILITY:
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements. More stringent provisions may be
required if it is demonstrated that such standards are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
B. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
as provided in these regulations. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision
of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, the provision which is more restrictive or imposes the
standards most likely to protect the public health, safety and general welfare shall control.
C. These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, private covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where the
provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulation, the requirements of these regulations shall govern
irrespective of private contractual provision.
D. The provisions of this title are severable. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this title is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, the decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this title. The remainder shall be interpreted to further the purposes of this title.
E. The provisions of this title serve to supersede prior ordinances regulating subdivision of land in Post Falls. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.04.100: SAVING PROVISION:
The adoption of these regulations shall not abate any action now pending under prior subdivision regulations or abate, modify, or alter any penalty
accruing or about to accrue.
These regulations shall not waive any right of the city under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption, or vacate or annul any rights
obtained by any person, firm, or corporation by lawful action of the city except as expressly provided for herein. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.04.110: RESERVATIONS AND REPEALS:
Upon the adoption of these regulations according to law, the subdivision ordinance of Post Falls, adopted February 3, 1970, as amended, is hereby
repealed, except as provided above. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.04.120: EXCEPTIONS AND WAIVERS OF CONDITIONS:
A. Where strict compliance with these regulations and/or the purposes of these regulations may be better served by an alternative proposal, the city
council may approve exceptions and/or waiver of conditions to these regulations. The granting of an exception or waiver of conditions shall not have
the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. The city council shall not permit exceptions and/or waiver of conditions unless it
finds, based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case, that:
1. The granting of the exception, or waiver of conditions will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property.
2. The conditions upon which the request is based are unique to the property for which the relief is sought and are not applicable generally to other
property.
3. Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular and unnecessary
hardship to the owner would result if the strict application of these regulations is applied.
4. The change sought will not vary the provisions of the zoning ordinance or comprehensive plan, except that those documents may be amended in
the manner prescribed by law.
B. In approving exceptions or waivers of conditions, the city council may require conditions that will secure the purposes of this title. An exception is any
alternative design, or proposed change in subdivision ordinance requirements that is requested by the developer. The exception requested must be
reviewed as an integral part of the overall review process as outlined in this title. A request for an exception shall be submitted in writing by the
developer at the time that the subdivision application is filed and shall be reviewed along with the subdivision. The request shall specify which
ordinance provisions shall be subject to exception along with the proposed changes and the reasons why the changes are necessary. The planning
and zoning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council specific to the exception requested. The city council shall render a decision
on the requested exception at the time the subdivision is reviewed.
C. A waiver of conditions is a request to change the conditions of subdivision approval as agreed to in the development agreement. A request for a
waiver of conditions must be in writing and submitted to the planning department prior to acceptance by the city of construction improvements or
recordation of the final plat. The request shall specify the condition needing to be waived and the reasons the waiver would be justified. Upon receipt
of a request, the administrator will place the request on the agenda of the planning and zoning commission for hearing. Notice of hearing shall be
provided in the same manner as hearing for subdivision approval. The request will be reviewed and the commission shall make a recommendation to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 165/268
the city council. The council shall review the recommendation and shall render a decision on the waiver of conditions. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
Chapter 17.08
DEFINITIONS
17.08.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the following terms, phrases, and words shall have the meanings given in this chapter:
ADT (AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC): The average number of cars per day that pass by or through a given location.
ADMINISTRATOR: The planning and building director or his/her designee or another official expressly appointed by the mayor or city administrator to
administer all or part of the subdivision ordinance.
ALLEY: A right of way designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street.
APPROACH: The location at which a driveway intersects with a public street.
ARTERIAL, MINOR: The second highest level of road as defined by the Post Falls public works department, and designated on the functional
classification map of the city.
ARTERIAL, PRINCIPAL: The highest level of road as defined by the Post Falls public works department and designated on the functional classification
map of the city.
BERM: A mound of soil, either natural or manmade, used to obstruct views, and/or intercept noise, and/or to provide separation.
BICYCLE LANE: A lane at the edge of a roadway reserved and marked for the exclusive use of bicycles.
BICYCLE PATH: A pathway usually separated from the roadway, designed to be used by bicyclers.
BLOCK: A contiguous group of lots within defined boundaries established by plat.
BUFFER: An area within a property or site, generally adjacent to and parallel with the property line, either consisting of natural existing vegetation or
created by the installation of trees, shrubs, fences, and/or berms, designed to provide separation and limit the view of and/or sound transmission from a
site toadjacent sites.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to arterial streets, including the principal entrance streets of a residential
development and streets for circulation within such a development.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: Land within or related to a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended
for the common use of the residents of the development. It may include structures and improvements.
CONCEPT PLAN: A preliminary presentation and attendant documentation of a proposed subdivision of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose
of discussion and classification.
CONDOMINIUM: An estate consisting of an undivided interest in common real property, in an interest or interests in real property, or in any combination
thereof, together with a separate interest in real property, in an interest or interests in real property, or in any combination thereof. Condominiums may
be of residential or nonresidential nature, both newly constructed or conversions of existing construction, and including multi-unit structures or single unit
structures.
CONDOMINIUM PLAN: A plat of the ground in a condominium project along with the legal description of the individual ownership(s) within the project.
CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT: An agreement that more particularly describes the duties and obligations of the parties for the
development of a subdivision or portion of a subdivision. The purpose is to establish specific construction details and guarantees necessary for the
timely construction of public infrastructure improvements and such other improvements as may be necessary. The construction improvement agreement
may be an addendum to the development agreement.
CUL-DE-SAC: A local street with only one outlet and having the other end for the reversal of traffic movement.
DEDICATION: An act conveying property rights or interests to the public.
DENSITY: A unit of measurement used to calculate the number of dwelling units per acre of land.
DENSITY, GROSS: The number of dwelling units per acre of total land to be developed, including public right of way.
DENSITY, NET: The number of dwelling units per acre of land when the acreage involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses, excluding
public right of way.
DEVELOPER: The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land included in a proposed development. Also, the holder ofan option or
contract to purchase, or any other person having enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT: A project involving substantial property improvement and, usually, a change of land use character within the site; the act of using land
for building or extractive purposes.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: An agreement setting forth the responsibilities of the city and the developer, conditions applicable to the development,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 166/268
and development schedules, entered into after subdivision approval has been granted but prior to construction. Entering into a development agreement
shall be a condition of approval of any subdivision unless no improvements are to be made. A development agreement is typically not required for a
minor subdivision.
DIVIDED STREET: A street having an island or other barrier separating traffic.
EXCEPTION: Any requested alternative design or change in subdivision ordinance requirements.
FINAL APPROVAL: The official action of the city council taken on an approved subdivision after all conditions, engineering plans, and other
requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been installed, or guarantees properly posted for their completion.
FINAL PLAT: The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision which is presented for final approval (see also definition of Plat).
FLAG LOTS: Lots or parcels with less frontage on a public or private street than is required. The panhandle, or "pole" portion of such lot, is an access
corridor to lots or parcels located behind lots or parcels with normally required street frontage. The lot width for a respective zone is the measurement
considered for the front building line.
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A plan outlining general, rather than detailed, development intentions. It describes the basic parameters of a
development proposal, rather than giving full engineering details. As such, it allows general intentions to be proposed and discussed without the
extensive costs involved in submitting a detailed proposal.
GUARANTEE: See definition of Performance Guarantee.
LOT: A parcel of land established by a subdivision plat filed pursuant to Idaho law.
LOT FRONTAGE: That portion of the lot adjacent to street rights of way.
LOT LINE: A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any otherpublic space.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT: A realignment of boundary lines between adjoining lots where no additional lots are created.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A service street which is parallel to a higher order street which, for purposes of safety, provides access to abutting
properties and separation from through traffic.
MEDIAN: That portion of a divided street separating lanes of traffic proceeding in opposite directions.
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING: A document that memorializes the review process and sets forth the conditions of approval of a minor
subdivision that is signed by the administrator and the developer after approval by the city council.
MINOR SUBDIVISION: A subdivision containing four (4) or fewer lots and proposing no new streets, extensions to existing streets, and where
infrastructure is in place or available.
OFF SITE: Not located on the property that is the subject of a development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right of way.
OFF STREET PARKING SPACE: A parking space provided in a parking lot, parking structure, or private driveway.
ON SITE: Located on the lot in question or on the property being developed.
ON STREET PARKING SPACE: A parking space that is located on a dedicated street right of way.
OPEN SPACE: Land, essentially free of structures, set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for the public or private use or enjoyment or for the use
and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space.
PARKING LANE: A lane usually located on the side of streets, designed to provide on street parking.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE: Security in a form that serves as a guarantee that the public or identified common improvements required as part of
the approval of a development are satisfactorily completed.
PLAT: The reproducible and permanent drawing of a subdivision and dedications and easements, prepared for filing and recording with the county
recorder in accordance with state law.
PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE: A meeting among developers, city staff, and other representatives which affords developers the opportunity to
present their proposals informally.
PRIVATE STREET: A street designed, constructed, and maintained on private property.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE: A parcel of land or right of use conveyed or otherwise dedicated to the city, state or county agency, or other public body for
recreational or conservation uses by the public.
SKETCH PLAN: A rough plan of a proposed subdivision showing the general location of streets and lots in enough detail to be reviewed.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land for sale or development,
subject to the exemptions set forth in this title.
SUBDIVISION APPROVAL: The approval status of a subdivision proposal prior to plat approval after specific elements of a subdivision plan have been
approved by the city council.
SUBDIVISION PLAN: A drawing indicating the proposed layout of a development showing locations of rights of way and lots and blocks and related
information that is submitted for preliminary approval.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 167/268
TRIP: A single or one-way vehicle movement to or from a property or study area. "Trips" can be added together to calculate the total number of vehicles
expected to enter and leave a specific land use or site over a designated period of time.
WAIVER OF CONDITIONS: A request for special conditions of subdivision approval as requested by an applicant.
WARRANTY GUARANTEE: A percentage of the cost of public subdivision improvements provided as cash in escrow, bond, or irrevocable letter of
credit to warrant the design, construction materials, and workmanship of the improvements for a specified period of time. (Ord. 1147 § 2, 2008)
17.08.020: INTERPRETATION:
When not inconsistent with the context, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory, unless the express language of the ordinance provides otherwise. Except as
expressly defined herein, words used in this title shall be given their ordinary meaning consistent with common usage and context. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
Chapter 17.12
APPLICATION, REVIEW, AND APPROVAL
17.12.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the procedures for review and action on applications for subdivisions. The procedure is intended to provide
orderly and expeditious processing of subdivision applications. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.12.020: PREAPPLICATION:
A. Prior to submittal of a subdivision application, the developer shall have completed a preapplication conference to review the proposal. The
preapplication conference may be waived by the administrator if the proposal is a minor subdivision.
B. A developer seeking a preapplication conference shall submit three (3) copies of a concept plan to the administrator. The administrator shall schedule
and hold the preapplication conference within thirty (30) days from the submittal date unless additional time is agreed to by the developer. However,
the administrator is encouraged to expedite this process for uncomplicated projects.
C. A preapplication conference allows the developer an opportunity to meet with municipal staff and other representatives deemed appropriate by the
administrator. A representative of the public works department shall be invited to all preapplication conferences. Elected officials and planning and
zoning commission members shall not be a part of this process. Items to be reviewed include, but are not limited to:
1. The general subdivision process.
2. Overall design, lot sizes, and street layout.
3. Preliminary utility design.
4. Conformity to the comprehensive plan.
5. Potential off site impacts/mitigation.
6. Off site/on site improvements.
D. Additional preapplication review may be scheduled by the administrator when, in the collective judgment of staff, the proposed subdivision is
extraordinarily complex, proposes large impacts to city utility systems, or requires extraordinary staff time. Total time for preapplication review shall
not exceed sixty (60) days from the date of submittal unless additional time is agreed to by the developer.
E. At the conclusion of the preapplication review process the administrator shall provide the developer with a written notice to proceed, which includes a
statement of issues, concerns and recommendations deemed important by the city staff based upon the level of information available at the time of
preapplication review. Notice to proceed allows the developer to submit an application for subdivision review. A notice to proceed states that the
proposed subdivision has been reviewed by appropriate staff and agencies and is eligible to submit an application and does not constitute an
approval in any way. Such notice may include comments, concerns, and recommendations of the staff and participating agencies.
F. A notice to proceed is valid for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. The administrator may extend the duration of notice to proceed for an
additional one hundred eighty (180) days if conditions of the preapplication review have not materially changed. After expiration of a notice to
proceed, the developer shall be required to resubmit for a preapplication conference. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.12.030: APPLICATION:
A. Applications for subdivisions shall be submitted and accepted at least forty five (45) days before the date of the public hearing at which it is to be
reviewed. Minor subdivisions may be submitted to the administrator at any time. No application for a subdivision shall be accepted until a
preapplication review has been completed and a written notice to proceed has been issued by the administrator. The administrator may waive the
preapplication conference for a minor subdivision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 168/268
B. The developer shall have the option of seeking the direction of the administrator as to which approvals are required and the appropriate review
process, or of filing an application the developer believes to be appropriate. The administrator's determination shall be presumed to be correct. (Ord.
937 § 2, 1999)
17.12.040: APPLICATION SUBMITTALS:
A. The documents submitted are intended to provide the approving authority with sufficient information and data to assure compliance with all municipal
codes and specifications and ensure that the proposed development meets the design and improvement standards contained in this title.
B. Documents to be submitted are listed and described in this section. In specific cases and for documented reasons, the administrator may waive the
submission of a particular document. All documents must be submitted, unless waived in writing, before an application is accepted and processed.
C. An application for a minor subdivision or subdivision shall include the following:
1. An application form, provided by the planning and building department, filled out completely and signed by the developer.
2. The names and addresses of the owners of real property within three hundred feet (300') of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
The names and addresses shall be prepared by a title company licensed to do business in the state. In the case of a minor subdivision, the
developer must provide the names and addresses of the owners of real property adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
3. Plans of the proposed minor subdivision or subdivision. The number of copies will be determined by the administrator. In addition to the plans, a
reduced copy, eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17") in dimension, shall be provided.
4. Plans submitted shall include the elements listed in table 1 of this section.
5. Preliminary construction plans shall be submitted for all required improvements including sanitary sewer, water supply, storm water collection and
disposal, streets, and any other elements determined to be necessary during preapplication review.
Preliminary construction plans shall be prepared by a civil engineer licensed in the state. Listed elements may be waived, or additional items
added by the city engineer at the preapplication review. The waiving or the addition of elements to the plans shall be in writing and made a part of
the notice to proceed from the preapplication review. A list of elements to be included on preliminary construction plans is found in table 2 of this
section.
TABLE 1
SUBDIVISION PLAN ELEMENTS
Elements Required
Subdivision
Minor
Subdivision
1. Name of subdivision, name and address of the developer. X X
2. A vicinity map. X
3. Existing/proposed zoning. X X
4. North arrow and scale. X X
5. Metes and bounds description with dimensions of the site. X X
6. Acreage of the tract to the nearest tenth of an acre. X X
7. Show location of existing structures and setbacks from proposed lot lines. X X
8. Location, width, and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within or immediately adjacent
to the tract.
X X
9. Location, sizes, elevations, and slopes of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, and other underground
structures within the tract and adjacent thereto.
X X
10. All adjacent streets including swales, curbs, and sidewalks. X X
11. Location and size of proposed water and sewer lines. X
12. Location of existing and proposed streetlights. X X
13. All proposed streets. Show width, curbs, swales, and sidewalks. X
14. Location, dimensions, and area of all parcels of land to be set aside for parks, open space, or other public use
or for the use of property owners in the proposed subdivision.
X X
15. Location, and typical size of proposed lots. X X
16. Any existing or proposed easements and right of way dedications. X X
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 169/268
17. Development phases, or stages, if the project will be done over several years. X
18. Existing vegetation (trees and significant vegetation). X X
19. Streams, watercourses, natural drainage patterns, wetlands, or floodplains. X X
20. Proposed street names. X
21. Topography shall be shown at an appropriate contour interval. Slopes of over 5 percent shall be shown in 5
foot intervals.
X
22. Data table showing number of lots, density in lots per acre, and average lot size. X X
TABLE 2
PRELIMINARY CONSTRUCTION PLAN ELEMENTS
Items Required Subdivision Minor Subdivision
1. Proposed utility infrastructure plans, including sanitary sewer, water, and stormwater management. X
2. Soil erosion and sediment control plan if required by the city engineer. X
if required
X
if required
3. Street and paving cross sections. Indicate slopes in excess of 5 percent. X X
if required
4. Proposed street names. X
5. Street lighting plans. X X
if required
6. Site identification signs, traffic control signs and directional signs. X X
7. Pedestrian circulation plans. X X
8. Right of way landscape plan and details. X X
9. Traffic studies, if required by the city engineer. X
if required
10. Areas of cuts or fills of more than 4 feet. X X
(Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.12.050: MINOR SUBDIVISION REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
A. The purpose of minor subdivision review is to provide a simplified procedure for processing minor subdivisions administratively. Minor subdivisions
are subdivisions of four (4) or fewer lots that create no new streets. The process is intended for the creation of lots along existing streets where
infrastructure is available. A minor subdivision may be part of a planned unit development. A developer proposing to create additional lots on the
same original parcel within a single five (5) year period (multiple minor subdivisions from 1 parcel) as a minor subdivision may be required by the
administrator to use the full subdivision review process if the administrator determines that the multiple minor subdivisions may have a significant
impact on public facilities to be used by the development.
B. Upon receipt of a complete application, the administrator shall schedule a minor subdivision review with staff and the developer. A date for the review
will be established within seven (7) days from the date of application acceptance.
C. The administrator shall provide copies of submitted documents, as necessary, to outside agencies and jurisdictions which, in the opinion of the
administrator, may be affected by the proposal. In addition, the administrator shall provide written notice to the owners of property adjacent to the
property proposed for development. The notice shall provide the adjacent property owners a plan of the minor subdivision, general information
concerning the proposal, and the time frame for submitting written comments. The period of time for comment or response shall not be less than
fourteen (14) days nor greater than twenty one (21) days from the date of notice.
D. The administrator shall act as hearing officer and shall conduct a minor subdivision review, along with appropriate staff, to ensure that all applicable
ordinance provisions are followed or completed. Minor subdivision review shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Review of lot size and dimensions for conformance to the zoning ordinance.
2. Determination that there are adequate provisions to serve the minor subdivision with sewer and water.
3. Review of the location of fire hydrants.
4. Review of the location for the installation of streetlights if determined to be necessary by the public works department.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 170/268
5. Determine if mitigation of any impact is warranted.
6. Define the scope of improvements and dedications required (curb, sidewalk, paving, water, sewer, drainage, easements, right of way dedication,
etc.).
7. Evaluation of the location of potential rights of way to access adjoining parcels.
E. A decision shall be rendered within thirty (30) days of the review unless circumstances require otherwise, such circumstances to be set forth in writing
to the applicant. The administrator shall, by written decision, grant approval, approval with conditions, or deny the minor subdivision. Notice of the
action taken by the administrator shall also be mailed to the owners of real property adjacent to the minor subdivision. A decision to deny shall be in
writing and indicate reasons for denial and indicate what steps are necessary to obtain approval. In the case of approval or approval with conditions,
a memorandum of understanding shall be prepared that details the conditions of approval and the responsibilities of the developer. The
memorandum of understanding shall be signed by the developer and the administrator, and returned to the city within sixty (60) days of release of
the document by the city, prior to proceeding to plat review.
F. The developer or any affected party may appeal the decision of the administrator by filing a notice of appeal with the planning and zoning commission,
with a copy to the administrator, no later than fourteen (14) days after the date of the administrator's decision. The appeal shall set forth in a clear
and concise fashion the basis for appeal. Upon receipt, the city clerk, or designee, shall schedule the appeal for consideration at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the planning and zoning commission at which it can be accommodated. The appellant shall be allowed to make a presentation
under procedures established by the planning and zoning commission. Those opposing the appeal shall have an opportunity to present and rebut
the appellant's presentation. Staff may provide a staff report. The commission, after consideration of the elements of the appeal, shall render a
decision affirming or reversing the administrator's decision within forty five (45) days from the date on which the notice of appeal is filed, unless
circumstances require that more time be taken to reach a decision, the reason therefor being stated in a formal motion by the commission.
G. The approval of a minor subdivision shall be effective for a period of three (3) years from the date the city receives the signed memorandum of
understanding. If a plat is not submitted for approval within the three (3) year period, the minor subdivision approval shall be null and void, and the
developer shall be required to submit a new application. Prior to the expiration date of the effective period, the developer may request an extension,
in writing, from the administrator. The administrator may grant an extension, not to exceed twelve (12) months, upon a showing of good cause by the
developer and upon finding that city regulations have not been changed significantly from those under which the original approval was reviewed. The
Administrator shall decide a request for extension within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the written request. The developer may appeal the
Administrator's decision to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
H. At any time after minor subdivision approval and before submission of a subdivision plat, the developer may request of the Administrator that an
amendment be made to the minor subdivision plan or to conditions of approval. If the proposed amendment is a minor change to the plan and
consistent with conditions of approval, the Administrator may grant the amendment in writing within ten (10) days of the request, unless the
Administrator determines that additional time is necessary for reasons stated in writing. If the amendment is major or involves a change in the
conditions of approval, the Administrator shall schedule a review with staff, and notify adjoining landowners, in his discretion, to review the proposed
amendment. The date for the review shall be scheduled within twenty one (21) days of the request.
I. Upon completion of the review for the amendment request, the Administrator may grant the amendment if the minor subdivision is not substantially
changed and does, in fact, remain a minor subdivision. If the proposed amendment changes the plan to cause it to become a subdivision, the
Administrator shall disapprove the amendment and notify the developer to adhere to the approved plan or to apply for the full subdivision review
process. (Ord. 1171 § 9, 2009)
17.12.060: SUBDIVISION REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
A. The purpose of this process is to provide a timely and efficient review of subdivisions. A "subdivision" is any division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
into two (2) or more lots and accompanied by proposed new streets or extensions to existing streets, and/or extensions of Municipal sewer and water
services. A subdivision may be part of a planned unit development (PUD).
B. The date that a completed application is accepted by the Administrator shall be the official submission date.
C. Upon receipt of an application for subdivision approval along with all of the required submittals, the Administrator shall schedule a public hearing
before the Planning and Zoning Commission. The public hearing shall be held at least forty five (45) days after but within seventy five (75) days of
the official submission date if the agenda of the Planning and Zoning Commission permits. The Administrator shall:
1. Submit a notice for publication in the official newspaper of the City. Such notice shall provide the time and place of the public hearing, a description
of the location of the subdivision, a brief statement summarizing the request, and a vicinity map. Notice shall be published at least fifteen (15) days
prior to the public hearing.
2. Mail notices to all owners of property within three hundred feet (300') of the boundaries of the land proposed to be subdivided or to such owners
as the Administrator believes should receive notice. The developer shall provide a current mailing list of all property owners within three hundred
feet (300') of the boundaries of the subdivision prepared by a licensed title company. Such notice shall provide the time and place of the public
hearing, a description of the location of the subdivision, a brief statement summarizing the request, and a vicinity map. Notice shall be mailed at
least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing.
3. Post notice on the property. Notice shall be twenty two inches by seventeen inches (22" x 17"), on brightly colored paper, mounted on eighteen
inch by twenty four inch (18" x 24") signboards. The notice shall provide the time and place of the public hearing, a brief statement summarizing
the request, and a phone number to call for information. Notice shall be posted on the property at least seven (7) days prior to the public hearing.
4. Notice and request for comment shall be mailed to agencies, utilities, and other jurisdictions deemed appropriate by the Administrator or required
by Idaho Code no later than fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing date. The notice and request for comment shall include application
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 171/268
information, notice of the public hearing date, additional staff comments, and a date by which comments are to be received. A copy of the
application and a copy of the subdivision plan shall be included.
D. After the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission will issue a reasoned decision determining whether the subdivision
plan meets the approval criteria contained in this section and may approve, conditionally approve or deny the application. The commission will issue
its written decision within forty five (45) days after the hearing unless circumstances require a longer review period for reasons set forth in a motion
adopted by the commission. The Administrator shall notify the developer, in writing, within seven (7) days of the action by the commission. Such
notification shall specify any recommended conditions or changes requested and, in the case of approval or approval with conditions, shall prepare a
development agreement for signature by the developer and the City.
E. Any affected party may appeal the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal, along with
the required fee, with the City Clerk no more than fourteen (14) days after the date of the written decision. The Clerk will coordinate with the City
Attorney and relevant City departments to schedule a de novo hearing, using the same notice and hearing procedures, before the City Council to
consider the matter as quickly as the City Council's schedule allows. The City Council will issue a reasoned decision determining whether the
subdivision plan meets the approval criteria contained in this section and may approve, conditionally approve or deny the application within forty five
(45) days of the date of the Council hearing unless circumstances require a longer review period for reasons set forth in a motion adopted by the
commission. The Administrator shall notify the developer in writing of the decision of the City Council and, in the case of approval or approval with
conditions, shall prepare a development agreement for signature by the developer and the City.
F. If a subdivision application is denied by the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council on appeal, a subsequent application for subdividing the
subject property in the same manner cannot be submitted to the City within one year of such denial unless a request for application consideration is
received and approved by the City Council. Such request shall be submitted to the Community Development Department, with the appropriate fee,
and shall provide the City Council with reasons why the application should be accepted and processed. The City Council will review the request,
determine whether or not the proposal is significantly different than the one denied and permit an application to be accepted and processed or deny
the request.
G. Upon approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council on appeal, subsequent review and approval of final construction plans by
the City Engineer which substantially conform to the subdivision plans approved by the City Council, and completion of a construction improvements
agreement, the developer may proceed with construction of the subdivision.
H. No subdivision shall receive a recommendation of approval from the Planning and Zoning Commission or be approved by the City Council unless
findings and conclusions are made that:
1. Definite provision has been made for a water supply system that is adequate in terms of quantity, and quality for the type of subdivision proposed.
2. Adequate provisions have been made for a public sewage system and that the existing Municipal system can accommodate the proposed sewer
flows.
3. Proposed streets are consistent with the transportation element of the Comprehensive Plan.
4. All areas of the proposed subdivision which may involve soil or topographical conditions presenting hazards have been identified and that the
proposed uses of these areas are compatible with such conditions.
5. The area proposed for subdivision is zoned for the proposed use and the use conforms to other requirements found in this Code.
6. The developer has made adequate plans to ensure that the community will bear no more than its fair share of costs to provide services by paying
fees, furnishing land, or providing other mitigation measures for off site impacts to streets, parks, and other public facilities within the community. It
is the expectation that, in most cases, off site mitigation will be dealt with through the obligation to pay development impact fees.
I. The developer shall have construction plans prepared by a civil engineer, licensed in the State. Such plans shall adhere to the design and
improvement standards set forth in this title as well as the City of Post Falls public works standards. No construction of any kind shall take place on
the site of an approved subdivision until final construction plans are reviewed and approved by the Public Works Department, and a development
agreement and a construction improvement agreement are completed and properly approved by the City. Systems reviewed and subject to staff
approval include, but are not limited to:
1. Streets, including curbs and sidewalks.
2. Water delivery system and water supply.
3. Sanitary sewer system.
4. Stormwater collection and treatment plans, including stormwater management during construction.
5. Streetlight plans.
6. Off site improvements (streets, traffic signals, sidewalks, lighting, etc.).
J. Time limits contained within this title are directory. Violation of time limits established in this title shall not be the basis for damages and shall have no
effect on the approval or disapproval of a subdivision. Time limits provided herein may be extended for good cause. The City Administrator shall be
informed of any failure of staff to meet time limits, and shall take appropriate action to ensure that limits are conformed to when circumstances allow.
K. Flag lots may be created, with the approval of the Administrator, so long as sufficient widths for access and utilities are provided. Where multiple flag
lots are created which abut one another, easements may be required by the Administrator over the "pole" portions of such flag lots. (Ord. 1330, 2018:
Ord. 1147 § 3, 2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 172/268
17.12.070: ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS, APPROVAL DURATION:
A. Every subdivision shall conform to zoning and subdivision regulations applicable at the official submission date.
B. The approval of a subdivision shall be effective for a period of three (3) years from the date that the master development agreement is recorded
unless a different time period is requested by the developer, in writing at the time of application, and agreed to by the City Council in a development
agreement. The master development agreement shall be signed and returned to the City within sixty (60) days of release of the document by the
City. By the end of the time period, the developer must have submitted a plat for review and approval. If a plat is not submitted for final approval
within the three (3) year period, the subdivision approval may be deemed null and void by City Council, and the developer may be required to submit
a new application.
C. Prior to the expiration date of the effective period, the developer may request an extension, in writing, from the Administrator. The Administrator may
grant an extension, not to exceed twelve (12) months, upon a showing of good cause by the developer and upon finding that City regulations have
not been changed significantly from those under which the original approval was reviewed. The Administrator shall render a decision to grant or not
grant an extension within thirty (30) days of the date of submittal to the Administrator. The developer may appeal the decision of the Administrator to
the Planning and Zoning Commission.
D. At any time after subdivision approval and before submission of a subdivision plat, the developer may request of the Administrator, in writing, that an
amendment be made to the subdivision plan or to conditions of approval. If the proposed amendment is a minor change to the plan, the
Administrator may grant the amendment in writing. If the amendment is major or involves a substantial change in the conditions of approval, the
Administrator shall schedule a public hearing at least thirty (30) days after the receipt of the request. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold
a public hearing on the proposed amendment in accordance with the same requirements for a public hearing for subdivision approval.
E. A public hearing on a proposed major amendment shall be limited to whether the proposed amendment should or should not be approved. The
commission may approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove any proposed major amendment and may make any modifications in the terms
and conditions of subdivision approval reasonably related to the proposed amendment. The commission shall render a decision on the proposed
amendment within thirty (30) days from the date of the public hearing or in such time as it may determine by motion approved by the commission.
Any proposed changes to conditions shall be forwarded to the City Council for review as would be the case for a new subdivision proposal. Any
changes approved by the City Council shall be included in an addendum to the development agreement for the project. (Ord. 1171 § 10, 2009)
17.12.080: PHASING OR SECTIONALIZING SUBDIVISIONS:
A. Large developments may be phased or sectionalized, to be developed in portions periodically according to a proposed schedule. The developer shall
indicate plans for phasing or sectionalizing at the time of application. The plans, subject to review and approval, shall show proposed phasing
boundaries. Proposed interim or temporary solutions to sanitary sewer and water systems and to the handling of traffic on local streets, collectors,
and arterials within the subdivision, shall be shown on plans submitted along with a narrative description of assurance of completion of permanent
system improvements.
B. The development agreement for each subdivision must ensure that the dedication of public streets and improvements will occur according to the
phasing plans, subject to conditions imposed by the City Council during subdivision review. The Council may, in the interest of public safety and
welfare, require that certain collector streets and arterials be dedicated and constructed in their entirety regardless of the phasing plan.
C. In approving a subdivision to be developed in phases, the City Council may require that the development agreement indicate the phasing plans and
that the amounts calculated for guarantees are commensurate with the phasing plan. The Council may require that the guarantee amount be that
amount calculated for each phase and may defer the remaining amounts of the guarantee until the remaining sections of the subdivision are platted.
D. A phasing plan shall coordinate required infrastructure systems, dedications, off site improvements, open space/parks, landscaping, private utilities,
or other elements of a subdivision. The plan may indicate times or triggering mechanisms for improvements. Agreements between the developer and
the City concerning the acceleration or deceleration of development of the subdivision may be included in the development agreement. Provisions of
a development agreement shall endeavor to the greatest extent possible to tie together the contingencies of development of a phased project. (Ord.
937 § 2, 1999)
Chapter 17.16
PLAT REVIEW AND APPROVAL
17.16.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the procedure for plat review. The procedure is intended to provide orderly and expeditious processing and
recordation of subdivision plats. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.16.020: APPLICATION:
A. Following approval of a subdivision or minor subdivision, the developer shall file, within the permitted time period, an application for final plat review
with the administrator. The application for final plat review shall:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 173/268
1. Be made on forms provided through the planning and building department.
2. Include the entire subdivision, minor subdivision, or section/phase thereof as determined by a phasing plan approved during subdivision review.
3. Comply in all material respects with the approved subdivision or minor subdivision plan, whichever is applicable.
4. Include all formal irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all streets, local government uses, utilities, additional rights of way, parks, and
easements in a form approved by the city attorney.
5. Be accompanied by a public works department certification that all the streets, water system, sanitary sewers, stormwater facilities and other
public improvements, including lot improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision have been completed and accepted as required in these
regulations, or that a guarantee has been submitted in the proper form.
6. Reflect street names as reviewed and approved through the street naming and addressing plan application process, conducted concurrently with
construction plan review and approval. (Ord. 1171 § 11, 2009)
17.16.030: REVIEW:
A. Upon submittal of the plat to the administrator, a staff review will be completed within twenty eight (28) days of acceptance. The review will determine
whether all conditions of the approved development agreement have been completed and whether the final plat is consistent with the approved
subdivision. Such review shall determine that:
1. The plat is in conformance with Idaho Code 50-1301 et seq., plats and vacations.
2. The plat layout is as approved by the city council during subdivision review or as approved by the administrator during minor subdivision review.
3. A development agreement has been completed.
4. Language on the dedication section of the plat reflects what was agreed to in the development agreement and that any dedications are accurately
described.
5. The appropriate signature blocks are on the plat and that all signatures have been obtained except for the signatures of the city engineer, mayor,
city clerk, and county recorder.
6. Construction plans have been reviewed and approved.
7. All required on site and off site improvements have been constructed and accepted by the public works department, or have been suitably
guaranteed.
8. Any mitigation required or determined in a development agreement, has been satisfied or other suitable arrangements approved by the city council
have been made. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.16.040: APPROVAL:
When staff review of the plat is completed and all required terms and conditions are satisfied, staff may forward the plat to the city clerk recommending
that it be submitted to the city council for approval. The city clerk shall place the request for plat approval on the next available city council agenda. The
council shall review the subdivision and plat and, upon a finding that all of the requirements have been satisfied, shall authorize the mayor and the city
clerk to sign. The city engineer's signature shall be the final approval assigned to the plat. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.16.050: RECORDATION:
After the plat is signed by the mayor, city clerk and city engineer, the developer shall record the plat with the county recorder, and provide the
administrator with a reproducible Mylar copy of the recorded plat. Upon recordation of the plat and receipt of a reproducible Mylar of the recorded plat,
building permits may be issued for the lots created. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.16.060: APPLICABLE LAWS:
To obtain plat approval, the developer shall be in compliance with all federal, state and local laws applicable at the time that the plat is reviewed for
approval. The developer shall be in compliance with all local laws and regulations applicable at the time that the subdivision was approved by the city
council, or in the case of minor subdivisions, at the time the minor subdivision was approved by the administrator. A plat shall not be authorized for
recordation if there exists a violation to relevant ordinances or statutes. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.16.070: MODEL HOMES:
In approved residential subdivisions, prior to plat approval but subsequent to construction plan approval and completion of a construction improvement
agreement, and in accordance with terms of the development agreement, a building permit or permits may be issued for the construction of a home or
homes to be used as models. Model homes shall not be open to the public until the public works department has determined that the homes can be
safely accessed. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued, nor shall utilities be used by a resident, until streets and utility systems are accepted by the
public works department and the plat is recorded. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 174/268
Chapter 17.20
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
17.20.010: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
The purpose of a development agreement is to specify certain land use and development regulations that will apply to the relevant property, to establish
conditions of approval, to establish terms of mitigation, to describe the scope of construction improvements, and to foster an understanding between the
city and the developer. It shall be a requirement of compliance with this title that a development agreement and construction improvement agreement be
entered into and approved by the city prior to initiating physical construction of subdivision improvements or recordation of a subdivision plat. (Ord. 937
§ 2, 1999)
17.20.020: GENERAL:
A development agreement shall constitute a binding contract between the developer of a proposed subdivision and the city (the "parties") and shall
contain those terms and conditions agreed to by the parties and those required by this title. The staff of the city, in conjunction with the city attorney, is
authorized to negotiate development agreements on behalf of the city. The development agreement shall be adopted by the city council and recorded in
the county recorder's office. Development agreement requirements may be waived for certain minor subdivisions upon a finding by the administrator that
they will serve no purpose. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.20.030: ELEMENTS OF AGREEMENT:
The development agreement shall be negotiated by the staff and city attorney and approved by the city council prior to signature by the parties. A brief
statement shall be included describing the subdivision, its location, legal description, number of lots, and the date of subdivision approval by the city
council. The agreement shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. Any conditions of approval from the review and approval process.
B. Time limit, and provisions for extension or extinguishing the agreement.
C. Phasing plans, if any, and a description of any required temporary improvements and the terms of those improvements.
D. A description of construction improvements to be installed on site and off site.
E. Covenants, if any, made by the developer to the city.
F. Covenants, if any, made by the city.
G. Details of dedications beyond those required.
H. Addenda, to include a construction improvement agreement as detailed in section 17.20.100 of this chapter. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.20.040: COVENANTS:
The city may, without incurring any liability, engage in action that otherwise would constitute a breach of any covenant contained in a development
agreement if it makes a determination, on the record, that the action is necessary to avoid a substantial risk to public health, safety, and general welfare.
All such covenants shall be subject to an additional proviso that the city may, without incurring any liability, engage in action that would constitute a
breach of any such covenant if the action is required by federal or state law. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.20.050: THIRD PARTY RIGHTS:
Except as otherwise expressly provided in a development agreement, the development agreement shall create no rights enforceable by any party
who/which is not a party to the development agreement. Purchasers of lots in approved subdivisions are not deemed to be third party beneficiaries of
development agreements. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.20.060: LIMITATIONS ON LIABILITY:
Any breach of a development agreement by the city shall not give rise to monetary damages, but shall be enforceable only by resort to an action for
specific performance. No provision of any development agreement which is contrary to law may be enforced. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.20.070: DEVELOPER'S COMPLIANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 175/268
Performance of the city's duties pursuant to a development agreement are expressly conditioned upon the developer's substantial compliance with each
and every term, condition, provision, and covenant of the agreement, and all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. (Ord. 937 § 2,
1999)
17.20.080: AGREEMENT TO RUN:
A development agreement shall run with the land and bind all successors, heirs, and assignees of the developer. The development agreement, including
addenda, shall be filed with the county recorder to give notice to any prospective purchaser. The development agreement would expire at the agreed
upon date set forth within the agreement or, when the city shall file a release with the county recorder, when the terms of the agreement have been
satisfied or are no longer valid. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.20.090: AMENDMENTS TO THE AGREEMENT:
Should amendments to the agreement be necessary and if all parties are in agreement, an addendum to the agreement shall be negotiated subject to
review by the city attorney for signature of the parties. Either party may propose amending the agreement by notifying other parties to the agreement in
writing of the nature of the amendment and the reasons why the amendment is necessary. The party requesting the amendment shall be responsible for
any costs associated with the preparation of the addendum to the development agreement, unless the parties agree to share the costs. Such cost
sharing arrangement shall be determined and agreed to, by the parties, prior to negotiating the addendum to the agreement. Amendments must comply
with the formalities of approval, including approval by the city council, which govern original development agreements. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.20.100: CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT:
A. An addendum to, or component of, a development agreement that sets forth the specific public improvements to be constructed in the subdivision,
the manner and timing of the construction, duties and responsibilities of the developer including the developer's duty to pay for the costs of
operations of the streetlights within the development for a period of one year following the acceptance of the public improvements by the city council,
estimated costs of the improvements, performance guarantee, maintenance, warranty, and standards shall be deemed a construction improvement
agreement.
B. A construction improvement agreement shall be reviewed by the city attorney prior to the signature of the parties (city and the developer). The
construction improvement agreement may be completed in conjunction with the development agreement or subsequent to the development
agreement.
C. A construction improvement agreement shall be executed prior to the commencement of any construction related to the subdivision. Staging or
mobilization of equipment or establishing a temporary construction office or equipment storage yard shall not be considered to be "construction" for
purposes of this section. Initiating actual construction prior to execution of a construction improvement agreement by all parties shall constitute a
violation of this title.
D. A street naming and addressing plan shall be submitted for review and approval, concurrently with construction plans, in compliance with title 12,
chapter 12.24 of this code and any associated street naming and addressing guidelines. Such review shall ensure that proposed streets and
addresses meet city and county regulations, that appropriate street signage is installed, and that streets as identified on final subdivision plats mirror
such. (Ord. 1171 § 12, 2009)
Chapter 17.24
ASSURANCE OF COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
17.24.010: COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
All required improvements shall be completed within one year of the effective date of the construction improvement agreement unless a different time
period is approved by city council. Before a plat is signed by the city engineer, the developer shall be required to complete all street, sanitary, and other
public improvements, including lot improvements on individual lots as required in these regulations and as approved by the city council, or the developer
shall provide a suitable performance guarantee. No building shall be occupied, nor shall any use be established in a subdivision, until all necessary
improvements have been installed and accepted for maintenance by the city or other public service providers. The purpose of this requirement is to
ensure to the greatest extent possible that the health and safety of the public and the residents of new subdivisions are protected. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.24.020: PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE:
The developer may guarantee to complete all of the agreed upon improvements within one year of the effective date of the construction improvement
agreement or within such alternative time period approved by city council by providing to the city one or more of the following instruments in an amount
equal to at least one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the value of improvements to be guaranteed:
A. Performance Bond: The developer may provide a performance bond from a company qualified by law to act as a surety in the state. The bond shall
be in the form approved by the city and name the city as the obligee and the developer as principal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 176/268
B. Escrow: The developer may deposit funds in an escrow with a bank or financial institution qualified by law to do business in the state. The
disbursement of the escrow funds shall be governed by an escrow agreement in a form approved by the city.
C. Irrevocable Letter Of Credit: The developer may cause a bankor financial institution, qualified by law to do business in the state to issue an
irrevocable letter of credit in a form approved by the city. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.24.030: GUARANTEE AMOUNT:
A. The performance guarantee amount shall be one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated costs of all improvements, not including those to be
constructed by private utilities. The developer's engineer shall have prepared, documented, and certified each cost estimate. The estimated costs
shall be submitted by the developer to the city engineer for approval. The estimated cost of all improvements shall be the sum of the estimated cost
approved by the city engineer.
B. If the developer is not in default under the terms of the development agreement, the city may allow a proportionate reduction in the amount of the
performance guarantee in increments not less than twenty five percent (25%) of the surety amount. The amount of the performance guarantee shall
always be greater than or equal to the amount of the cumulative required warranty amount. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.24.040: RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE:
As soon as any one of the following occurs, the city may release any performance guarantee which has not been used or encumbered under provisions
of the development agreement or this code.
A. The final acceptance of all improvements and the posting of warranty guarantee as set forth in this code.
B. The expiration of the warranty period as provided in this code. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.24.050: DEDICATIONS:
Acceptance of dedication of streets or other public areas or facilities shall be by the city council after review and recommendation by the city engineer.
Any dedications for property and/or public improvements shall be free and clear of all liens and encumbrances. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.24.060: MAINTENANCE:
The developer shall perform capital maintenance of each required public improvement until the city has expressly accepted the improvements. Details of
the maintenance provisions shall be included in the construction improvement agreement. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.24.070: WARRANTY OF IMPROVEMENTS:
A. The developer shall warrant the design, construction materials, and workmanship of the improvements installed pursuant to this title against any
failure or defect in design, construction, material, or workmanship for a period of one year, except for sewer systems which shall be warranted until
such time as the number of active users on the system reaches twenty percent (20%) of the approved user design capacity, but not less than one
year or more than three (3) years.
B. This warranty shall cover all direct and indirect costs of repair or replacement, and damage to the property, improvements, or facilities of the city or
any other person, caused by such failure or defect or in the course of repairs, any increase in cost to the city of operating and maintaining a city
improvement resulting from such failures, defects, or damages.
C. The warranty shall not extend to any failure or defect caused solely by changes in design, construction, or materials required by the city as a
deviation from regular requirements established by this title. (Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
17.24.080: WARRANTY GUARANTEE:
To secure the developer's performance of the warranty of improvements, the performance guarantee provided by the developer pursuant to this code
shall remain in effect until the end of the warranty period or the developer shall provide a warranty guarantee by one or more of the instruments
described above by the following table:
Actual Cost Of Improvements Percent To Secure Warranty
Less than $500,000.00 10 percent
$500,000.00 to $1,000,000.00 7.50 percent
Over $1,000,000.00 5 percent
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 177/268
(Ord. 937 § 2, 1999)
Chapter 17.28
DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
17.28.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of subdivision design is to create a functional and attractive development that is consistent with the community's vision, goals and policies
found within the comprehensive plan and design goals set forth in this chapter or other land use ordinances. Design standards are intended to provide
direction and ensure that subdivision improvements will be compatible with the city's public utility and transportation systems. An express grant of
discretion to vary from these standards is empowered to the city engineer. To promote this purpose, subdivisions shall conform to the following general
guidance standards. (Ord. 1065 § 1, 2005)
17.28.020: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
General requirements are those that apply to all subdivisions proposed within the corporate limits of the city of Post Falls and the area of city impact.
A. Conformance To Applicable Rules And Regulations: In addition to the requirements established in these regulations, all subdivisions shall comply with
the following:
1. All applicable statutory provisions.
2. This code and adopted building codes.
3. The comprehensive plan of the city of Post Falls.
4. Any rules administered or applied by the department of environmental quality and Panhandle health district and/or appropriate state agencies.
5. The rules and regulations of the local highway district and the Idaho department of transportation, if the subdivision or any lot contained therein
abuts a state highway or highway district road.
6. The construction and design standards and regulations adopted by the city of Post Falls.
B. Subdivision Name: The proposed name of a subdivision shall not duplicate, or closely approximate, the name of any other subdivision in the city, the
area of city impact, or Kootenai County. Subdivision naming shall be reviewed and approved by the community development department.
C. Addresses: Street addresses shall be assigned in accordance with the addressing system in effect within the city. Addresses will be assigned prior to
issuance of any building permit on any lot.
D. Street Names: Names for new streets may be proposed by the developer and must be approved as part of subdivision approval. Street names shall
not duplicate existing street names unless the proposed street is a continuation of or is in alignment with an existing street. Street names shall be
reviewed and approved by Kootenai County prior to being entered into the emergency service 911 system. Street names shall be easily pronounced,
not to be confused with similar words. (Ord. 1065 § 1, 2005)
17.28.030: LOTS AND TRACTS:
A. Lot Dimensions: Lot dimensions shall comply with the standards set forth within the Post Falls zoning ordinance. Where lot sizes are more than
double the minimum required area for the zoning district, the potential for further subdivision and impacts of further subdivision shall be considered in
the review.
B. Corner Lots: Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets. Lots
abutting a mid block pedestrian walkway shall be treated as a corner lot, with regard to setbacks. The setback shall be measured from the walkway
easement.
C. Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to street centerlines or radial to curved street lines.
D. Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary, due to restricted access along collector and arterial streets, or
to overcome specific site constraints.
E. Tracts: Parcels of land within a subdivision set aside for nonoccupancy shall be designated as tracts. (Ord. 1065 § 1, 2005)
17.28.040: STREET CIRCULATION AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 178/268
A. Street Dedication, Location And Arrangement: All collector and arterial streets and associated rights of way shall be dedicated, designed, and
constructed to conform with the location and arrangement indicated within the transportation element of the comprehensive plan, the transportation
master plan, and provisions set forth within this chapter. All other street classifications shall be located to provide for roadway continuity within the
community.
1. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of existing streets in the adjoining areas. Street layout
shall conform to the most advantageous development of the subject property and adjoining areas.
2. To facilitate continuity of streets and/or utilities to serve adjacent properties, the city may require dedication of rights of way and/or easements
beyond the current phase of a multiphase development.
3. Half streets shall be generally limited where allowed rights of way shall be provided and streets shall be constructed to provide for street centerline
plus ten feet (10') on the opposite side of the centerline. Along collectors and arterials that are not fully developed, rights of way shall be provided
and streets shall be constructed to provide for street centerline plus ten feet (10') on the opposite side of centerline.
4. Stub streets will be required where a subdivision is located adjacent to undeveloped property and street connections would provide for
transportation continuity between the properties.
5. Streets shall be arranged and located in relationship to existing or planned topography to result in usable lots, safe streets, and acceptable
gradients.
6. Traffic calming measures may be incorporated into design of local streets, and some minor collectors where approved by the city engineer.
Acceptable calming measures include roundabouts, traffic circles, landscaping, curb extensions, and mid block medians.
7. To facilitate vehicle and pedestrian movements, enhance emergency service, and reduce city maintenance, the use of cul-de-sacs should be
limited to portions of developments in which street continuity is not foreseeable due to property configurations.
8. Private streets may be approved as a part of a PUD or subdivision, or by the city council, if: a) the proposed street(s) are not required to provide
continuity or add circulation to the overall city transportation system, and b) emergency service is not compromised. Private streets and associated
streetlights shall meet city public street and illumination standards.
9. Public alleys shall be avoided except where deemed necessary by the council for the continuation of existing utilities. Private alleys may be
allowed, if provisions for maintenance have been established.
10. Provisions for postal delivery services shall be incorporated into the design of all subdivisions.
B. Specifications:
1. Streets shall be designed to comply with city standards as approved by city council and on file within the city engineering division, and the current
editions of the Idaho "Standards For Public Works Construction", and American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO)
"Geometric Guidelines". Street signage, striping and traffic control shall be designed to comply with the latest version and exceptions of the
"Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD) as adopted per Idaho Code and city standards, as approved and on file with the city
engineering division. Streets or highways under the jurisdiction of other agencies shall be designed to the current standards of those agencies.
2. Street and rights of way width shall conform to the following table:
TABLE B-1
Street
Classification
Rights Of
Way1
Street
Width3
Curb
Requirements5
Local residential
(parking 1 side)
60 feet 28 feet Yes
Local rural residential2
(without on street parking)
65 feet 28 feet No
Local residential
(parking both sides)
65 feet 32 feet Yes
Local residential collector
(with parking both sides)
70 feet 36 feet Yes
Local commercial/ industrial 75 feet 40 feet Yes
Minor collector 80 feet 45 feet Yes
Major collector 80 feet 54 feet Yes
Minor arterial (3 lane) 110 feet 48 feet Yes
Minor arterial (5 lane) 110 feet 73 feet Yes
Principal arterial 110 feet 64 feet Yes
Private roads4
(without parking)
- 24 feet No
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 179/268
Notes:
1. Rights of way may be reduced by 10 feet if appropriately located community swales are used in place of continuous street side swales. In no
case shall rights of way be less than 55 feet.
2. Local rural residential may be allowed for subdivisions with average lot size and street frontages of 1 acre and street frontage of 120 feet.
3. Street width is measured to the face of curb, or edge of asphalt.
4. Private roads with parking shall meet local streets standards.
5. Rolled curb is permitted only on residential designated streets.
3. Other rights of way and street sections may be adopted by the city for special circumstances to meet overall city transportation needs.
a. Street Grades: All new roadways shall be designed with a minimum longitudinal grade of 0.8 percent. Street grades matching into existing
roadway conditions may be allowed minimum grades of 0.5 percent when constructed with a concrete gutter. Maximum street grades shall be
eight percent (8%) with the exception of arterials, which shall be six percent (6%). Private streets shall be 0.5 and ten percent (10%) minimum
and maximum, respectively.
b. Street Cross Slopes: Cross slopes for new roadways shall be designed between 1.5 to 2.25 percent. Roadways with an inverted crown shall be
designed to a one percent (1%) cross slope. Street cross slopes may be varied from one to 3.5 percent to achieve minimum longitudinal grades
and provide for proper drainage when widening or matching into existing roadways.
c. Street Alignment:
(1) Minimum centerline radius shall be one hundred seventy five feet (175') for local streets, with design speeds of twenty five (25) miles per
hour; collectors and arterials shall be based upon the design speeds (35 mph - 475 feet, 40 mph - 675 feet, 45 mph - 950 feet), as determined
by the city engineer. Private streets based upon twenty (20) miles per hour design speeds shall be one hundred feet (100'). For tangent
deflections of ten degrees (10°) or less, horizontal curves are not required.
(2) Vertical curves shall be designed to the minimum "k" values as presented below. Grade changes of two percent (2%) or less may be
designed as a grade break, without a vertical curve.
Design Speed Crest "k" Sag "k"
201 10 20
25 12 26
35 29 49
40 44 64
Note:
1. Private streets.
(3) Reverse curves shall be separated by a tangent length of one hundred feet (100') for collectors and arterials. For local streets a tangent
length is not required between reverse curves.
(4) Permanent cul-de-sac designs shall be no longer than eight hundred feet (800') in length measured from the center of cul-de-sac to the
intersecting street. Cul-de-sacs shall provide a one hundred foot (100') diameter right of way and be constructed to provide an eighty foot (80')
diameter at the face of curb.
(5) Stub streets over one hundred fifty feet (150') in length shall have a developed temporary turnaround acceptable to the city and the local fire
district.
d. Shoulders And Side Slopes:
(1) On roadway sections where curb and gutter are not provided, a two foot (2') aggregate shoulder with a cross slope equal to the paved
roadway shall be provided. An additional side slope extending at least eight feet (8') from the edge of pavement shall be provided with a slope
not exceeding four (4) horizontal to one vertical.
(2) Within all rights of way and easements intended for roadways, pedestrian or bicycle facilities, the maximum allowable side slope is three (3)
horizontal to one vertical. If pedestrian or bicycle facilities are to be located near the outside edge of easements, the three (3) horizontal to one
vertical side slope shall extend at least five feet (5') beyond the edge of said facilities. Where existing topography makes the maximum
allowable side slope impractical, alternative designs may be considered subject to approval by the city engineer.
e. Roadside Clear Zones: An unobstructed area to aid in the recovery of errant vehicles and facilitate enhanced visibility of pedestrians and traffic
control devices shall be provided adjacent to all new roadway construction or roadway widening projects. Where curbing exists, the clear zone
shall extend two feet (2') behind the face of curb; when curbing is not present, the clear zone shall extend eight feet (8') from the edge of
pavement or fog line, whichever is less. Prohibited items within the clear zone include, but are not limited to, utility poles and pedestals, trees or
shrubs, traffic signals and light poles. Postal boxes installed in conformance with U.S. postal regulations shall not be deemed an obstruction.
C. Intersections:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 180/268
1. Intersection Of More Than Two Streets: The intersection of more than two (2) streets at one point shall be avoided, except where it is
impracticable to secure a proper system otherwise.
2. Angles: Streets shall intersect one another at an angle as near to a right angle (90°) as possible, and no intersections of streets at angles less
than sixty degrees (60°) shall be approved. Street intersections between sixty degrees (60°) and eighty degrees (80°) shall utilize roadway
markers and striping to orient vehicles near ninety degrees (90°).
3. Street Knuckles: Where two (2) streets intersect and do not form a tee or a cross intersection, a street knuckle shall be provided with a minimum
roadway radius of forty feet (40') from the point of intersection to the face of curb.
4. Centerlines: Street centerlines shall be offset at a minimum, according to the following1:
Principal arterial 1/4 mile
Minor arterial 500 feet
Major collector and less 250 feet
Note:
1. The city engineer may waive the spacing requirements, due to special circumstances that impede reasonable development and do not create
safety difficulties.
5. Flat Grades: A nearly flat grade with appropriate drainage slopes is desirable within intersections. This flat grade (0.5 percent to 2.0 percent) shall
be extended one hundred feet (100') each way from the intersection. An allowance of four percent (4%) in rolling terrain (as defined by AASHTO,
"Rolling terrain is any combination of vertical and horizontal alignment that causes heavy vehicles to reduce their speeds substantially below those
of passenger cars, but does NOT cause heavy vehicles to operate at crawl speeds for any significant length of time") will be permitted, subject to
the judgment of the city engineer.
6. Curb Returns: Curb returns shall be designed to accommodate the street classification, per the following table:
Street Classification Curb Return Radius (Feet)
Minimum curb return radius with
typical crown:
Principal arterial 35 _ 50
Minor arterial 35 _ 50
Major collector 30
Minor collector 30
Local and private 20
7. Access Management: The minimum spacing of approaches shall be based upon the functional classification of the roadway being accessed and
shall not be less than the figures provided in the following table:
Street Classification Spacing Between Approaches
Principal arterial 300 feet
Minor arterial 200 feet
Major collector 150 feet
Minor collector 75 feet
Local (residential) and private Access to each lot permitted
Local (commercial/industrial) 50 feet
The spacing standards are for full access. Restricted access (right in, right out) shall be half the amount shown on the table, but in no case
less than seventy five feet (75').
a. Approach Location: Access locations shall take into consideration existing and projected traffic volumes, accident history, internal circulation,
drainage requirements and physical features of lands adjoining the roadway.
Drive approaches on opposite sides of all roadways except local (residential) shall be offset to produce T-intersections, unless center medians
exist.
Drive access locations within the functional area of an intersection, defined as the area beyond the physical intersection that comprises the
required peak hour vehicle queue length, may be limited to restricted access only (right in, right out).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 181/268
b. Restricted Access: "Restricted access" is defined as the prohibition of one or more movements within an intersection or at an access location.
Where restricted access is required, a physical barrier that inhibits the restricted movement and signage shall be provided. (Ord. 1147 § 4, 2008)
17.28.050: PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS:
Rights of way or easements for pedestrian walkways shall be required where necessary, to provide convenient pedestrian circulation throughout
subdivisions to major roadways, schools, parks, shopping areas, or other pedestrian attractions. The dedicated pedestrian area shall be at least fifteen
feet (15') in width.
A five foot (5'), minimum, concrete sidewalk shall be provided along both sides of all roadways; except arterials, where the minimum sidewalk width shall
be six feet (6'). Wider sidewalk widths may be required in commercial zones, along principal school routes, or in other areas where significant pedestrian
volumes are anticipated.
Sidewalks along local rural residential streets shall not be required. However, a ten foot (10') multiuse trail shall be provided along at least one side of
the roadway.
Sidewalks or a paved pathway shall be provided along at least one side of private roadways.
When improvements are located along a section of roadway identified as a bicycle and pedestrian route within the city's transportation master plan, a
ten foot (10') asphalt multiuse trail may be required by the city engineer in lieu of sidewalk. A ten foot (10') asphalt multiuse trail may also be substituted
for concrete sidewalk, when proposed as a part of a planned recreational system within a development.
A grassy swale or landscape planting area shall be located to provide a separation between the edge of pavement or curb and the sidewalk or multiuse
trail. The minimum separation shall be six feet (6'), except in cases where the city engineer deems that placement of the sidewalk or trail adjacent to a
concrete curb is warranted, based on similar facilities in the immediate vicinity, constraints with available rights of way or conflicts with existing buildings.
(Ord. 1065 § 1, 2005)
17.28.060: UTILITY, SIDEWALK AND DRAINAGE EASEMENTS:
A. Utility, sidewalk and drainage easements shall be provided along all rights of way. The easements will vary between ten feet (10') and fifteen feet (15')
depending upon the street design and available rights of way. The fifteen foot (15') easement is to be provided when a multiuse path is required. Five
foot (5') utility easements shall be provided along side and rear lot lines when requested by the utility companies.
B. Additional drainage easements may be required to accommodate designs utilizing common drainage swales. The easement area shall encompass
the entire swale area (including side slopes), plus any additional area required by the city for access and maintenance purposes.
C. Upon private roadways, an easement encompassing the street lot shall be granted to the city, other political subdivisions, and public and private
utilities, to provide for the construction, operation and maintenance of utilities. The city may require additional public access easements for sidewalks
and/or multiuse trails, in order to maintain pedestrian and nonvehicular connectivity. (Ord. 1065 § 1, 2005)
17.28.070: STORM DRAINAGE:
A. Storm drainage shall be designed to accommodate the design storm event and provide for the first half inch of runoff per the city's stormwater
management ordinance. The treatment methodology shall comply with the Idaho department of environmental quality's best management practices
for the Rathdrum Prairie aquifer area, primarily utilizing grassy swales. Grassy swales may be continuous street side, community type designs, or a
combination of both types; however, all swales shall be designed to be easily visible and accessible for maintenance.
B. Swales are to be irrigated and provided with grass turf or other vegetation (including trees) that will survive in an occasional submerged or saturated
condition. The design and placement of grassy swales shall take into consideration their effect on the overall site appearance and landscaping. (Ord.
1065 § 1, 2005)
17.28.080: UTILITY DESIGN AND STANDARDS:
A. City sanitary sewer and water design shall be in conformance with the city's master water and water reclamation master plans and construction
standards. Utility designs shall additionally conform to local standards as set forth by city ordinances, and rules enforced by the department of
environmental quality, Panhandle health district, and other appropriate agencies.
B. City utilities shall be installed and extended to carry service beyond the proposed development through extensions to property lines and by providing
appropriate line size, depth and location. When city utility extensions are required to serve to and along developments, main or service laterals to
adjoining properties are to be provided per the city's direction.
C. Dry utilities (electrical, cable, gas, etc.) shall be located within the right of way or easements per city standard construction details. Dry utilities shall
be coordinated to minimize the use of available rights of way or easements, and shall be installed to accommodate future roadway expansions. (Ord.
1251, 2013)
17.28.090: STREET TREES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 182/268
A. Street Trees Required: Street trees are required within the rights of way along both sides of all streets, in accordance with the approved street tree
plan, unless developer elects the alternative provided in section 17.28.091 of this chapter. Trees may be massed, spaced evenly along the street, or
both. When trees are spaced evenly along the street, spacing shall conform to spacing and location standards in the Post Falls "Tree Standards
Manual". The type of tree shall be selected from the approved street tree list found within the city of Post Falls "Tree Standards Manual". Class II and
class III trees defined within the manual shall be used in all areas where there are not overhead utility conflicts. Trees that are not on the approved
list may be permitted by the urban forester.
B. Street Tree Plan: A street tree plan, prepared by a landscape architect licensed in the state of Idaho, shall be submitted for review and approval prior
to commencement of any subdivision construction. The plan shall identify type, size and location of trees and planting and construction details.
Where existing trees are to be retained, the plan should indicate proposed methods of protection during construction.
C. Tree Locations: Tree locations shall not interfere with utilities, sidewalks, intersection and drive approach visibility, or streetlights. Plans may be
altered to accommodate driveways or other elements upon review and approval by the city.
D. Planting: The method and timing of tree planting shall be indicated with the subdivision application, reviewed and approved, and placed in the
development agreement.
E. Irrigation And Maintenance: Street trees shall be irrigated and maintained by the adjacent property owner, a homeowners' association, a combination
thereof, or as determined during subdivision review and placed into the development agreement. (Ord. 1217, 2011)
17.28.091: STREET TREE ALTERNATIVE:
As an alternative to installing street trees at the time of development of the subdivision, the developer of a subdivision may elect to pay at the time of
final plat application the appropriate fee, determined by resolution of the city council pursuant to title 12, chapter 32 of this code, for each required tree.
Should a developer choose to elect this alternative the requirements of section 17.28.090 of this chapter to install the trees shall not be applicable and
the city will be responsible for the purchase, installation in conformance within the Post Falls tree planting standards, and warranty of street trees.
To elect this alternative, a developer shall submit a written request to exercise this alternative at the time of subdivision application.
A. Number Of Trees Required: The number of trees required for a plat, and for which the fee will be calculated, is determined as follows:
1. Residential subdivisions: The number of trees shall be one tree per interior lot and two (2) trees per corner lot. For rights of way along the
perimeter of the subdivision, the number of trees is calculated at one tree per fifty feet (50') of frontage minus the widths of intersecting streets, and
rounded to the nearest fifty foot (50') increment.
2. Commercial or industrial subdivisions: The number of trees is one per fifty feet (50') of street frontage minus the widths of intersecting streets and
drive approaches. Where drive approaches are not indicated on the plat, an assumption will be that each lot would have at least one drive
approach of twenty four feet (24') in width.
3. The public services department has the authority to modify the number of trees calculated to account for existing trees to be retained and to take
into account and accommodate utilities and utility structures that are located within the rights of way.
B. Irrigation And Maintenance: Street trees, installed by the city, shall be irrigated and maintained by the adjacent property owner or a property owners'
association, or as otherwise determined during subdivision review, which may include a combination of adjacent property owners and a property
owners' association, and made a part of the development agreement. (Ord. 1217, 2011)
17.28.100: FENCING:
A. Residential subdivisions, developed adjacent to railroad rights of way, shall include a six foot (6') high barrier fence (solid fencing or chainlink)
adjacent to the right of way to enhance safety.
B. Fencing may be required for all subdivisions where concerns for public safety are determined in the subdivision process due to either the nature of
the proposed subdivision or the adjacent property uses. (Ord. 1065 § 1, 2005)
17.28.110: RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION DESIGN:
A. Residential Lot Access: Residential lots shall not front upon or directly access streets with a classification of minor collector or higher. Exceptions may
be requested and granted in the approval process to accommodate existing uses. Every lot shall have sufficient access to accommodate emergency
vehicles. If driveway access locations are indicated within the subdivision plans, they shall comply with driveways and curb cut standards in this
code.
B. Residential Lot Frontage: All residential lots shall abut a publicly dedicated street, or an approved private street. (Ord. 1065 § 1, 2005)
17.28.120: COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISION DESIGN:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 183/268
A. Limited Access To Arterial And Collector Streets: Access points shall be shown on the subdivision plan and become part of the recommendation by
the planning and zoning commission and the decision of the city council.
B. Commercial; Industrial Lots: Lots within a commercial/industrial subdivision are not required to front on a public street but must have access provided
through an easement or other arrangement. Review and approval of commercial/industrial subdivisions should consider the types of uses envisioned
and shall focus on infrastructure provisions, circulation design, potential traffic impacts and mitigation, access provisions, and any other issues
identified by staff at the preapplication review that pertain to the proposed subdivision.
C. Commercial; Industrial Standards: The applicant shall show that the streets and block patterns proposed are suitable for the uses anticipated, and
considers other potential or existing uses in the vicinity.
Residential uses adjacent to commercial/industrial subdivisions shall be protected from potential nuisances (noise, odor, light, etc.) through the use
of buffers, landscaping, setbacks, or open space. (Ord. 1065 § 1, 2005)
Title 18
ZONING
Chapter 18.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
18.04.010: TITLE:
The ordinance codified in this title shall be known as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF POST FALLS, IDAHO. (Ord. 1061 § 2, 2005)
18.04.020: STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
The ordinance codified in this title is adopted pursuant to authority granted by title 67, chapter 65 of the Idaho Code and article 12, section 2 of the Idaho
constitution, as amended or subsequently codified. (Ord. 1061 § 2, 2005)
18.04.030: PROVISIONS DEEMED MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety and the general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this title conflict with the express requirements of any other locally adopted ordinance, the
ordinance incorporating the most restrictive provisions shall prevail. (Ord. 1061 § 2, 2005)
18.04.040: APPLICABILITY:
This title shall apply, to the extent permitted by law, to all land and the use thereof, within the incorporated boundaries of the city of Post Falls. Any land
owned by a governmental agency shall be exempt from the provisions of this title only to the extent that such land or the use thereof may not be lawfully
regulated by the city of Post Falls. (Ord. 1061 § 2, 2005)
18.04.050: COMPLIANCE:
A. It shall be lawful for any building or structure to be moved, erected, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt if done in conformance with the provisions of this title.
B. It shall be lawful for any yard, open space, building, structure or land to be used for any purpose if done in conformance with this title.
C. Any use not permitted by the provisions of this title is prohibited. The zoning administrator is authorized to classify unnamed uses that are similar to
named uses, subject to administrative appeal procedures authorized herein.
D. It shall be unlawful for any building or structure to be moved, erected, altered, enlarged or rebuilt that does not adhere to the adopted flood damage
prevention requirements in title 15, chapter 15.44, "Flood Damage Prevention", of this code. This applies to areas that have been mapped and
identified by the federal emergency management agency (FEMA) as being in a flood hazard area. (Ord. 1237, 2012)
18.04.060: BUILDINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTION:
Any building or structure for which a building permit has been lawfully issued prior to the effective date hereof may be completed and used in
accordance with the plans, specifications, and permits on which the building permit was granted, if construction is commenced and inspections are
requested within one hundred eighty (180) days after the issuance of the permit, and if construction is diligently pursued to completion. (Ord. 1061 § 2,
2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 184/268
18.04.070: APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS:
An application for a permit governed by this title shall address the information necessary to determine compliance with this title and other applicable
provisions of law. The zoning administrator is authorized to establish administrative procedures, develop application forms and administer the permitting
process as necessary to demonstrate compliance with this title and applicable provisions of state law. (Ord. 1237, 2012)
Chapter 18.08
ADMINISTRATION
18.08.010: COMMISSION RESPONSIBILITY:
The Planning and Zoning Commission established in title 2 of this Code is responsible for performing the duties set forth in the Local Land Use Planning
Act and for fulfilling the duties of the commission as set forth in this title. (Ord. 1061 § 2, 2005)
18.08.020: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR; APPOINTMENT:
This title shall be administered by the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee(s). (Ord. 1237, 2012)
18.08.030: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR; POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. For the purpose of this title, the Zoning Administrator shall have the following duties and authority:
1. Advise interested persons regarding zoning and subdivision ordinance provisions.
2. Notify the public and news media as required by law.
3. Advise applicants regarding required applications and ordinance compliance.
4. Administer and issue land use and development permits, notifications and similar administrative duties.
5. Investigate violations of this title and take the actions necessary and appropriate to remedy such violation.
6. Assist the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council in implementing the provisions of this title.
7. Render written interpretations of the Zoning and Subdivisions Codes subject to an appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission as provided by
section 18.20.110 of this title. (Ord. 1330, 2018)
18.08.040: COORDINATION WITH OTHER DEPARTMENTS:
The Zoning Administrator is directed to coordinate with other City departments and public agencies concerning all permits which may be required by this
title and by previously or subsequently adopted laws. (Ord. 1237, 2012)
18.08.050: FEES:
The City Council will establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for matters pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this title requiring investigations, inspections, legal advertising, postage and other expenses. The schedule of fees will be available in the
Office of the Zoning Administrator, and may be altered or amended only by the City Council. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been
paid in full, no application shall be deemed complete for processing pursuant to this title. (Ord. 1237, 2012)
18.08.060: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY OR ZONING COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A. It is unlawful to occupy or use any building or premises, or part of a building or premises created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly
altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy and/or certificate of zoning compliance has been issued. A certificate of
zoning compliance shall be sufficient to authorize use only in circumstances where improvements to a site are not so substantial as to require a
building permit. The Zoning Administrator, upon application and payment of an application fee established by resolution of the City Council, may
issue a provisional certificate of occupancy for a period of time, not exceeding six (6) months, to allow for completion of weather dependent, non-life
safety related improvements or other non-safety related incomplete improvements the status of which is due to circumstances not within the control
of the owner or his agent. A provisional certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to this section does not authorize use or occupancy by occupants,
residents, employees or members of the public except as expressly provided in a written provisional occupancy agreement/authorization approved
by the Director of Public Works or his designee. A provisional occupancy agreement/authorization may include provisions for surety or guarantee
sufficient to assure completion and shall include release and indemnity provisions, assuring that the City and its personnel will be defended and held
harmless from the consequences of any provisional occupancy. The City reserves the right, and every provisional occupancy
agreement/authorization shall so provide, to terminate any provisional occupancy at any time if it finds a threat to life or public safety, essential
community function or to the environment or if it determines that the provisional occupancy was approved in error, was authorized on the basis of
incorrect information supplied by the applicant or others or when it is discovered that the building or use is in violation of any statute, ordinance, law
or other provisions of this Code. Such termination may occur without a prior hearing in the event of an emergency as determined by the Mayor, City
Administrator or Public Works Director or after an opportunity to be heard informally by the Public Works Director or City Administrator in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 185/268
nonemergency circumstances. Occupancy or use of any building or premises beyond the date of expiration or outside the express terms and
conditions of any provisional certificate of occupancy is unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor as defined by this Code.
B. Certificates of occupancy or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Zoning Administrator or
designee authorize only the use and/or arrangement set forth in such approved plans and applications or amendments, and not other uses or
arrangement. The Community Development Division shall maintain records of certificates of occupancy and certificates of zoning compliance which
shall be maintained as required by the adopted records retention policy of the City or by State law. (Ord. 1343, 2018: Ord. 1237, 2012)
18.08.070: PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION:
Provided that the context does not give rise to practical difficulties, interpretations of certain zoning ordinance language and certain standards will
usually be applied in the following manner:
A. Buildings Across Parcel Boundary Lines: Provided legal and contiguous parcels of record are owned by the same property owner(s) a building(s) that
has been developed across property lines shall merge the properties into one parcel for the determination of zoning standards.
B. Fences And Wall Height Measurement: Maximum fence and wall height shall be measured from the finished grade at the fence or wall. Retaining wall
height shall be measured from the footing to the top of the wall. That portion of a wall functioning as a retaining wall shall not be counted in
determining overall fence or wall height.
C. Yard Orientation On Through Lots: On through lots, where public road frontage exists at both ends, either frontage may be designated by the Zoning
Administrator as the front yard; however, the predominant orientation of existing structures and the presence of street access limitations, if any, on
that block should be used to determine the front yard.
D. Setback Encroachments: Setbacks are measured from the property line to the foundation of the structure. Setbacks shall not be less than the
minimum dimension specified in the specific section of this title, except as follows: cornices, canopies, eaves, or other similar architectural features
not providing additional floor space within the building may extend into a required side, front or rear yard setback no more than two feet (2').
E. Interpretation Of District Boundaries: Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the zoning districts as shown on the official
zoning map, the following shall apply:
1. Where zone boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of street or highway right-of-way lines, streams, lakes or other
bodies of water, the centerline shall be construed to be such boundary. Where the zoning boundary follows a railroad right-of-way, such boundary
shall be deemed to be located in the center of the right-of-way, unless otherwise clearly designated.
2. Where zone boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be the boundaries.
3. Where zone boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the centerlines or rightof-
way lines of highways, such zone boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the
official zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the official zoning map. (Ord.
1237, 2012)
Chapter 18.12
DEFINITIONS
18.12.010: DEFINITIONS ENUMERATED:
ABUTTING: Touching at a point or line.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: An additional dwelling unit subordinate and incidental to the main residential use.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE: A use or structure on the same lot, which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure. An
accessory structure shall be permitted on an adjoining lot if both lots are under same ownership.
ASSISTED CARE HOME: A home which provides personal care, room and board to more than one but not more than six (6) adults not related by blood
or marriage to the operator in a family setting. Also included is any place or institution, which operates or maintains facilities for providing convalescent
or long term care, or both.
AUTOMOTIVE IMPOUND YARDS: Outdoor secured storage for temporary placement of vehicles.
BIKEWAY: A designated multiuse path for pedestrians and bicycles, or a designated lane within street rights of way established for use by bicycles.
BUFFER: A combination of physical space and vertical elements, such as plants, berms, fences, or walls. The purpose of a buffer is to separate
incompatible land uses from each other.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest
point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the top of building walls for gable, and hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINE: The edge or side of a building nearest a lot line. The line facing the front lot line is the front building line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 186/268
COMMERCIAL COACH: A factory built prefabricated assembly designed for commercial occupancy, and has been issued a commercial coach
certificate of approval by the state of Idaho. Such unit has wheels attached for transportation, which may be removed on site when connected to the
required utilities and may be set on a foundation approved by the Idaho "Manufactured Home Installation Standards Manual".
COMMISSION: The planning and zoning commission appointed by the mayor and city council.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIVISION: A division of the city of Post Falls public services department consisting of the planning division, engineering
division, and the building division.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The long range plan used as a guide for the physical, economic, and social development of Post Falls.
CONDOMINIUM: An estate consisting of an undivided interest in common real property, in an interest or interests in real property, or in any combination
thereof, together with a separate interest in real property, in an interest or interests in real property, or in any combination thereof. Condominiums may
be of residential or nonresidential nature, both newly constructed or conversions of existing construction, and including multi-unit structure or single unit
structures.
CONDOMINIUM PLAN: A plat of the ground in a condominium project along with the legal description of individual ownership(s) within the project.
COUNCIL: The city council of Post Falls.
DAYCARE: The provision of supplemental care and supervision for nonrelated children or adults on a regular basis less than twenty four (24) hours per
day. This term is not intended to include baby sitting services of a casual, nonrecurring nature. "Home daycare" is providing care and supervision to no
more than five (5) children or adults at one time. Children of the provider, under the age of thirteen (13), shall be considered needing care and included
in the child limit.
DENSITY: A unit of measurement used to calculate the number of dwelling units per acre of land.
Gross Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of total land to be developed, including public right of way.
Net Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land when the acreage involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses, excluding
public right of way.
DISTRICT OVERLAY: Additional standards and/or guidelines attached to a defined area within a zoning district by ordinance. Overlays are intended to
establish and promote design identity and character for those areas designated as an architectural overlay, and to protect and enhance those areas that
are declared green space overlay.
DWELLING: Any building that contains one or two (2) dwelling units used, intended, or designed to be built, used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be
occupied, or that are occupied for living purposes.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A residential building containing two (2) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building containing a single dwelling unit.
DWELLING UNIT: A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
FARMING: An activity involving the manipulation of the land for profit or personal use. This usually involves the seeding, cultivating, and harvesting of a
crop.
FLOODPLAIN: The relatively flat area or lowland adjoining the channel of a river, stream, lake or other body of water which has been or may be covered
by water of a flood of 100-year frequency.
FRONTAGE IMPROVEMENTS: Urban roadway improvements consisting of curbing, sidewalk, utilities, street lighting, storm drainage facilities, street
trees, landscaping, irrigation and paving, developed to current design and construction standards.
GRADE: The finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls.
GREEN SPACE: A planned open space following guidelines established by the community that has determined cultural, ecological, and recreational
values for such space. Green space may include parks, trail systems, natural areas, ecological preserves, etc.
HEARING EXAMINER: A professionally trained or licensed staff planner, attorney, engineer or architect confirmed by the city council to carry out duties
authorized by Idaho Code section 67-6520, or its successor, pursuant to procedures required or allowed by this title.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation conducted within a dwelling unit or residential accessory buildings.
INDUSTRIAL, HEAVY: Processing, assembling, storing, testing and similar industrial uses which are generally major operations and extensive in
character, requiring larger sites, open storage and service areas, ready access to regional transportation and normally generate some nuisances such
as smoke, noise, vibration, dust, and glare.
INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT: Industrial uses which have less detrimental effect upon surrounding properties by a reduction or elimination of nuisances such as
smoke, noise, vibration, dust, glare, air pollution, and water pollution, and less demand upon public services such as electricity, gas, sewers, and streets.
JUNKYARD: A place where junk, waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or
handled. The term "junkyard" shall not be construed to include the above described uses if conducted entirely within an enclosed building; or recycling
collection centers, pawnshops and establishments for the sale, purchase, or storage of used furniture and household equipment; used cars in operable
condition; used or salvaged machinery in operable condition; or the processing of used, discarded, or salvaged materials as a minor part of
manufacturing operations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 187/268
LANDSCAPING: Aesthetically pleasing space using ground cover, shrubs, trees, building materials, or a combination thereof.
LOT: A parcel of land established by a subdivision plat filed pursuant to Idaho law.
LOT COVERAGE: That percentage of the total lot area covered by buildings.
LOT FRONTAGE: That portion of the lot adjacent to street rights of way. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through
lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage and yards shall be provided as indicated under the definition of "yard" in this
section.
LOT OF RECORD: A parcel of land that is part of a subdivision or a parcel of land described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so
recorded. In some instances tax numbers describe parcels solely and may not be lots of metes and bounds.
LOT TYPES: Terminology used in this title with reference to corner lots, interior lots and through lots is as follows:
Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
Flag Lot: Lots or parcels with less frontage on a public or private street than is required. The panhandle, or "pole" portion of such lot, is an access
corridor to lots or parcels located behind lots or parcels with normally required street frontage.
Interior Lot: A lot with frontage on one street.
Irregular Lot: A nonrectangular lot which may present numerous property lines that could be considered front, side or rear lot lines.
Through Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street. Through lots abutting two (2) streets may be referred to as double
frontage lots.
LOT WIDTH: The width of a lot measured at the required front setback line.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A factory built assembly designed for residential occupancy. Such housing is built on a permanent chassis and has wheels
attached for transportation, which are removed on site when connected to the required utilities and set on a foundation approved by the Idaho
"Manufactured Home Installation Standards Manual". Such housing is manufactured on or after June 15, 1976, and is certified as meeting the
manufactured housing construction safety standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
MOBILE HOME: A factory built residential structure transportable in one or more sections, which is manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, and which is
built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any site or tract of land under single ownership, upon which two (2) or more mobile homes and/or manufactured homes are set.
MODULAR STRUCTURE: A factory built prefabricated assembly designed for residential/commercial occupancy where all prefabricated construction
and all materials conform to the requirements of the International Building Code and has been issued a certificate of approval. Such housing does not
contain a permanent chassis frame and must be mounted on a permanent foundation or a building component, and is transported to the site by flatbed
trailer.
NONCONFORMING USE: A building, structure or use of land, which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated.
OFFSET FACE: The face of a structure that is recessed from the principal face. Reference the diagram regarding townhome performance standards
within section 18.24.030 of this title for a visual representation.
OPEN SPACE: An area, substantially undeveloped, which may or may not be open to the public. Open space may include, along with the natural
environmental features, active and passive recreation areas and necessary utilities and support infrastructure and facilities. Active recreation areas
provide space for scheduled, organized activities such as baseball fields and soccer fields, or that have highly developed facilities, such as skate parks
or swimming pools. Passive recreation areas are those that have a lower level of development, preserve natural habitat or provide space for
unorganized play such as playgrounds, trails and basketball and tennis courts.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE: A bond, surety, cash or an irrevocable letter of credit provided to the City by a developer in an amount set by ordinance
for guaranteeing the completion of physical improvements according to plans and specifications within a time prescribed.
PERMIT: Written authorization to perform work or establish a land use under this title.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A development process, provided for by ordinance that allows for flexibility in the application of regulations and
standards for consideration provided by a developer.
PRINCIPAL FACE: The closest structural plane of a building that is usually on the front of a building and faces the principal frontage.
PRINCIPAL FRONTAGE: The front of a lot that is to bear the address and principal entrance to the building.
PRINCIPAL PLANE: The plane created by more than one principal face along the same line of sight and parallel to the principal frontage (see diagram
in subsection 18.24.030C of this title).
PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY: A building or facility that is used to provide utility type services for the community.
PUBLIC USES: Buildings and/or land areas established for and open for use by the public.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: Usually refers to public land on which a street or alley is built, or privately owned land upon which railroad tracks are located.
SECONDARY FRONTAGE: On corner lots, the lot frontage that is not the principal frontage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 188/268
SETBACK LINE: A line established by this title, generally parallel with and measured from the lot line, defining the limits within which a building or
structure may be located.
SPECIAL USE: A use permitted within a district, other than a principally permitted use allowed by right, requiring approval of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and a permit.
STAFF: A City employee having knowledge in the principles and practices of planning and zoning.
STREET SCREEN: A freestanding wall often with vegetation built along the street frontage or coplanar (lying or occurring in the same plane) with the
facade. It may mask a parking lot from the thoroughfare, provide privacy to a side yard, and/or create more privacy and accentuate positive elements of
public or private spaces.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having a fixed location on the ground.
Among other things, structures may include any type of building, wall, fence or sign.
TOWNHOME: Multiple residences (3 or more) connected by common walls. Within each common wall is a platted lot line that segregates each unit.
Ownership includes a defined plat of land associated with the structure.
TWIN HOME: A two (2) unit structure that has a common wall shared between the two (2) units. Within the common wall is a platted lot line that
segregates the two (2) units. Therefore, each unit has its own legal platted lot but shares a common wall.
URBAN SERVICE AREA: A defined area, not always coincidental with the Municipal corporate boundaries, within which the City plans for basic urban
services for the near future.
USE: A specific purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, and intended, or the actual utilization of land or structure.
VARIANCE: As defined within Idaho Code section 67-6516 or its successor.
YARD: Any open area on a lot or parcel unoccupied and unobstructed by structures from the ground up, except for allowed accessory buildings, or such
projections as are expressly permitted in these regulations.
Yard, Front: A yard extending along the full width of a front lot line between side lot lines and from the front lot line to the front building line in depth.
Yard, Rear: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the building. Rear yard depth
shall be measured at right angles to the rear line of the lot. In the case of an irregular, triangular, or other shaped lot, the setback may be measured
off a line ten feet (10') in length within the lot parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line.
Yard, Side: A yard lying between the side line of the lot and the nearest line of the building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or in
the absence of either of such front or rear yards, to the front or rear lot lines. Side yard width shall be measured at right angles to the property line.
Yard, Street Side: A front yard on a corner lot that is not situated between the predominant front building line and the property line.
ZERO LOT LINE: A lot line with no setback.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR (OR CODE ADMINISTRATOR): The Planning Manager or his/her designee or as otherwise designated by the Mayor to
administer this title. (Ord. 1330, 2018: Ord. 1237, 2012)
Chapter 18.16
ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
18.16.010: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS:
Zoning districts are tools created to aid implementation of land use policies found within the comprehensive plan. Through the provision of standards,
zoning districts regulate the height, bulk, and placement of buildings, establish residential densities, and regulate the uses of land and buildings. The
following zoning districts are established and shall be applied and depicted upon the official zoning map of the City. Every lot and parcel of land, within
the incorporated City of Post Falls shall be classified in one of the zoning districts established by this section.
The regulations for each district shall apply uniformly to each type of land use, except as otherwise provided. No building, structure or land shall be used
or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity
with all of the regulations specified in this title. No yard area or lot existing at the time of passage of this title shall be reduced in dimension or area below
the minimum requirements set forth in this title. Yards or lots created after the effective date hereof shall meet at least the minimum requirements set
forth in this title.
Zoning is assigned following consideration of such items as street classification, traffic patterns, existing development, future land uses, community
plans, and geographic or natural features. Commercial and high density residential zoning is typically assigned along streets with a higher road
classification. Limited or neighborhood commercial and lower density residential zoning is typically assigned for properties as they proceed farther away
from the higher intensity urban activity. Industrial zoning is typically assigned for properties with sufficient access to major transportation routes and may
be situated away from residential zoning.
A. Residential Zones:
1. Single-Family Residential Suburban (R1S): The R1S Zone recognizes existing rural residential large lot uses, and other areas suitable for large lot
residential development with or without accessory agricultural uses. The intent of this zone is to provide estate sized lots. This zone should be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 189/268
applied where surrounding uses are compatible with large lot residential development. Lot area and building bulk and placement requirements
shall agree with the values set forth in section 18.20.040, "Official Bulk And Placement Regulations Table", of this title.
2. Single-Family Residential (R1): The R1 Zone is intended for one single-family home on one lot of minimum size or larger and to permit other
accessory uses that are associated and compatible with residential use. Lot area and building bulk and placement requirements shall agree with
the values set forth in section 18.20.040, "Official Bulk And Placement Regulations Table", of this title.
3. Medium Density Multi-Family Residential (R2): The R2 Zone is intended for residential structures containing one or more dwelling units and for
accessory uses that are associated and compatible with residential uses. This zone is primarily applied in areas suitable for residential
development where such residentially designated areas are readily serviced by collector and arterial streets suitable for higher levels of traffic;
where other public services are sufficiently available for the intensity of use contemplated; and where the configuration of Municipal infrastructure
and neighboring land uses are compatible with the use allowed hereby. Lot area and building bulk and placement requirements shall agree with
the values set forth in section 18.20.040, "Official Bulk And Placement Regulations Table", of this title.
4. High Density Multi-Family Residential (R3): The R3 Zone is intended for residential structures containing one or more dwelling units potentially
constructed in multiple-unit configuration at moderate to high density and for accessory uses that are associated and compatible with residential
uses. This zone is primarily applied in areas where such residentially designated areas are readily serviced by collector and arterial streets suitable
for higher levels of traffic, where other public services are sufficiently available for the intensity of use contemplated and where the configuration of
Municipal infrastructure and neighboring land uses are compatible with the use allowed hereby. Lot area and building bulk and placement
requirements shall agree with the values set forth in section 18.20.040, "Official Bulk And Placement Regulations Table", of this title.
5. Mobile Home Park (RMHP): The intent of this district is to provide for existing mobile home parks and establish minimum standards for the design,
construction, alteration, extension and maintenance of mobile home parks and related utilities and facilities and authorizing the issuance of
permits, licensing and inspection of such mobile home parks. This zoning designation is for existing established residential mobile home parks, not
for new or proposed parks. Lot area and building bulk and placement requirements shall agree with the values set forth in section 18.20.040,
"Official Bulk And Placement Regulations Table", of this title.
B. Commercial Zones:
1. Limited Commercial (LC): The LC Zone permits neighborhood compatible commercial retail and service uses of modest scale in areas not
conveniently served by existing or proposed commercially designated lands. This zoning district is compatible with residential lands that would
accommodate medium or high density residential land uses. Residential uses may be allowed at densities permitted by the Medium Density Multi-
Family Residential (R2) Zone by special use permit. Lot area and building bulk and placement requirements shall agree with the values set forth in
section 18.20.040, "Official Bulk And Placement Regulations Table", of this title.
2. Community Commercial Services (CCS): The CCS Zone supports uses that include retail sales or performance of consumer services and permits
a variety of retail, professional, or service businesses, including some manufacturing, technical, or other professional uses. This zone is applied in
areas primarily located near arterials and collector streets. Residential uses may be allowed within this zone at densities permitted by the High
Density Multi-Family Residential (R3) Zone by special use permit when they will not compromise present uses. Lot area and building bulk and
placement requirements shall agree with the values set forth in section 18.20.040, "Official Bulk And Placement Regulations Table", of this title.
C. Industrial Zones:
1. Industrial (I): The Industrial (I) Zone permits light industrial uses such as warehousing, assembly, processing and light manufacturing as permitted
uses. Residential use of industrial property shall be subordinate and accessory to a primary industrial use (on site security, etc.) and shall be
permitted only by special use permit.
2. Heavy Industrial (HI): The Heavy Industrial (HI) Zoning designation is for existing established heavy industrial uses and not for new or proposed
heavy industrial uses. Lot area and building bulk and placement requirements shall agree with the values set forth in section 18.20.040, "Official
Bulk And Placement Regulations Table", of this title.
D. Technology Mixed (TM) Zone: The Technology Mixed (TM) Zone provides for well-designed technological-industrial parks that can accommodate light
industrial, technological, professional office together with limited commercial and residential uses that support a work, shop and live environment.
Approval of the Technology Mixed (TM) Zone requires a development agreement as provided in section 18.20.190 of this title.
1. Application: The TM Zone is appropriate for:
a. Areas designated commercial, GS-2, or GS-3 in the Comprehensive Plan.
b. Areas readily serviced by collector and arterial streets suitable for higher levels of traffic.
c. Areas where other public services are sufficiently available for the intensity of use.
d. Areas with at least twenty (20) net contiguous acres.
e. Areas adjacent to single family residential zoning districts (R1S, R1 and R2) only if they are located across an arterial or collector street from the
residential district and are not materially detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of nearby residents.
f. Areas where the configuration of Municipal infrastructure and neighboring land uses are compatible with the use allowed in the TM Zone.
2. Permitted Uses: Permitted and specially permitted uses in the TM Zone are listed in the land use table in section 18.20.030 of this title. Individual
retail buildings are limited to ten thousand (10,000) square feet (20,000 square feet with a special use permit) of net floor area and retail uses
(LBCS Code series 2100, 2300, 2500) as a whole may not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the development site. Multi-family residential uses may
not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the development site.
3. Development Intensity Standards:
a. Minimum site: Twenty (20) acres.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 190/268
b. Minimum lot area: None.
c. Maximum lot coverage: None.
d. Maximum height (may be exceeded by a special use permit):
(1) Within three hundred feet (300') of a residentially zoned property: Forty five feet (45').
(2) All other areas: Seventy five feet (75').
4. Minimum Setbacks:
a. Front And Street Side:
(1) Adjacent to streets along perimeter of zone: Twenty five feet (25').
(2) Adjacent to streets internal to the zone: Ten feet (10').
b. Interior Side And Rear:
(1) Lot lines bordering zone edge: Twenty five feet (25').
(2) Lot lines internal to the zone: Ten feet (10').
c. Additional Setback For Buildings Over Twenty Five Feet In Height: The minimum setback for buildings over twenty five feet (25') in height is
increased by one foot (1') for each additional foot of building height. (Ord. 1340, 2018)
18.16.020: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICT OVERLAYS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1237, 2012)
18.16.030: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP:
The zoning districts established in this title shall be as depicted on the official zoning map attached to the ordinance codified herein and as modified by
the text of subsequent ordinances to be maintained on file in the Office of the City Clerk. The Zoning Administrator shall maintain the official zoning map
to reflect changes made by the City Council. Each change shall be documented at the time the map is modified, including reference to the ordinances
authorizing changes. (Ord. 1241, 2012)
Chapter 18.20
PERMITTED LAND USES
18.20.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to designate permitted land uses for the various zoning districts. A land use that will operate for less than thirty (30) days
in one calendar year is considered a temporary use, and is subject to the requirements governing temporary uses. Unless an administrative permit has
been approved to establish a temporary use, any other establishment of a permitted land use will be required to comply with all applicable provisions of
this title. (Ord. 1061 § 2, 2005)
18.20.020: INTERPRETATION OF LAND USE TABLE:
The land use table in this chapter indicates whether a specific use is permitted or permitted by a special use within a zone classification.
The land use table addressing uses along with building bulk and placement standards are made part of this title and shall be interpreted consistent with
the principles and rules set forth as follows:
A. Uses not permitted are prohibited as denoted in the following land use table.
B. If the proposed use is not listed within the following land use table, the Zoning Administrator will make the determination by the most appropriate and
closely related category.
C. If the letter "P", for "permitted", appears in the matrix, the use is allowed in that classification, subject to the development and operational
requirements of this title and other applicable titles.
D. If the letter "S", for "special use", appears in the matrix, the use is allowed subject to special use permit procedures and requirements and other
development and operational requirements of this title and other applicable titles. The burden of demonstrating that a special use permit request is
appropriate rests with the applicant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 191/268
E. Certain properties on the north side of Mullan Avenue are designated for residential use on the City's Comprehensive Plan, future land use map, and
are also identified as suitable for commercial and mixed use. Commercial and mixed land uses proposed on residentially zoned properties shall be
considered through the special use permit process, just as residential land uses are permitted through a special use permit in commercial zones.
F. Boats, trailers, RVs and other such spaces are not considered permanent places of habitation within the City. Residing in such, other than RVs or
camper trailers in lawfully established RV parks, is not permitted within City limits. (Ord. 1237, 2012)
18.20.030: LAND USE TABLE:
P = Permitted use
S = Special use
- = Nonpermitted use
Land Use Category
Zoning Classifications
LBCS Code
R1S
R1
R2
R3
LC
CCS
I TM
Residential uses:
Private household, 1 unit per structure P P P P - - - - 1101
Duplex, 2 units per structure - - P P S S - - 1102
Multi-family, 3 or more units per structure - - P P S S - P 1103
Accessory dwelling unit P P P P P - - -
Accessory residential support use (i.e., garage, shed, pool, greenhouse) P P P P P - - - 1199
Single-family incidental to a commercial/industrial use - - - - P P P
P
Single-family incidental to a religious use P P P P P P P
-
Home occupation P P P P P P - -
Accommodations and group living:
Congregate living, group homes - P P P S S - P 1220
Nursing homes - S S S P P S
S 1230
Residential care facilities S S S S P P S
S 1230
Bed and breakfast inn S S S S P - - - 1310
Rooming and boarding house - - - - P P - S 1320
Hotel, motel, or tourist court - - - - S P P
P 1330
General sales or services:
Retail store - - - - P P P
P 2102
Postal services and packaging - - - - P P P
P
Photo processing - - - - P P P
P
Outdoor vendor spaces/farmers' market or stands - - - - P P S
P
Neighborhood shopping center - - - - P P P
P 2106
Destination shopping center - - - - - P P
- 2107
Automobile/light truck/RV dealership - - - - - P P
- 2111
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 192/268
Mobile home/manufactured housing dealership - - - - - P P
- 2112
Motorcycle/ATV dealer - - - - - P P
- 2113
Boat/marine craft dealer - - - - - P P
- 2114
Auto service station (full service with garage bays) - - - - - P P
P 2116
Car lot/used car dealership - - - - - P P
- 2118
Furniture/home furnishings center - - - - S P P
S 2121
Hardware/home improvement center - - - - S P P
S 2122
Lawn and garden supplies/feed store - - - - S P P
S 2123
Department store/warehouse club/superstore/big box - - - - - P P
- 2124
Lumberyard/building materials store - - - - - P P
- 2126
Discount store - - - - S P P
- 2128
Durable consumer goods sales and service - - - - S P P
P 2130
Grocery store/supermarket - - - - P P P
P 2151
Convenience store - - - - P P P
P 2152
Convenience store with gas - - - - S P P
P
Specialty food/health food store - - - - P P P
P 2153
Pharmacy/drugstore - - - - P P P
P 2170
Auto supply stores - - - - P P P
P
Automotive repair services - - - - - P P
P
Automatic car wash - - - - S P P
P 2171
Self-service car wash - - - - P P P
- 2172
Automobile or marine service center - - - - - S P
- 2174
Heavy equipment repair - - - - - S P
-
Service garage/paint shop/detailing - - - - - S P
P 2175
Quick lube job - - - - S P P
P 2176
Bank/savings institution - - - - P P P
P 2210
Branch bank (drive-up facility) - - - - P P P
P 2211
Bank ATM kiosk or remote facility - - - - P P P
P 2212
Car rental agency - - - - - P P
P 2331
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 193/268
Tractor/heavy trucks/trailer, dealership/leasing - - - - - S P
- 2332
Recreational or consumer goods rental - - - - S P P
P 2333
Leasing commercial/industrial machinery and equipment - - - - - S P
- 2334
Building, developing, and general contracting services - - - - S P P
- 7100
Professional, scientific, and technical services:
General office buildings (1 - 4 stories) - - - - P P P
P 2401
General office buildings (5+ stories) - - - - S P P
P 2402
Research and development - - - - S S P
P 2416
Veterinary office - - - - P P P
S 2418
Full service restaurant - - - - P P P
P 2510
Cafeteria/limited service restaurant/delicatessens - - - - P P P
P 2520
Drive-in restaurant - - - - - P P
P 2521
Fast food restaurant - - - - - P P
P 2522
Snack/nonalcoholic bar - - - - S P P
P 2530
Bar/tavern/lounge - - - - S P P
P 2540
Nightclub/dinner theater - - - - S P P
- 2541
Parking lot (uncovered) - - - - P P P
P 2650
Parking garage (covered) - - - - S P P
P 2660
Municipal animal shelter/pound - - - - - P P
- 2721
Kennel/boarding services/dog daycare - - - - S P P
S 2722
Retail/office/residential combination (minimum 2 separate uses per
structure)
- - - - P P S
P 2800
Industrial and manufacturing uses:
Asphalt plant/storage - - - - - - S
-
Blast furnace and smelting - - - - - - S
-
Manufacture or storage of explosives - - - - - - S
-
Food and beverage manufacturing - - - - - S P
S 3110
Meat products manufacturing - - - - - - P
- 3111
Dairy products manufacturing - - - - - - P
- 3112
Grain milling products manufacturing - - - - - - P
- 3113
Bakery products manufacturing - - - - - P P - 3114
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 194/268
Beverage products manufacturing - - - - - S P
S 3115
Tobacco products manufacturing - - - - - S P
- 3120
Textiles (mill products) - - - - - S P
- 3130
Clothing manufacturing - - - - - S P
S 3131
Leather and allied products manufacturing - - - - - S P
S 3140
Wood products manufacturing, except lumber mills - - - - - S P
- 3210
Sawmill - - - - - - S
- 3215
Millwork/veneer/plywood manufacturing - - - - - S S
- 3216
Paper manufacturing - - - - - - S
- 3221
Paperboard/cardboard/box manufacturing - - - - - S S
- 3222
Furniture and related products manufacturing - - - - - S P
- 3230
Petroleum refining - - - - - - - - 3311
Paving and roofing materials manufacturing - - - - - S P
- 3312
Rubber products manufacturing - - - - - S P
- 3321
Paint/varnish/lacquer manufacturing - - - - - - P
- 3322
Drug/pharmaceutical manufacturing - - - - - S P
P 3323
Plastic manufacturing - - - - - S P
- 3324
Industrial chemical manufacturing - - - - - - S
- 3325
Flat glass manufacturing - - - - - S P
- 3331
Glass/glassware products manufacturing - - - - - P P
S 3332
Cement manufacturing - - - - - - P
- 3333
Gypsum/plaster/concrete products manufacturing - - - - - - S
- 3334
Cut stone and stone products manufacturing - - - - - - P
- 3335
Primary metal manufacturing - - - - - - P
- 3340
Steel and iron foundries - - - - - - S
- 3341
Steel fabrication - - - - - - S
- 3342
Machinery manufacturing - - - - - - S
- 3350
Automobile/truck manufacturing - - - - - - P
- 3351
Aircraft manufacturing - - - - - - P P 3352
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 195/268
Instrument/high-technology manufacturing - - - - - - P
P 3353
Electrical equipment/ appliance/components manufacturing - - - - - P P
P 3360
Heavy transportation equipment manufacturing (railroad/pipeline) - - - - - S P
- 3370
Miscellaneous manufacturing - - - - - - P
S 3400
Salvage yard/recycle center - - - - - S S
- 3519
Warehouse and storage uses:
Mini-storage warehouse/self-storage - - - - S P P
- 2321
Construction equipment storage facility - - - - - S P
-
Automotive impound yards - - - - - S P
-
Warehouse distribution/storage facility - - - - - S P
S 3610
Warehouse-retail combination - - - - - S P
P 3630
Warehouse-office combination - - - - - S P
P 3640
Cold storage warehouse - - - - - S P
- 3660
Transit warehouse/truck terminal - - - - - S P
- 3670
Transportation uses:
Air transportation - - - - - S S
- 4110
Air freight transportation - - - - - S S
- 4112
Airport support establishment - - - - - S P
- 4113
Other air transportation (including scenic, balloon, etc.) - - - - - S P
- 4115
Rail transportation stations/transit stops - - - - - S P
S 4120
Local transit center-bus, special needs, and other motor vehicles stations S S S S P P P
P 4133
Interurban, charter bus, and other similar establishments/transit stations - - - - P P P
P
Special purpose transit transportation (including scenic, sightseeing, etc.) - - - - S P P
S 4136
Taxi and limousine service staging facility - - - - S P P
- 4137
Towing and other road and ground services staging facility - - - - S P P
- 4138
Truck and freight transportation services - - - - - - P
S 4140
Courier and messenger services - - - - - P P
P 4160
Communication uses:
Publishing - - - - - P P
P 4210
Newspapers, books, periodicals, etc. - - - - - P P P 4211
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 196/268
Software publisher - - - - S P P
P 4212
Motion pictures and sound recording - - - - S P P
P 4220
Radio and television broadcasting - - - - S P P
P 4231
Cable networks and distribution - - - - - P P
P 4232
Wireless telecommunications1 - - - - - - - - 4233
Telephone and other wired telecommunications - - - - - P P
P 4234
Information services and data processing industries - - - - S P P
P 4240
Online information services - - - - S P P
P 4241
Libraries and archives - - - - P P P
P 4242
Utility and utility services:
Electric power S S S S P P P
S 4310
Hydroelectric S S S S S S P
P 4311
Fossil - - - - - - P
- 4312
Nuclear - - - - - - - - 4313
Alternative energy sources S S S S S S P
S 4314
Natural gas, petroleum, fuels, etc. S S S S S S P
S 4320
Water, steam, air conditioning supply - - - - - S P
P 4330
Industrial water supply - - - - - - P
P 4332
Hazardous waste collection and storage facility - - - - - - S
- 4341
Hazardous waste treatment and disposal - - - - - - S
- 4342
Solid waste collection and storage - - - - - S P
- 4343
Solid waste combustor or incinerator - - - - - - S
- 4344
Solid waste landfill - - - - - - - - 4345
Septic tank and related storage and distribution services - - - - - S S
-
Arts, entertainment, tourism, and recreation:
General arts and tourism - - - - P P P
S 5000
Conference or convention center - - - - S P P
S
Community centers - - - - S P P
S
Performing arts or supporting establishment - - - - S P P
S 5100
Theater, dance, or music establishment - - - - S P P
S 5110
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 197/268
Stadiums - - - - - S P
-
Movie theater - - - - S P P
S 5112
Sports team or club headquarters/facility - - - - S P P
- 5120
Racetrack establishment - - - - - - P
- 5130
Promoter of performing arts, sports, and similar events - - - - P P P
- 5140
Agent for management services - - - - P P P
- 5150
Museums and other special purpose recreational institutions - - - - S P P
S 5200
Art gallery - - - - P P P
S 5211
Historical or archeological institution - - - - S P P
- 5220
Zoos, botanical gardens, arboretums, etc. - - - - S P P
- 5230
Amusement, sports, or recreation establishment - - - - - P P
- 5300
Amusement or theme park establishment - - - - - P P
- 5310
Games arcade establishment - - - - S P P
- 5320
Casino, bingo halls, or gambling establishment - - - - - P P
- 5330
Miniature golf establishment - - - - S P S
- 5340
Marina or yachting club facility operators - - - - - P P
- 5360
Fitness, recreational sports, gym, or athletic club - - - - S P P
P 5370
Golf course S S S S S S S
- 5374
Indoor shooting or archery range - - - - - S P
-
Driving range - - - - - P P
- 5376
Private (sports complex/arena/playing field) - - - - - P P
S 5379
Municipal (sports complex/arena/playing field) P P P P P P P
S
Bowling, billiards, pool, etc. - - - - S P P
- 5380
Skating rinks, roller skates, etc. - - - - S P P
- 5390
Camps, camping, and related establishments - - - - S P P
- 5400
Travel trailer (RV) park - - - - - S P
- 5410
Education uses:
Nursery and preschool - - - - P P S
P 6110
Elementary school - - - - S P S
- 6121
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 198/268
Middle school - - - - S P S
- 6122
High school - - - - S P S
- 6123
Adult education services - - - - S P P
P 6126
Colleges and universities - - - - S P P
S 6130
Technical, trade, and other specialty schools - - - - S P P
P 6140
Beauty schools - - - - S P P
- 6141
Business management - - - - S P P
P 6142
Computer training - - - - S P P
P 6143
Driving education - - - - S P P
- 6144
Fine and performing arts education - - - - S P P
S 6145
Flight training - - - - - P P
S 6146
Sports and recreation education - - - - P P P
- 6147
Public administration uses:
Courts - - - - S P P
- 6221
Correctional institutions - - - - - - S
- 6222
Other governmental functions:
Space research and technology - - - - S P P
P 6320
Public safety:
Fire and rescue S S S S S P P
P 6410
Police P P P P P P P
P 6420
Emergency response S S S S S S S
P 6430
Public safety training facility S S S S S P P
S
City facilities P P P P P P P
P
Health and human service:
Ambulatory or outpatient care services - - - - S P P
P 6510
Clinics - - - - S P P
P 6511
Family planning and outpatient care centers - - - - S P P
P 6512
Medical and diagnostic laboratories - - - - S P P
P 6513
Blood and organ bank - - - - S P P
P 6514
Nursing, supervision, and other rehabilitative services - - - - S P P
P 6520
Hospital - - - - S P P S 6530
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 199/268
Social assistance, welfare, and charitable services - - - - S P P
S 6560
Child and youth services - - - - P P P
S 6561
Child daycare, commercial (more than 5 children) - - - - P P P
P 6562
Child daycare, home (up to 5 children) P P P P S S - -
Community food bank - - - - S P P
- 6563
Emergency and relief services - - - - P P P
- 6564
Other family services - - - S P P P
- 6565
Services for elderly and disabled - - - S S P P
- 6566
Veterans affairs - - - - S P P
- 6567
Vocational rehabilitation - - - - S P P
P 6568
Work release facilities - - - - - S S
-
Religious institutions - - - - P P P
S 6600
Death care services:
Funeral homes and services - - - - S P P
- 6710
Cremation services and cemeteries - - - - S P P
- 6720
Associations, nonprofit organizations, etc.:
Civic, social, and fraternal organizations headquarters/ facility - - - - P P P
- 6830
Mining and extraction establishments:
Metals (iron, copper, etc.) - - - - - - - - 8200
Nonmetallic mining - - - - - - - - 8400
Quarrying and stone cutting establishments - - - - - - S
- 8500
Agriculture, forestry, fishing and hunting:
Commercial crop production P P P P P P P
P 9100
Commercial greenhouse, nursery, and floriculture - - - - P P P
S 9140
Farm and farm labor management services - - - - S P P
- 9210
Slaughterhouse - - - - - S S
-
Stockyard/dairies - - - - - - - -
Cattle feedlot establishment - - - - - - - - 9312
Hog and pig farm - - - - - - - - 9330
Note:
1. Wireless communications are regulated by chapter 18.26 of this title.
(Ord. 1340, 2018)
18.20.040: OFFICIAL BULK AND PLACEMENT REGULATIONS TABLE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 200/268
District
Maximum
Height
(Ft.)
Front
(Ft.)
Rear
(Ft.)
Interior
Side
(Ft.)
Street
Side
(Ft.)
Minimum
Lot Width
(Ft.)
Minimum Floor
Area Per Unit
(Sq. Ft.)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
(%)
Minimum Lot
Rear Area
Dwelling Unit
(Sq. Ft.)
Maximum
Dwelling
Unit Density
Per Acre
(# Units)

R1S 35 30 15 15 30 135 800 25 1 acre 1
R1 (SF) 35 15 10 5 15 60 800 40 6,500 5
R2 (SF) 35 15 10 5 15 60 800 40 6,500 5
R2 (DPX)
35 15 10 5 15 50 600 50 3,600 12
R2 (other
MF)
35 15 10 5 15 50 600 50 3,000 12
R2 (TWH)
35 15 20 0 - 5 15 25 600 70 2,400 18
R3 (SF) 35 15 10 5 15 60 800 40 3,600 5
R3 (DPX)
35 15 10 5 15 50 600 50 3,600 12
R3 (other
MF)
45 15 10 10 15 50 600 50 2,400 18
R3 (TH) 35 15 20 0 - 5 15 18 600 70 2,000 21
RMHP 1 story 10 7.5 10 10 50 n/a 50 4,500 10
LC 35 0 n/a 0 n/a n/a n/a 30 n/a n/a
CCS 45 0 0 0 0 n/a n/a 80 n/a n/a
I 50 15 10 0 15 n/a n/a 50 n/a n/a
HI
(existing)
50 IBC IBC IBC IBC n/a n/a 65 n/a n/a
TM See subsection 18.16.010D of this title for regulations.
Notes:
1.Definitions:
SF = Single-family dwelling unit.
DPX = Duplex, two-family dwelling unit.
TH = Townhome.
TWH = Twin home.
Other MF = Other multi-family dwelling units of 3 or more units, including apartments, townhouses, condominiums, etc.
IBC = International building code.
2.All single-family dwellings, twin homes, townhomes, and duplexes in any residential district shall require a minimum of 1 covered car garage
per dwelling. Townhomes that are processed under a site plan review may be excluded from this requirement, if a common parking structure is
provided.
3.Minimum 20 foot setbacks to residential garages are required, measured to property lines or back of sidewalk when within an easement,
whichever is closer.
4.Twin home or townhome projects shall provide a minimum of a 5 foot interior side yard setback or utilize a common wall with a zero lot line.
5.Height limitations do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys or other appurtenances usually required to be
placed above roof level and not intended for human occupancy; however, 35 feet in residential zones (except in R3 [other MF]), 45 feet in R3
(other MF) and in commercial zones, and 50 feet in industrial zones is the maximum height allowed without a special use permit; City utility and
public service structures are exempt from height restrictions.
6.Current RMHP dimensions are for existing established residential mobile home parks, not for new or proposed parks.
7.Structures cannot be placed in public easements.
8.Heavy Industrial (HI) setbacks are for existing zones and uses only, not for new or proposed industrial uses.
9.Setbacks shall be measured from a property line to the foundation, face of a covered porch or stairway, or other weight bearing portion of the
structure, whichever is closest to the property line.
10.Compliance with zoning setbacks and lot coverage shall not be required for fences, walls, signs or accessory structures not requiring a
building permit.
11.The lot width for a respective zone is the measurement considered for the front building line, including flag lots.
12.Residential structures may extend an additional 5 feet beyond the minimum 15 foot front yard setback for those improvements, such as an
open porch, canopies, balconies, platforms, covered patios and similar architectural projections attached to a structure, that do not restrict
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 201/268
visibility between pedestrians along the adjacent sidewalk and vehicles accessing/leaving a residence.
13.Open structures such as porches, canopies, balconies, platforms, carports, covered patios and similar architectural projections attached to a
structure shall not project into the required minimum side or rear yard setbacks. Roof overhangs may extend into the minimum side or rear yard
setback, such as the conditions set forth within the International Building Code are met.
(Ord. 1340, 2018: Ord. 1237, 2012)
18.20.050: ZONING PROCEDURES:
The zoning procedures contained in this chapter are established to create a framework for land use decisions that comply with the requirements of Local
Land Use Planning Act and other legal requirements. Land use decisions are divided into quasi-judicial, administrative and legislative decisions. These
procedures also allow for mediation, appeals and other processes relating to the review and approval of land use matters. (Ord. 1330, 2018)
18.20.060: QUASI-JUDICIAL PROCEDURES:
A. General: The City follows quasi-judicial procedures when making site specific decisions that involve the legal rights of specific parties. The
fundamental purpose of a quasi-judicial hearing is to provide the affected parties due process, including notice and the opportunity to testify at a
public hearing. In these cases, the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council acts like a judge and are subject to stricter procedural
requirements than those in legislative or administrative hearings. Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council members cannot speak with
members of the public, including the applicant, about a pending quasi-judicial matter outside of the public hearing. Planning and Zoning Commission
and City Council members can only consider information provided in the public hearing process and can only base their decision on the adopted
approval criteria contained in the City's subdivision and zoning regulations. Application forms for quasi-judicial actions must contain information
required by this title and additional information relevant to the specific permits requested. A hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission will
be scheduled as its schedule and agenda allow.
Site-specific zone changes, subdivisions, variances, planned unit developments and special use permits must follow the quasi-judicial procedures
established by this section.
B. Public Hearing Notice: Prior to any required public hearing, notice shall be provided as required by the Local Land Use Planning Act. An applicant for
a quasi-judicial matter must provide the City with an ownership report, prepared by an Idaho licensed title company, of all current property owners
within three hundred feet (300') and the public notification fees established by resolution of the City Council along with their application to enable the
City to provide the required public notice.
C. Alternative Public Hearing Notifications: When public hearing notification is required for two hundred (200) or more property owners or purchasers of
record, the City may use the alternative notification procedures provided in the Local Land Use Planning Act to provide public notice of the pending
matter. The applicant bears the cost of alternative public hearing notice as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
D. Public Hearing Procedures: Quasi-judicial hearings will be held before the Planning and Zoning Commission following the hearing procedures
adopted by resolution of the City Council.
Whenever Idaho Code authorizes the use of a hearing examiner, the City Council may approve a resolution authorizing use of a hearing examiner as
an alternative to the Planning and Zoning Commission whenever it deems such use to be appropriate.
E. Appeals: Any affected party may appeal a quasi-judicial decision to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal, along with the required fee,
with the City Clerk no more than fourteen (14) days after the date of the written decision. The Clerk will coordinate with the City Attorney and relevant
City departments to schedule a de novo hearing, following the same notice and hearing procedures, before the City Council to consider the matter as
quickly as the City Council's schedule allows.
F. Exhaustion Of Procedures: The final decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission is not a final decision for purposes of judicial review until the
City Council has issued a final decision on appeal and the party seeking judicial review has requested reconsideration of that final decision as
provided by Idaho Code 67-6535(2)(b).
G. Mediation Process: Mediation is a process available to an affected person who owns real property that might be materially affected by a quasi-judicial
matter in order to promote resolution of differences concerning potentially time consuming, divisive land use matters. The process for mediation is
explained below:
1. Application For Mediation: Mediation may be requested in writing by any applicant, other affected person or by the City prior to approval of any
quasi-judicial matter or no later than fourteen (14) days after entry of a final decision and prior to any person filing a petition for judicial review.
2. Mediation: The parties to any quasi-judicial matter must participate in at least one mediation session if mediation is ordered by the Planning and
Zoning Commission or the City Council. The City will select the mediator and pay the expense of the first mediation session. After completion of
the initial mediation session, participation in additional mediation sessions is optional. Compensation of the mediator for additional sessions will be
determined by the parties participating in the first mediation session.
a. Any time limit concerning the pending quasi-judicial matter is tolled by receipt by the City of a request for mediation. The time limit begins
counting again when:
(1) The Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council reject the request to order mediation; or
(2) Twenty eight (28) days have elapsed from the date the request for mediation was received by the City without a mediation session being
scheduled; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 202/268
(3) The applicant or any other affected person(s) who participated in one mediation session declines, in writing, to participate in further mediation
sessions; or
b. If mediation occurs after a final decision by the City Council and the mediation results in a recommended change to the quasi-judicial matter, a
subsequent public hearing will be held before the City Council to receive public comment on the proposed change.
c. Any records created during the mediation process will not be part of the official record regarding the quasi-judicial matter. (Ord. 1330, 2018)
18.20.070: SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
The purpose of a special use permit is to establish procedures for the review and approval of uses that are not permitted by right in a particular zoning
district. A special use permit is not transferable from one parcel of land to another nor shall it be considered as establishing a binding precedent to grant
other special use permits. Special use permits require a public hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission following appropriate procedures.
A. A completed special use permit application shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator which shall include a description of the use proposed, the
manner of implementation of the proposed use including information about appearance and configuration, how it would be compatible with
infrastructure and land uses present and future, and why the proposal would be in the public interest.
B. As its schedule and agenda allow, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing and shall review the particular facts and
circumstances of each proposed special use. In granting a special use permit, the Planning and Zoning Commission may attach appropriate
conditions to mitigate impacts, and to ensure conformance with the intent of the Comprehensive Plan and applicable provisions of this title. The
application for a special use permit may be approved as presented, conditionally approved, or denied by the Planning and Zoning Commission upon
determining the following:
1. Whether implementation of the special use would/would not conform to the purposes of the applicable zoning district.
2. Whether the proposed use constitutes an allowable special use as established by this chapter for the zoning district involved; and complies with all
other applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations of the City and the State.
3. Whether the proposed use will/will not be compatible with the health, safety, and welfare of the public or with land uses in the vicinity of the
proposal.
4. Whether the proposed use will/will not comply with the goals and policies found within the Comprehensive Plan.
C. Upon granting a special use permit, the Planning and Zoning Commission may attach conditions including, but not limited to:
1. Minimizing adverse impact on other development.
2. Controlling the sequence and timing of development.
3. Controlling the duration of development.
4. Assuring that development is maintained properly.
5. Controlling the location and setbacks of development.
6. Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required in the zoning ordinance.
D. Upon granting or denying an application, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall render its decision in accordance with the requirements
established by Idaho law and as otherwise required by this title. If a special use permit application is denied by City Council, a subsequent
application for special use permit of the subject property cannot be submitted to the City within one year of such denial unless a request for
application consideration is received and approved by the City Council. Such request shall be submitted to the Community Development
Department, with the appropriate fee, and shall provide the City Council with reasons why the application should be accepted and processed. The
City Council will review the request, determine whether or not the proposal is significantly different than the one denied and permit an application to
be accepted and processed or deny the request.
E. Appeals of any decision of the Planning Commission must follow the appeal procedure in this title.
F. If development permits for the requested special use have not been issued within one year of the granting of the special use permit, or if development
of the approved special use has not commenced with sustained effort to complete development within three (3) years after granting approval of the
special use, the special use permit shall become null and void, unless the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council, whichever gave final
approval, has granted an extension. An extension to the permit may be granted if applied for in writing to the approving body prior to the date of
expiration and if the approving body finds, upon review of the record, that an extension is warranted due to circumstances beyond control of the
applicant and upon finding that City regulations have not been changed significantly from those under which the original approval was reviewed.
G. Any special use that operates in violation of the requirements and conditions established in a special use permit, pursuant to this section, may be
revoked and the use restricted, suspended, and/or be subject to penalties for violation of this title. (Ord. 1237, 2012)
18.20.080: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD):
A. Purpose: A planned unit development ("PUD") is a master planned development that encourages enhanced community design by permitting flexibility
in certain development standards in exchange for benefits to the community including open space, heightened site design (when compared to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 203/268
developments utilizing traditional developments standards) and compatibility with surrounding uses. A PUD may contain a mix of residential,
commercial and industrial uses so long as the proposed uses are allowed in the underlying zoning district (either as a permitted or specially
permitted use). The PUD plan must provide for the integrated design and placement of buildings and uses within the development as well as internal
traffic circulation, pedestrian and bicycle circulation, open space, landscaping and other features necessary to create an efficient, attractive
development.
B. Scope: All PUDs must comply with the following scope requirements:
1. Maximum Residential Density: The maximum allowable residential density in a PUD is based on the overall gross land area (including the required
open space areas). The PUD generally may not exceed the overall residential density allowed in the underlying zoning districts ("base density").
However, the PUD may exceed the base density by up to ten percent (10%) if the PUD provides an additional five percent (5%) of the gross land
area as open space meeting the requirements of this section.
2. Compliance With Other City Processes And Requirements: The PUD must meet all City development standards unless the standard is modified
under this section. Additionally, all PUDs must comply with all other applicable development processes and requirements including subdivision
regulations. A list of development standards that may be modified by the PUD process is contained in subsection B3 of this section.
3. Development Standards Subject To A PUD: In order to achieve the purposes of this section, the developer may request modifications to the
following development standards:
a. Any provision pertaining to the height, bulk, setback or maximum dimensions of any facility.
b. Any provision establishing buffering, landscaping or other similar requirements pertaining to site design.
c. Any provision pertaining to the minimum or maximum dimensions of lot(s).
d. Any provision in title 12, chapter 12.12 and title 17, chapter 17.28 of this Code regarding, driveways, local streets and sidewalks except
accessibility standards.
e. Any provision pertaining to off street parking except accessibility standards.
C. General Requirements: All PUDs must comply with the following requirements:
1. Ownership Requirements: The entire site must be under common ownership or control at the time of application and remain under common
ownership or control until the PUD plan is approved.
2. Open Space Requirements: Each PUD plan must contain open space meeting the following requirements:
a. Size And Exclusions: A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the gross land area in any PUD must be reserved for open space areas usable for a
mix of active and passive recreational activities by all occupants of the area being developed. Individual open space areas within the site should
be large enough to be usable for park land and/or other recreational uses while remaining within a reasonable walking distance for occupants of
the development. Areas dedicated or set aside for public rights-of-way, private streets, street side stormwater swales or utility easements,
required landscape buffers, setback areas, and/or common private parking areas (other than parking areas necessary to meet parking standards
for the open space areas) cannot be included in the calculation of the required minimum open space. Stormwater management areas and utility
easements are generally excluded from the calculation of open space areas unless the primary use and design of the area is for recreational
purposes and the use of the area for stormwater management or utilities does not impair the use of the area for its designed recreational use.
b. Demarcation Of Open Space Areas: Open space areas must be clearly demarked by creating separation from adjoining developed areas with
plants, landscaped earth berms, fences, walls, or a combination of such elements.
c. Maintenance: Open space areas may be either privately maintained or dedicated for public ownership and maintenance (if the dedication is
formally accepted by the City). If any open space area is to be privately maintained, an owner's association must be formed to ensure that the
open space is perpetually maintained in an acceptable manner, which includes irrigation of all landscaped areas with an automated irrigation
system. If any open space area is to be dedicated to the public for ownership and maintenance, it must be dedicated to the public with the first
block of development unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the City.
d. Coordination With Other Open Space Areas: When preparing the PUD plan, the developer should coordinate open space areas, trails and
amenities within the site and with other open space areas/parks to create a larger, more efficient City-wide open space system that provides a
greater range of amenities.
D. PUD Application Requirements: A PUD application must contain or be accompanied by the following information:
1. Legal Description: A legal description of the site approved by an Idaho licensed surveyor or engineer must be included in the application.
2. Project Narrative: A narrative outlining the proposed PUD plan that, at a minimum, addresses the existing uses on the site, the proposed uses for
the site and how those uses fit into the uses in the surrounding area, compatibility with the approval criteria, a list of all proposed deviations from
City development standards, and an explanation of how the requested deviations allow for a heighted design that benefits the community.
3. PUD Plan: The application must be accompanied by a set of plans depicting the following elements:
a. Dimensions: Site dimensions and property lines.
b. Topography: Topography of the site using two foot (2') contours.
c. Existing Features: Existing site features including major wooded areas, significant natural, scenic and/or historical features, structures, rights-ofway,
streets, easements, utility lines and land uses.
d. Transportation Plan: A plan depicting all arterial, collector, planned local road ways and pedestrian/bicycle facilities within the development area.
Identify and provide proposed street and trail sections.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 204/268
e. Landscape Plan: A landscape plan for all planned private open space and rights-of-way areas.
f. Block Development Plan: A block development plan depicting the scope of each block of development and a timetable for implementation of the
PUD plan elements, which includes the timing of the dedication and/or development of the open space. Blocks can be developed in any order
provided that each block contain all of the infrastructure necessary to exist as a stand-alone development.
4. Authorized Signature And Proof Of Title: The application must be signed by each owner or by a person having the approval of each owner and be
accompanied with, proof of legal title to the entire site, proof of authorization to file the application (if applicable), and proof of common control (if
not under common ownership).
5. Will-Serve Letters: If public utility service is to be provided by an entity other than the City, the application must include a "will-serve" letter from the
entity indicating that the entity has sufficient capacity to service the entire development.
6. Fee: The current PUD application fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council.
E. PUD Review And Approval Criteria: The Planning and Zoning Commission will hold a public hearing to consider the proposed PUD plan following the
quasi-judicial hearing procedures contained in section 18.20.060 of this chapter. In order to approve a proposed PUD plan the commission must
determine that the proposal meets each of the following approval criteria:
1. The proposed PUD provides for adequate utilities, services, and parking to service the proposed development by:
a. Providing a public water supply system that has adequate supply to serve the proposed development; and
b. Providing a public wastewater collection system that is designed in accordance with the City's adopted Wastewater Master Plan and has
sufficient capacity to accommodate the proposed sewer flows; and
c. Providing adequate accommodation for other utilities necessary to support the proposed development; and
d. Providing sufficient parking throughout the development to adequately meet the parking needs of all uses proposed in the PUD.
2. The proposed PUD provides for an integrated transportation network that adequately serves the proposed development by:
a. Providing for the continuation of arterial and collector streets, meeting City standards for traffic volume, in a manner consistent with the City's
adopted Transportation Master Plan; and
b. Providing a local street network that allows adequate traffic circulation and snow storage throughout the entire development; and
c. Providing a pedestrian and bicycle system designed to provide adequate circulation throughout the entire development and to all open space
areas.
3. The proposed PUD provides enhanced community design by:
a. Conserving and incorporating the sites significant natural, scenic and/or historical features in the development, if any; and
b. Integrating a mix of compatible land uses in the development and adequately buffering and/or separating any incompatible uses in the
development; and
c. Locating the proposed uses and lot sizes in the proposed PUD in a manner that blends with the surrounding uses, neighborhoods and public
facilities located in the City; and
d. Providing at least ten percent (10%) of the gross land area for open space that meets the recreational needs of the users of the development
and provides for a variety of recreational uses; and
4. The proposed PUD provides for timely development of the property and security for future completion and maintenance by:
a. Ensuring that each development block contains all the necessary element to exist independently from future blocks; and
b. Ensuring that each building in the development lot has sufficient access around the structure to allow for continual maintenance of the building
and access for emergency services.
c. Ensuring that a funding mechanism exists to adequately maintain common areas that are not publicly maintained.
F. Development Of The PUD: Following final approval of the PUD plan, parcels within the PUD may be subdivided pursuant to title 17 of this Code and
sold but development of each parcel must conform to the approved PUD plan in all material respects unless an amendment to the PUD plan is
approved. Prior to subdividing any lots, the developer must construct or otherwise secure the construction of all public infrastructure as required by
title 17, chapter 17.24 of this Code. If the PUD is to be developed without subdivision, issuance of building permits will be conditioned upon
completion of all necessary public infrastructure prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Additionally, the developer must submit the proposed
CCRs for the development to the Zoning Administrator for review. The CCRs must require the formation of an owner's association for the perpetual
maintenance of all common areas and require that the owner's association obtain the approval of the City prior to amending the CCRs in any manner
that would change the maintenance obligation of the owner's association. The City will not approve any final plats, issue building permits or other
development approval until such time as the CCRs have been submitted to, and approved by, the City.
G. Amendments To A PUD Plan: Any material modification of an approved PUD plan, or removal of a PUD plan, must be approved by following the
same review and approval procedure required by this section for a new PUD plan. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to determine whether the
proposed plan amendment is material or to submit that question to the Planning and Zoning Commission for determination. If the modification to the
plan is immaterial, the modification may be approved or denied by the Zoning Administrator, who may modify, or require new conditions of approval,
as necessary to ensure that the intent of the original approval is met. For the purposes of this section a material modification is any modification that
alters the layout of the major transportation elements of the plan, changes the uses authorized by the plan, increases the density of the development,
decreases the amount of open space or the types of recreational uses in the plan, changes the alternate development standards approved for the
plan, alters a condition of approval or otherwise makes a material change to the plan. (Ord. 1330, 2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 205/268
18.20.090: VARIANCES:
Variances may be permitted when, due to unusual natural physical characteristics of the site, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title would
result in unnecessary hardship. A variance shall not be considered a right, but may be granted to an applicant only upon a showing of unnecessary
hardship because of unique physical characteristics of the site, and after demonstrating that the variance if implemented would not be in conflict with the
public interest.
A. Application: A complete application using an application form supplied by the Zoning Administrator shall include a description of the variance
requested, reasons why the variance is warranted, and any supporting documents. The application will be scheduled for public hearing whenever it
can be accommodated by the schedule of the hearing body.
B. Public Hearing: At least one public hearing must be held before the Planning and Zoning Commission using the hearing and notice procedure
required by law.
C. Decision: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the following when deciding a variance request:
1. Whether a literal interpretation of the provisions of this title would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same
district under the terms of this title.
2. That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to other
lands, structures or buildings in the same district. Such conditions or circumstances shall not be created by human error or oversight.
3. That the variance, if granted, would not harm the public interest.
Upon granting or denying an application, the commission shall specify the relevant facts considered in evaluating the application, the legal reasons
for approval or denial, and the actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain a permit. The applicant will be notified of the decision in
writing. (Ord. 1237, 2012)
18.20.100: AMENDMENT OF ZONING MAP:
An amendment of the zoning map may consist of the amending, supplementing, changing or repealing of the regulations, restrictions and/or boundaries
of the zone classification of land by ordinance in accordance with applicable provisions of Idaho Code. Amendments to the zoning map should be in
accordance with the future land use map and the goals and policies found in the Post Falls Comprehensive Plan.
A. Application: Any application for a zone map amendment or zoning upon annexation shall include the information required by the application forms
supplied by the Zoning Administrator, the information required by State law and information otherwise required by this title or by the Zoning
Administrator, commission or Council. In addition, the application shall provide a description of the amendment or zoning requested along with a
statement that describes the rationale for the request, how it conforms to the Comprehensive Plan, and why the City should consider the amendment
or establish the zone.
B. Public Hearing: Public hearing(s) shall be held before the Planning and Zoning Commission, and City Council, using the hearing and notice
procedure required by law.
C. Decision: The City Council, upon receipt of a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, and after review of the record, staff report,
and materials received at the public hearing shall render a decision to adopt, modify, or reject the amendment. Upon granting or denying an
application, the Council shall specify the reasons for approval or denial. An amendment, if approved, shall be made part of this title upon the
preparation and passage of an ordinance. If an amendment of the zoning map, submitted by parties other than staff or a City commission or board, is
denied by the City Council, a subsequent application for amendment of the zoning map for the subject property cannot be submitted to the City within
one year of such denial unless a request for application consideration is received and approved by the City Council. Such request shall be submitted
to the Community Development Department, with the appropriate fee, and shall provide the City Council with reasons why the application should be
accepted and processed. The City Council will review the request, determine whether or not the proposal is significantly different than the one denied
and permit an application to be accepted and processed or deny the request. (Ord. 1237, 2012)
18.20.110: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
A. General: The purpose of this section is to provide processes to allow certain land use related permits to be approved administratively. The Zoning
Administrator is hereby granted discretion to decide the administrative permits addressed by this chapter. Application forms for all administrative
permits must contain information required by this title and additional information relevant to the specific permits requested.
Temporary use permits, site-plan review, home occupations and administrative exceptions must follow the administrative procedures established by
this section.
B. Appeals: Any affected party may appeal an administrative decision by the Zoning Administrator to the Planning and Zoning Commission by filing a
written notice of appeal, along with the required fee, with the Zoning Administrator no more than fourteen (14) days after the date of the written
decision. The request for appeal must include the legal or factual reason for appeal and the result sought through the appellate process. The Zoning
Administrator will coordinate with the City Attorney and relevant City departments to schedule a de novo hearing before the Planning and Zoning
Commission to consider the matter as quickly as the Planning and Zoning Commission's schedule allows. Employing whatever procedures it deems
appropriate in accordance with its procedures resolution, the Planning and Zoning Commission will render a written decision that will be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 206/268
communicated to the appellant and applicant. The decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be further appealed to the City Council by
following the appeal procedures contained in section 18.20.060 of this chapter.
C. Exhaustion Of Procedures: The final decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission is not a final decision for purposes of judicial review until the
City Council has issued a final decision on appeal and the party seeking judicial review has requested reconsideration of that final decision as
provided by Idaho Code 67-6535(2)(b). (Ord. 1330, 2018)
18.20.120: TEMPORARY USE PERMIT:
Temporary uses include, but are not limited to, erection of temporary structures such as fences, booths, tents, or parking of trailers for activities such as
carnivals, circuses, fairs, religious meetings, temporary outdoor displays and/or sale of art objects or other items and other similar activities conducted
either outdoors or within temporary structures. A temporary use is a land use established for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days in a calendar
year and does not require permanent site improvements. The actual use embodied by a temporary use permit must be a permitted use in the zoning
district in which it is proposed to be located. The temporary use permit may be allowed subject to conditions required by the Zoning Administrator so
long as the Zoning Administrator determines that granting the temporary use permit will not harm the public interest if the required conditions are
complied with.
A. An application for a temporary use shall include a written description of the use, proposed starting date of the use, and a site plan that shows the
location of the use, access, setbacks from property lines, parking, restroom facilities (if applicable), and any other pertinent information that the
Zoning Administrator may require to evaluate the use. An application shall include the names and addresses of abutting property owners. The
Zoning Administrator will prepare a notice of the administrative permit request and mail it to abutting property owners who will have seven (7) days
from the date of mailing within which to respond with written comments supporting or opposing the request.
B. A temporary use may be approved, approved with conditions or denied by the Zoning Administrator. A temporary use permit is valid on the date of
approval or on the date requested by the applicant and will be valid for the time period requested or no more than thirty (30) days during a calendar
year, such days to be designated at the time of issuance. The Zoning Administrator, when deciding a temporary use permit request, should consider
the following:
1. That the permit for the proposed temporary use would be consistent with the general intent of the zoning ordinance and Comprehensive Plan and
would be permitted within the zoning district wherein located.
2. Granting the permit would not be detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood or to the community in general, would not create a traffic hazard
and would not harm the functioning of community facilities or services.
3. Written notice of the decision shall be sent to the applicant.
C. Annual Christmas tree sales and fireworks stands are exempt from needing to obtain a temporary use permit so long as the use does not exceed
thirty (30) days per calendar year, occur solely on private property, are conducted on commercially/industrially zoned and improved property, and are
conducted in a manner that does not create a traffic hazard or other health and safety hazards to adjacent properties and the general public. (Ord.
1237, 2012)
18.20.130: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
A. Site plan review ensures that new development meets applicable provisions of this code through administrative review. A site plan shall implement
the appropriate provisions to connect to nearby infrastructure and utilities, provide necessary easements, complement adjoining land uses and
transitioning of areas. Site plan review and approval is required for the following conditions:
1. Establishment or location of any permitted commercial, industrial, public or multi-family residential (3 or greater units on 1 parcel) structure or use
on a vacant lot.
2. Expansion of the total floor area (either attached or detached) of an existing structure greater than twenty five percent (25%) other than a multifamily
structure.
3. Expansion of a multi-family structure (duplex or greater) in which additional unit(s) are to be attained.
4. Tenant improvement that results in the change of use or expansion of an existing use of twenty five percent (25%) or more within a structure.
Change of use is defined by the international building code (IBC).
B. The zoning administrator may waive the requirement to complete the site plan review upon the following condition:
1. Preexisting site is already improved to current site design standards.
C. An application for site plan review approval shall be filed with the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall determine whether the
application is complete. An applicant can meet informally with staff prior to submittal of an application. In addition to application requirements
otherwise required by this title or the applicable building code, a site plan submitted for review should include:
1. A drawing of the proposed development site depicting placement of all buildings, parking areas, landscaped areas, signage, building bulk
information, drainage, and stormwater treatment, utility service information, frontage improvements and such other information as the zoning
administrator might require to assess the impact of development of a site upon the land and infrastructure affected.
2. Location and statistical information about the site including the size of the site in square feet or acres, the address of the site, if known, the area of
the lot covered by buildings in square feet, square feet of impervious surface (excluding roof area) and the density in units per acre for residential
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 207/268
developments.
D. A street naming and addressing plan shall be submitted for review and approval, concurrently with site plan review construction plans, in compliance
with title 12, chapter 12.24 of this code and any associated street naming and addressing guidelines. Such review shall ensure that proposed streets
and addresses meet city and county regulations and that appropriate street signage is installed.
E. The applicant shall provide copies of the site plan for review, drawn to an appropriate scale to clearly show all required elements that include, but are
not limited to:
1. Location and height of existing and proposed structures.
2. Signs.
3. Trash enclosures.
4. Site furnishings, and site lighting.
5. Site boundaries and dimensions.
6. Grading and drainage, and enough site information from adjoining properties so that differences in site grading can be minimized or
accommodated.
7. Spot elevations shall be included at building corners, drainage inlets and dry wells, sufficient to determine drainage on the site.
8. Setbacks from property lines.
9. Existing and proposed easements and rights of way.
10. Location of existing and proposed utility structures.
11. Location and size of existing and proposed sewer and water lines.
12. Location of the nearest fire hydrant(s).
13. Site grading and drainage to include stormwater collection and treatment prepared by a licensed professional, registered in the state of Idaho.
14. Location of all driveways, streets and sidewalks, and frontage improvements.
15. Location and layout of all off street parking.
16. Location of loading areas (if applicable).
17. Location of ADA accessible parking stalls/access aisles and ADA route along the public right of way, from the public right of way to the building
entrance, and from the ADA parking to the building entrance.
18. Location of nearest streetlight.
19. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the landscape requirements within this code.
20. Irrigation plan.
F. The zoning administrator may waive any of the elements listed above upon determining they are unnecessary based on the scope of work proposed.
The site plan review process provides a degree of flexibility in the application of standards and ordinance requirements to allow site design to
function with its surroundings while maintaining substantial compliance with ordinance requirements.
Upon receipt of a complete site plan, the zoning administrator may schedule a site plan review with appropriate staff. Copies of submittal documents
will be provided as necessary to agencies and jurisdictions. The zoning administrator and appropriate staff will review the site plan submittals to
determine that all applicable ordinance provisions are complied with and that the site will function satisfactorily with its surroundings. Site plan review
may include, but not be limited to:
1. Review of lot size, dimensions, setbacks and other site development characteristics to determine functional compatibility with topography, public
facilities and established or projected nearby uses.
2. Determine that there are adequate utility provisions to serve the proposed use and to continue the utility systems to property lines in order to
facilitate continuity of utilities.
3. Assure that the design, grading and drainage, parking, circulation design, landscaping, and other elements of the plan meet adopted performance
standards and function compatibly with nearby uses and public facilities.
4. Review the location of streetlights and other site lighting practices to protect public safety on site and on adjoining rights of way, without disturbing
the livability of neighboring lands.
5. Determine if mitigation of any extraordinary on site or off site impact is necessary or would result in a more functional project that would not
diminish the potential use of public facilities or nearby private lands.
6. Define the scope of improvements and dedications required (curb, sidewalk, paving, water, sewer, drainage, easements, right of way dedication,
etc.) to allow the project to meet legal requirements and to be compatible with present or future development of neighboring land and determine
the need for a construction improvement agreement for frontage improvements or off site public infrastructure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 208/268
G. If changes to the site development plans are required, the site plan will be returned to the applicant for revision. Upon submittal of a properly revised
site plan, the zoning administrator will issue a written approval, addressing any supplementary conditions applicable to the site. The owner shall
acknowledge the review comments and conditions of approval by countersigning the written approval, returning a copy to the zoning administrator.
When all requirements have been satisfied and the conditions of approval are acknowledged and returned, the site plan may be deemed approved.
Notwithstanding site plan approval, actual field conditions or physical realities that do not meet legal standards or that result in dysfunctional site
conditions shall be subject to on site adjustment or correction as directed by the city engineer, or his designee.
1. The applicant may appeal the decision of the zoning administrator to the planning and zoning commission by filing a notice of appeal in
accordance with the appeals section of this title.
2. The approval of a site plan shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of approval. If construction has not commenced or an extension
granted within the one year period, the site plan approval shall expire, and the applicant shall be required to resubmit for site plan review.
3. Prior to the expiration date of the effective period, the applicant may request an extension, in writing, from the zoning administrator. The zoning
administrator may grant an extension, not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days, upon a showing of good cause. The zoning administrator shall
address the request for extension by a written response to the applicant. The applicant may appeal the zoning administrator's decision to deny an
extension in accordance with the appeals section of this title.
4. After the plan approval, the applicant may request an amendment to the approved site plan or to conditions of approval. If the proposed
amendment is a minor change and is consistent with conditions of approval, the zoning administrator may grant the amendment in writing. If the
zoning administrator determines the amendment involves significant change to the conditions of approval, the zoning administrator shall schedule
a review with other staff members in accordance with the site plan review procedures and the applicant shall pay an additional one-half (1/2) of the
current site plan review fee for review of the proposed amendment. (Ord. 1237, 2012)
18.20.140: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Certain limited business or professional uses may be conducted as a home occupation on premises subject to specific limitations established to
maintain compatibility with a residential neighborhood. Examples of permissible use types include professional offices, home offices, daycare,
handicrafts, graphic arts, seamstress, beauty/hair salon or similar businesses. The purpose of this section is to establish standards for home
occupations that maintain the residential character of a neighborhood.
Before establishing a home occupation, an application must be reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator. An application must include
information listed on the application along with an accurate and concise description of the requested home occupation.
The zoning administrator will review the application submittals and will grant, grant with conditions, or deny the home occupation permit upon finding that
the home occupation will not adversely affect the character of the neighborhood or create a nuisance (noise, dust, odor, excessive traffic, etc.) and that it
complies with the standards established by this code. The zoning administrator shall review the application to determine that the use will meet the home
occupation standards listed in this section. A permit may be revoked or a violation may be prosecuted for noncompliance with standards or conditions of
approval.
A decision by the zoning administrator may be appealed to the planning and zoning commission and thereafter to the city council respectively, in
accordance with the appeals section found in this title.
A home occupation permit is effective on the date that the permit is approved, is nontransferable and is valid so long as the conditions of approval
issued with the permit are complied with and home occupation standards set forth herein are met.
A. Home Occupation Performance Standards: All home occupations shall comply with the following standards, in addition to the site specific conditions
required by the zoning administrator:
1. The home occupation must be clearly subordinate, both visually and with respect to space occupied, to the primary residential use. Not more than
one-third (1/3) of the floor area of the dwelling unit may be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
2. No outside storage of goods, equipment or materials related to the home occupation shall be permitted.
3. No home occupation shall create a need for parking or traffic beyond that required for the primary single-family residential use, or create noise,
dust, vibration, odor, smoke, glare, electrical interference, fire hazard, or any other hazard or nuisance beyond that caused by typical single-family
residential occupancy in a residential neighborhood.
4. There shall be no change in appearance that would alter the residential character of the premises.
5. Signage requirements for home occupations are to be consistent with chapter 18.36 of this title.
6. A permitted home occupation shall have no more than one full time employee equivalent who is not a family member on the premises.
7. Employees (other than the resident and 1 employee) of a permitted home occupation, may not work, gather, park, or meet, at the residence of a
home occupation on a regular or frequent basis.
8. A home occupation must be fully enclosed within the residence or approved accessory building.
9. Home occupation daycare shall provide care to no more than five (5) children or adults at any time. Children of the provider, under the age of
thirteen (13), shall be considered needing care and included in the child limit.
10. Uses with the following characteristics are expressly prohibited as home occupations:
Any business creating external noise, odors, vibrations, or other potential nuisance factors including high levels of customer traffic.
Any use requiring sewage pretreatment in accordance with this code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 209/268
Repair and/or servicing or painting of automobiles, trucks, boats, RVs, motorcycles, and ATVs. (Ord. 1237, 2012)
18.20.150: ADMINISTRATIVE EXCEPTIONS:
A. An "administrative exception" is defined as follows:
1. A maximum twenty percent (20%) reduction in required setback from external property lines;
2. A possible fifteen percent (15%) reduction in the lot area requirements per dwelling unit; the intent for this exception is for individual lots rather
than implementing across an entire major subdivision;
3. Administrative discretion to allow fences or walls in excess of three feet (3') in height in the designated front yard area to increase up to four feet
(4') such as to not create visibility issues;
4. Administrative discretion to allow fences or walls in excess of six feet (6') in a rear or side yard to increase up to eight feet (8'); and
5. Administrative discretion to waive the required minimum four foot (4') wide landscaped area between a parking lot (including driveways) and an
exterior property line under the following conditions:
a. Exterior property line is under common ownership with adjoining property.
b. Exterior property line abuts open space, utility corridors, railway corridors, and interstate rights of way.
B. Administrative exceptions may be granted upon the finding that such exception is consistent with the general intent of this title. Administrative
exceptions shall not be granted when the request is to reduce the front yard setback to a residential structure to less than ten feet (10') or garage to
less than twenty feet (20'), with setbacks to garages measured from the property line or back of sidewalk when placed within an easement.
C. An application for an administrative exception shall include a written description of the requested exception and a site plan that shows information
relevant to the request in order to allow the zoning administrator to evaluate the proposed exception. Applications shall include the names and
addresses of abutting property owners.
D. An administrative exception may be approved, approved with modifications or denied by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator, when
deciding, shall consider the following:
1. That the administrative permit for the proposed minor exception would be consistent with the general intent of the zoning ordinance and related
provisions of this code.
2. Granting the permit has not been demonstrated to be detrimental to neighboring development.
E. Written notice of the decision shall be provided to the applicant and mailed to abutting property owners. A decision may be appealed by any affected
property owner or by the applicant in accordance with procedures specified by this code for decisions made by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 1237,
2012)
18.20.160: LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURES:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide processes to allow certain land use related actions to be approved legislatively by the City Council, upon
receipt of a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission. Application forms for legislative actions shall contain information required by
this title and additional information relevant to the specific permits requested. Hearings before the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City
Council will be scheduled as their schedules and agendas allow.
Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, zoning and subdivision ordinances and annexations must follow the legislative procedures established by this
chapter. (Ord. 1330, 2018)
18.20.170: AMENDMENTS OF ZONING ORDINANCE TEXT:
The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council may amend, supplement, change or repeal the regulations, restrictions and/or zoning
classifications that can be made applicable by this title. An amendment to the text of the zoning ordinance is a legislative action subject to procedural
standards applicable to legislative action.
An amendment of the zoning text may consist of the amending, supplementing, changing or repealing of the regulations and/or zone classification of
land by ordinance in accordance with applicable provisions of Idaho Code. Amendments to the zoning text should be in accordance with the future land
use map and the goals and policies found in the Post Falls Comprehensive Plan.
A. Application: Any application for a zone text amendment shall include the information required by the application forms supplied by the Zoning
Administrator, the information required by State law and information otherwise required by this title or by the Zoning Administrator, commission or
Council. In addition, the application shall provide a description of the text amendment requested along with a statement that describes the rationale
for the request, and how it conforms to the Comprehensive Plan, and why the City should consider the text amendment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 210/268
B. Commission Hearing: A public hearing will be held before the Planning and Zoning Commission, using the notice and hearing procedures required by
law. Following the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission will forward a recommendation to the City Council concerning the proposed
amendment.
C. City Council Decision: The City Council, upon receipt of a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, will schedule a public hearing
to consider the proposed amendment following the notice and hearing procedures required by law and render a decision to adopt, modify, or reject
the amendment. An amendment, if approved, shall be made part of this title upon the preparation and passage of an ordinance. If an amendment of
the zoning ordinance text, submitted by parties other than staff or a City commission or board, is denied by the City Council, a subsequent
application for a text amendment cannot be submitted to the City within one year of such denial unless a request for application consideration is
received and approved by the City Council. Such request shall be submitted to the Community Development Division, with the appropriate fee, and
shall provide the City Council with reasons why the application should be accepted and processed. The City Council will review the request,
determine whether or not the proposal is significantly different than the one denied and permit an application to be accepted and processed or deny
the request. (Ord. 1330, 2018)
18.20.180: ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council may amend, supplement, change or repeal provisions of the Comprehensive Plan by following
the legislative procedures established by this chapter. Amendments of the text or future land use map contained in the Comprehensive Plan should be
consistent with the general intent, goals and policies contained in the Comprehensive Plan.
A. Application: Any application for a Comprehensive Plan amendment must include the information required by the application forms supplied by the
Zoning Administrator, the information required by State law and information otherwise required by this title or by the Zoning Administrator,
commission or Council. In addition, the application shall provide a description of the proposed amendment along with a statement that describes the
rationale for the request, and how it conforms to the general intent, goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan, and why the City should consider
the amendment.
B. Commission Hearing: A public hearing will be held before the Planning and Zoning Commission, using the notice and hearing procedures required by
law. Following the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission will forward a recommendation to the City Council concerning the proposed
amendment.
C. City Council Decision: The City Council, upon receipt of a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, will schedule a public hearing
to consider the proposed amendment. The hearing will be scheduled following the notice and hearing procedures required by law and the City
Council will render a decision to adopt, modify, or reject the amendment. If the City Council makes a material change to the proposed amendment
during the course of the public hearing, a second public hearing, following the same notice and hearing requirements, will be held to allow public
comment before final adoption of the amendment. An amendment, if approved, will be made part of the Comprehensive Plan upon the preparation
and passage of a resolution adopting the amendment.
If an amendment of the Comprehensive Plan, submitted by parties other than staff or a City commission or board, is denied by the City Council, a
subsequent application for an amendment cannot be submitted to the City within six (6) months of such denial unless a request for application
consideration is received and approved by the City Council. Such request shall be submitted to the Community Development Division, with the
appropriate fee, and shall provide the City Council with reasons why the application should be accepted and processed. The City Council will review
the request, determine whether or not the proposal is significantly different than the one denied and permit an application to be accepted and
processed or deny the request. (Ord. 1330, 2018)
18.20.190: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
The City requires a development agreement, pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6511A, for all requests to zone property to the Technology Mixed Zone
and in conjunction with all requests for annexation and zoning of property. Additionally the City may require a development agreement as a condition of
approving a rezone request. When required, the development agreement must be signed by the property owner and returned to the City within six (6)
months of the City Council granting annexation and/or rezone. (Ord. 1340, 2018)
Chapter 18.24
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
18.24.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide performance standards that provide consistency in site development and conformance with the regulations
found in this title. The following performance standards apply to developments in all zoning districts. (Ord. 1061 § 2, 2005)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1357 - DRIVEWAYS. Go to new ordinance.
18.24.020: GENERAL STANDARDS:
A. Corner Lot Visibility: Visibility shall be maintained at all intersections of public rights-of-way or the intersection of a public right-of-way with a private
street in conformance with title 10, chapter 10.52, "Maintenance Of Intersection Visibility", of this Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 211/268
B. Temporary Buildings: Temporary buildings, trailers, equipment and materials used in conjunction with construction work, may be permitted in any
district during the construction period upon showing that their use and placement will not harm the area in which they are located. Temporary
facilities shall be removed upon completion of the construction or issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
C. Screening And Landscaping: Screening devices and landscaping shall not impair the visibility of drivers entering or exiting a commercial, industrial, or
multi-family site.
D. Dangerous And Objectionable Conditions: No land or building in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner creating dangerous, injurious,
noxious or otherwise objectionable conditions, which may adversely affect the surrounding area or adjoining premises. Methods and procedures for
the determination of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall conform to applicable standard measurement procedures
listed in the International Fire Code or other applicable Life Safety Codes.
E. Glare/Exterior Lighting: No interior or exterior lighting shall create direct or reflected glare which will adversely affect any surrounding property nor
shall such lighting adversely affect use of public streets or rights-of-way.
F. Street Right-Of-Way Dedication And Frontage Improvements: Dedication of necessary additional street rights-of-way, easements and construction of
frontage improvements is required at the time of establishment of other than a temporary use, any construction on a lot to establish a new land use
or expansion of an existing use by twenty five percent (25%) or more in floor area. Frontage improvements shall be to centerline of existing fully
developed roadways, or to centerline, plus ten feet (10') for nondeveloped roadways, including transitions on each end of the developing property, as
determined by the City Engineer. Right-of-way dedication shall conform to the transportation element of the comprehensive plan, the transportation
master plan, or as otherwise required by the City Engineer pursuant to site plan review or other ordinance specified procedures. Private streets and
associated streetlights may be allowed, as determined by the City, and shall meet City street and illumination standards.
G. Utility Line Placement: All wire or cable utility service lines shall be placed underground, in accordance with franchise agreements. The Zoning
Administrator may waive this requirement if the use is temporary in nature or if there are practical physical difficulties.
H. Surfacing:
1. Residential: All required residential access drives and parking areas shall be surfaced with concrete or asphalt paving. Driveways to individual
residences shall be a maximum of eight percent (8%) slope and measure a minimum of fourteen feet (14') in width and twenty feet (20') in depth;
this shall include a city standard drive approach.
2. Commercial/Industrial: All required commercial/industrial access drives, maneuvering areas and parking areas, outdoor merchandise display
areas and motorized vehicle display lots shall be surfaced with concrete or asphalt paving. Surfacing material shall be designed for the loading
anticipated. Actual load design for commercial/industrial uses will be determined at site plan review. Outdoor nonvehicular storage areas in the
commercial and industrial zones may be surfaced with gravel and shall be enclosed within a sight obscuring fence. Outdoor merchandise display
areas may be provided without paving and/or a sight obscuring fence as determined by the zoning administrator.
I. Water Supply And Sewage Disposal: The method of water supply and sewage disposal for all land uses must comply with municipal and other
applicable codes. Developers shall extend utility systems to the boundaries of the land developed in order to maintain system continuity.
J. Dust Control: During all on site grading and construction activities, adequate measures shall be implemented to control dust. Methods for dust control
may be required to be approved at site plan review. The zoning administrator may issue a stop work order on any project that demonstrates
persistent inability to control dust until an acceptable dust control program is implemented.
K. Fences And Walls (Excluding Retaining Walls): All walls and fences shall not exceed three feet (3') in height within the required front yard setback
and nor shall they exceed six feet (6') in height in the rear and side yard setback areas, unless otherwise permitted per section 18.20.150 of this title.
For corner lots, fences measuring six feet (6') in height along the "street side yard" can be permitted so long as such fence height does not extend
into the front yard setback where the primary entrance of the residence is oriented. Corner lots which abut the side yard of an adjoining lot may not
block visibility of a driveway on the adjoining lot above three feet (3'). The height and location of new fences or walls that affect visibility from existing
abutting driveways shall be restricted, to provide for vision clearance measuring ten feet by ten feet (10' x 10') on the subject private property. Where
new driveways are proposed adjacent to existing fences that exceed three feet (3') in height, the driveway approach shall be located no closer than
fifteen feet (15') to the fence.
L. Unsightly Conditions: The exterior of all structures and yards shall be maintained in such manner that there is no detrimental effect on the property of
others. There shall be no keeping or depositing on, or scattering over, the property of any of the following:
1. Junk, trash, or debris.
2. Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment, such as automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, containers, or similar
items.
3. Stagnant water or excavations.
4. Any device, decoration, design, structure or vegetation which offends the visual sensibilities of a reasonable person by reason of its conditions.
M. Building Materials And Equipment: No building materials, machinery or other materials or equipment used in or for a business shall be stored
outdoors on any lot in any residential district, except during construction on the lot.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 212/268
N. Commercial Curbing: Curbing is required at the outer limits of a paved surface to ensure the integrity of the edge of asphalt, direct storm drainage,
function as wheel stops, provide separation of pedestrian facilities and for aesthetics. A six inch (6") high cement concrete curb shall be constructed
at the edge and along all landscaped areas and extent of pavement. All extruded curbs shall be dowelled. Flush curbs may be used in areas
designated for snow storage. Curbing located at the extent of a paved surface, in a phased project or in an extraordinary case of vast amounts of
asphalt, may be waived by the zoning administrator.
O. Outbuildings Or Carports: All commercial and residential outbuildings or carports that require a building permit shall be constructed with either a
concrete or asphalt floor. Outbuilding and/or carports for livestock shall not require such floors in livestock areas. (Ord. 1237, 2012)
18.24.030: RESIDENTIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Single-Family And Duplex Residential: Single-family and duplex residential development shall conform to the following standards:
1. Garages: All dwellings in any residential zone shall be required to have a garage per dwelling of sufficient size to accommodate at least one
vehicle, measuring a minimum of ten feet (10') in width and twenty feet (20') in depth.
2. Accessory Structures: Accessory structures in any zone shall be set back behind the front of the residence. On a corner lot the accessory
structure may be placed in front of the residence on the "street side yard".
3. Accessory Dwelling Units: Accessory dwelling units may be permitted as secondary dwellings to single-family homes subject to the following
restrictions:
a. Only one accessory dwelling unit per lot.
b. One of the residences shall be owner occupied.
c. One additional off street parking space must be provided.
d. Building materials will be consistent with the primary residence.
e. No more than one entrance shall be visible from the street.
f. The accessory dwelling unit will not have a separate drive approach.
g. The accessory dwelling unit shall be no larger than forty percent (40%) of the living area of the primary residence, or no more than one
thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is greater.
h. An accessory dwelling unit shall have electricity, kitchen facilities, and sanitary facilities.
i. The applicant shall include a detailed site plan, drawn to scale, including the proposed accessory living unit, setback lines, ingress/egress routes.
j. An existing accessory building that is proposed to be converted to an accessory living unit shall meet the requirements of the building
department.
B. Twin Home Performance Standards: Twin home development projects shall conform to the following standards:
1. Open porches may extend five feet (5') from the principal plane, such that they do not restrict the visibility of pedestrians along the adjacent
sidewalk or vehicles accessing/leaving a residence.
2. All twin homes shall have a walkway connecting each residential unit to the adjacent sidewalk.
3. All garages must either be accessed from the rear as depicted in the following diagram or be front loaded with the garage face being recessed at a
minimum of five feet (5') from the principal face.
4. Twin homes may have detached outbuildings as illustrated below or attached garages.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 213/268
C. Townhome Performance Standards: Townhome development projects shall conform to the following standards:
1. Open porches may extend five feet (5') from the principal plane, such that they do not restrict the visibility of pedestrians along the adjacent
sidewalk or vehicles accessing/leaving a residence.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 214/268
2. All townhomes shall have a walkway connecting each residential unit to the adjacent sidewalk.
3. Unless otherwise approved through the site plan review process per chapter 18.20 of this title, all townhomes shall have vehicular access from the
rear.
4. In order to avoid a continuous plane, an offset face shall be provided to not create two (2) adjoining principal faces (see following diagrams).
5. The offset face shall be set back a minimum distance of five feet (5') from the principal face.
6. The offset face or the sum of two (2) adjoining offset faces shall be at least three-fourths (3/4) or equal to the width of the adjoining principal face.
(See following diagrams.)
7. Townhomes shall develop under a unified theme to include at least two (2) distinct architectural facade designs that are alternated in adjacent
units. A two-unit townhome development would follow the design standards set forth for twin homes.
8. Common parking lots approved through the site plan review process for townhomes shall provide street screens that complement the architectural
theme of the constructed townhomes.
9. A minimum of two (2) separate siding materials shall be applied on the exterior of townhomes. Vinyl siding is prohibited.
10. Townhome developments shall comply with the standards set forth in title 17, "Subdivisions", of this code and the site plan review process per
section 18.20.130 of this title, unless otherwise approved by the zoning administrator.
11. Townhome developments will be required to provide information regarding the coordination and installation of a trash enclosure with a refuse
company.
D. Multi-Family Performance Standards: Multi-family development (3 units or greater on a single lot) shall utilize the site plan review process, section
18.20.130 of this title, and shall conform to the following standards:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 215/268
1. Solid Waste Screening: All solid waste storage areas shall be enclosed on at least three (3) sides by a sight obscuring wall or fence six feet (6') in
height or shall be stored within an enclosed building or structure. Adequate access shall be provided for collection.
2. Parking Lot Lighting: Lighting shall be provided for all parking lots for multi-family sites. Lighting shall be installed in a manner that prevents glare
on adjoining lands.
3. Outside Storage And Screening: Outside storage areas must be screened from public view by sight obscuring fences, walls, berms, or a
combination of these, as approved by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator may approve alternative methods of reducing the visual
impact in lieu of screening, or waive the requirements if visual impact is not an issue.
4. Landscaping: Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with section 18.24.080 of this chapter.
E. Manufactured/Modular Home Placement Standards On Private Platted Lots: This subsection establishes minimum placement standards for
manufactured/modular homes for all districts in which a manufactured home can be located. Restrictions are in addition to those applicable to the
district where a manufactured home is located. Manufactured/modular homes are a factory built assembly designed for residential occupancy. Such
housing is built on a permanent chassis and has wheels attached for transportation, which are removed on site when connected to the required
utilities and set on a foundation approved by the Idaho "Manufactured Home Installation Standards Manual". Such housing is manufactured on or
after June 15, 1976, and is certified as meeting the manufactured housing construction safety standards of the U.S. department of housing and
urban development, and shall be placed with the following standards:
1. Designed for long term residential use by a family, contains a kitchen, bath, living and sleeping facilities, multisectional and at least twenty feet
(20') wide with a minimum total square footage equal to eight hundred (800) square feet.
2. Recessed permanent foundations are required. Foundations must comply with the setup requirements of title 44, chapter 22, Idaho Code, when
placed in any residential or commercial district.
3. Where garages are required for site built homes, they are required for manufactured homes.
4. Placement of a manufactured/modular home on a lot not located in a residential mobile home park will comply with the single-family bulk and
placement requirements and the single-family residential off street parking standards.
F. Residential Mobile Home Park Performance Standards: The mobile home park development standards contained in the following subsections shall
apply to all land and structures in the RMHP district. The following subsections describe the standards for design, issuance of permits, authorizing
the licensing of operations, authorizing the inspection of mobile home parks, and fixing penalties for violations. The following are standards for
development in existing residential mobile home parks:
1. Uses And Development Permitted: The following uses and developments may be conducted or constructed in the mobile home park district:
Accessory buildings such as storage buildings, attached or detached garages and toolsheds.
Carports, garages and patios.
Individual mobile home as part of a mobile home park.
Parks, playgrounds, and other open space amenities.
2. Nonresidential Uses:
a. No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except such uses that are required for the direct servicing and well being of park
residents and for the management and maintenance of the park.
b. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be deemed as prohibiting the sale of a mobile home located on a mobile home stand and connected
to the pertinent utilities.
3. Home Separation, Setbacks, Buffer Strips And Screening:
a. All mobile homes shall be located at least twenty five feet (25') from any park property boundary line abutting upon a public street or highway
and at least fifteen feet (15') from other park boundary lines.
b. There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet (10') between individual mobile homes or an individual mobile home with an adjoining improved
or unimproved park street, or common parking area or other common areas.
c. All mobile home parks located adjacent to industrial or commercial land uses shall be provided with screening such as fences or natural growth
along the property boundary line separating the park and such adjacent nonresidential uses.
4. Off Street Parking: Off street parking areas shall be provided in all mobile home parks for the uses of park occupants and guests. Each mobile
home lot shall be designed to provide two (2) off street parking spaces. Parking may be in tandem.
5. Mobile/Manufactured Home Placement/Tiedown: The placement and tiedown of a mobile/manufactured home shall be in accordance with the
latest adopted Idaho manufactured home installation standards for a temporary installation. (Ord. 1237, 2012)
18.24.040: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
The following standards apply to commercial, Technology Mixed and industrial districts. Development in the commercial and industrial districts requires
site plan review in accordance with section 18.20.130 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 216/268
A. Solid Waste Screening: All solid waste storage areas shall be enclosed on at least three (3) sides by a sight obscuring wall or fence six feet (6') in
height or shall be stored within an enclosed building or structure. Adequate access shall be provided for collection.
B. Outside Storage And Screening: Outside storage areas, service and loading areas must be screened from public view by sight obscuring fences,
walls, berms, structures, or a combination of these, as approved by the Zoning Administrator. Screening by vegetative plantings in combination with
street screens may also be acceptable, as approved by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may approve alternative methods of
reducing the visual impact in lieu of screening, or waive the requirements if visual impact is not an issue. Please reference the following diagram:
C. Parking Lot Lighting: Lighting shall be provided for all parking lots for commercial and industrial sites. Lighting shall be installed in a manner that
prevents glare on adjoining lands.
D. Landscaping: Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with section 18.24.080 of this chapter.
E. Limited Commercial (LC); Special Development Standards: Within the Limited Commercial Zone building coverage on a single lot or parcel is limited
to ten thousand (10,000) square feet or thirty percent (30%) of the lot whichever is less. No outside storage or display of goods is permitted in the LC
Zone. A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the lot area of any development in the LC Zone shall be landscaped. All parking areas shall be screened
from adjacent residential uses or zones.
F. Animal Clinics, Hospitals, Veterinary Facilities, And Kennels: Shall be located at least three hundred feet (300') from any residence including motels
and hotels, except for an owner's residence. The Zoning Administrator may modify these requirements if the animals are completely housed in
soundproof structures that completely screen them from view of the abutting residential property; and will comply with all State and local regulations
relative to such an operation, and maintain adequate housekeeping practices designed to prevent the creation of a nuisance and to reduce to a
minimum the factors of noise and odor.
G. Automotive Impound Yards: Outdoor surface storage of automobiles shall comply with Code provisions for a paved surface, storm drainage
treatment, and visual screening/landscape buffering from public rights-of-way and adjacent properties.
H. Seasonal Outdoor Markets: "Seasonal outdoor markets" are defined as seasonally operated outdoor markets located on publicly or privately owned
property, where single or multiple vendors or merchants locate on a common site to sell their products to the general public for more than thirty (30)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 217/268
days but less than one hundred eighty (180) days annually. Outdoor markets wanting to operate less than thirty (30) days annually may be permitted
under section 18.20.120 of this title. Outdoor markets wanting to operate more than one hundred eighty (180) days annually are required to meet the
same performance standards as all other commercial retail businesses. Vendors allowed in seasonal outdoor markets may include farmers, crafters,
fresh food merchants, vendors (trinkets, flea market vendors), and prepared food vendors. The following are performance standards for seasonal
outdoor markets:
1. Location is limited to nonresidential zones in compliance with all underlying height, area, setback and density requirements. Approval is subject to
site plan review in accordance with this Code.
2. Must possess permit for food service if required by Panhandle Health District.
3. Must provide adequate all weather parking spaces to meet traffic generated by the outdoor market.
4. Public restrooms adequate to meet needs of the public must be provided.
5. Solid waste collection and disposal must be provided; the method and location will be reviewed at site plan review.
6. Electrical power to the site and/or vendor stalls must be permitted by the State of Idaho Labor and Industrial Services, Electrical Division, and
comply with applicable Code requirements.
7. No overnight use of the outdoor market area, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., may be allowed.
8. The site shall be maintained in a dust free, litter free condition with weeds controlled to prevent spread to adjoining lands and to avoid risk of fire.
9. Signage shall comply with the regulations contained in this title. Signage is discussed in chapter 18.36 of this title.
10. All temporary structures must be removed at the end of the season, and the site left clean and free of debris. (Ord. 1340, 2018)
18.24.050: MISCELLANEOUS PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1237, 2012)
18.24.060: SITE DISTURBANCE:
The intent of this section is to protect the existing natural topography and prevent erosion of land by restricting construction activity that may cause
accelerated soil erosion or sedimentation due to unstable soils, steep slopes, high groundwater, or road and building construction. Exempt from these
requirements are emergency grading activities necessary to protect lives or property.
A. Any person or agency planning or conducting a land disturbing activity involving the following sites shall submit a plan for erosion and sediment
control when applying for a building permit, special use permit, planned unit development or subdivision permit:
1. Sites that are in high erosion hazard areas as determined by the City Engineer by nature of the slope, soil characteristics or by concentration of
drainage or by existing or proposed stormwater runoff influence.
2. Sites where the slope is fifteen percent (15%) or more.
3. Sites where disturbance could have water quality impacts on the Spokane River, as determined by the City Engineer.
4. Sites that have the potential to discharge stormwater to the surface waters of the United States (Spokane River) and are greater than one acre in
size or less than one acre that are part of a larger project totaling more than one acre.
B. The following information is required on erosion control plans, unless waived by the City Engineer. An engineer or landscape architect, licensed in
Idaho, must stamp and sign plans submitted pursuant to this section.
1. Information thoroughly describing the construction of facilities, grading, filling or clearing of vegetation from the site, including resulting slopes,
identification of runoff potential, soil depth, erosion potential and natural drainage.
2. Contours must be depicted at two foot (2') intervals for slopes up to fifteen percent (15%) and five foot (5') intervals for slopes over fifteen percent
(15%), showing the topography of the ground to be graded, filled, or cleared and the topography of the ground within fifteen feet (15') of the site,
before and after the proposed site work. Spot elevations must be provided at high and low points, grade breaks, and inlets to drainage control
structures.
3. Evaluations, proposed grading, dimensions and location of proposed construction, including calculated quantities of earth to be moved must be
addressed.
4. The type and location of all temporary and permanent runoff control methods, including those to be used during construction to prevent the
discharge of degraded runoff water into surface waters must be depicted and described.
5. Slope stabilization methods employed, identifying the location, design and specifications for slope stabilization that will be utilized during and after
construction of the project.
6. Revegetation/remediation strategy must be provided, specifying the methods to be used following completion of the project.
7. A copy of the notice of intent (NOI), as required by the EPA, for projects greater than one acre in size, or less than one acre that are part of a
larger project totaling more than one acre, and having the potential for runoff discharge to surface waters of the United States (Spokane River).
(Ord. 1237, 2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 218/268
18.24.070: PARKING:
The following standards are applicable to and required for off street parking for newly established or substantially modified land uses subject to this
Code. Parking provisions shall not apply to any existing building or structure, or use, unless there is a change of use or expansion requiring additional
parking. Whenever a building or structure existing prior to the adoption of this Code, is enlarged in floor area, such addition shall comply with current
parking requirements and site improvements, without diminishing the usefulness of existing site improvements. Parking requirements and configuration
must be reviewed and approved in the site plan review process. The following are general requirements that shall apply to off street parking in all zoning
districts:
A. Uses Not Listed: Where a proposed use is not listed in this section the Zoning Administrator will determine parking needs based on the information
provided by the applicant or staff. Appeal of the Zoning Administrator's determination may be applied for in accordance with provisions of this title.
B. Lighting: Lighting used to illuminate a parking lot shall be arranged to direct light and glare away from adjoining property or public rights-of-way.
C. Paving: The required number of parking and loading spaces as set forth in this section, together with driveways, aisles and other circulation areas,
shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete.
D. Drainage: All parking and loading areas shall provide for proper drainage of surface water to approved drainage areas or structures. Surface drainage
shall be retained on site to the extent that site runoff shall not exceed runoff from the site in its undeveloped condition.
E. Striping: Parking lots shall be permanently striped to delineate parking spaces and circulation patterns in accordance with the adopted Building Code
and related standards.
F. Accessible Parking Standards: Accessible parking must be provided in accordance with ICC/ANSI accessibility standards.
G. Residential Off Street Parking Requirements:
Type Of Residence Parking Spaces
Single-family or two-family dwelling 2 for each unit (spaces within garages/carports are calculated in the overall
requirement)
Multi-family (3 units or greater):
1 bedroom unit 1.5 for each dwelling unit
2 or more bedroom units 2.0 for each dwelling unit
Senior housing (55 years and older) (includes senior mobile
home parks)
1 for each dwelling unit
Mobile home park 2 for each unit
H. Commercial, Office, Technology And Industrial Parking Requirements: Parking for nonresidential land uses must comply with the following standards
in addition to other parking requirements:
1. Joint Use Parking: Separate nonresidential uses may jointly provide and use parking spaces in a complementary manner, provided that a written
agreement between joint users, approved by the Zoning Administrator, must be completed.
2. Off Street Parking Location: Off street parking shall be located on the premises it is intended to serve or within one hundred fifty feet (150') thereof.
Parking spaces for all detached residential uses shall be located on the same lot as the use which they are intended to serve.
3. Multi-Tenant User Parking Space Requirements: Off street parking shall be calculated for each individual use requirement. The Zoning
Administrator may reduce the total number of spaces required, taking into consideration tenant composition and complementary uses. In no case
should the number of spaces be less than four (4) per one thousand (1,000) square feet. A change of use may require a reevaluation of parking
requirements. A proposed subsequent use may be denied if sufficient parking is not provided.
4. Maintenance Of Parking Areas: The owner shall maintain all parking areas. Maintenance shall include landscaping, removal of trash and weeds,
and repair of signs, light standards, fences, walls, maintenance of drainage, surfacing materials, curbs, snow removal and striping.
5. Access: Any commercial, industrial, technology or institutional parking area shall be designed in such a manner that any vehicle leaving or
entering the parking area from or onto a public or private street shall be traveling in a forward motion. Access driveways for parking areas or
loading spaces shall be located in such a way that any vehicle entering or leaving such area shall be clearly visible to a pedestrian or motorist
approaching the access or driveway from a public or private street.
I. Parking Requirements: Except for the uses expressly listed below all commercial uses shall provide one space for each two hundred fifty (250) square
feet of gross floor area. For any commercial use an absolute minimum of two (2) spaces shall be required.
Type Of Use Parking Spaces
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 219/268
Commercial, office, and industrial parking:
Auction business 1 space for every 100 square feet of the structure
Auction business, permanent outdoor
location
10 parking spaces per acre, minimum of 20 spaces
Hotels/motels 1 per each sleeping room, plus 1 space for each 2 employees
Medical/dental offices 1 for every 200 square feet floor area
Ministorage 3 spaces, plus 1 space for each 75 units
Offices 1 per 200 square feet floor area
Restaurants/taverns/bars 1 space per 100 square feet of floor area, or 1 space for every 2 seats, whichever is greater
(includes any outdoor seating)
Industrial/manufacturing parking requirements:
1 space per 450 gross square feet
Storage/warehouse areas in industrial
buildings:
Up to 20,000 square feet 1 space per 2,000 square feet of floor area
Over 20,000 square feet 1 space per 3,000 square feet floor area
Institutional:
Churches or assembly areas (to include
funeral homes)
1 for each 5 seats
Hospital 1 for each bed; 1 for each on duty staff employee on the busiest shift
Schools:
High school 1 for each 4 students and 1 for each employee
Middle school 1 for each 25 students and 1 for each employee
Elementary school 1 for each 40 students and 1 for each employee
Childcare/nursery schools 2 for each classroom, not less than 6 total
J. Parking Spaces: The following standards apply to development of parking lots:
1. Accessible Parking:
a. Parking: Parking requirements must be provided in accordance with ICC/ANSI standards and chapter 11 of the International Building Code,
regarding number of spaces.
b. Maximum Slope: Parking spaces and access aisles shall have a maximum slope of two percent (2%) in all directions.
c. Parked Vehicle Overhangs: Parked vehicle overhangs shall not reduce the clear width of an accessible route to less than four feet (4').
2. Parking Dimensions And Maneuvering Aisles: Parking space and maneuvering aisles shall comply with the following minimum standards. See
parking diagrams of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 220/268
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 221/268
(Ord. 1340, 2018: Ord. 1237, 2012)
18.24.080: LANDSCAPING:
The objectives of this section are to establish landscaping requirements that improve the appearance of development within the City and to protect and
preserve the appearance, character, and value of the surrounding neighborhoods. Minimum standards and requirements are intended to assure
attractive landscapes throughout the City and to promote safety, provide screens, and/or buffers between incompatible land uses, to safeguard privacy,
and to promote the general welfare of the community. It is not meant to inhibit imaginative landscape design. When equal or superior landscaping
solutions are presented, the Zoning Administrator has the authority to approve alternatives that meet the intent of this chapter.
A. Definitions:
BERM: An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen undesirable views, provide separation between uses, and/or decrease noise.
BUFFER: A combination of physical space and vertical elements, such as plants, berms, fences, or walls. The purpose of a buffer is to separate
incompatible land uses from each other.
DECIDUOUS: A plant with foliage that is shed annually.
EVERGREEN: A plant with foliage that persists and remains green year round.
LANDSCAPING: Providing an aesthetically pleasing space using ground cover, shrubs, trees, building materials, or a combination thereof.
ORNAMENTAL TREE: A tree planted primarily for its ornamental value (flower, color, texture), or for screening purposes; tends to be smaller at
maturity than a shade tree.
PARKING AREA: Areas designated for vehicle parking purposes including surfaces designed as parking stalls, loading areas, drives within the
property line, and maneuvering areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 222/268
SCREEN: Method of reducing the impact of noise and unsightly visual intrusions with less offensive elements, such as plants, berms, fences, walls,
or any appropriate combination thereof. Screens are commonly used to reduce the visual impact of trash enclosures, utility structures, or any
unsightly elements. Screens may also reduce the visual impact of traffic, parking lots, and incompatible land uses.
SHADE TREE: Usually a deciduous tree planted primarily for its high crown of foliage or overhead canopy.
SHRUB: A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small stems from the ground or small branches near the ground; may be deciduous
or evergreen.
TREE: A large, woody plant having one or several self-supporting stems or trunks and numerous branches. May be classified as deciduous or
evergreen.
B. Landscape Plan: A landscape plan is required for the entire site including adjacent rights of way. The landscape plan shall be submitted as part of the
site plan review process within section 18.20.130 of this title. An Idaho licensed landscape architect shall complete the landscape plan. The plan
shall show the following elements:
1. Boundaries and dimensions of the site.
2. Location of existing and proposed streets, curbs, utility lines, sidewalks.
3. Location of buildings and structures, parking lots, driveways, loading areas, outdoor mechanical equipment, signs, refuse enclosures, overhead
utilities, water meter location, grassy swales, parking lot lighting, and any plants or trees that are to remain on site.
4. The location and design of landscape areas to be landscaped, and plant list to include the location, number, size and type of plant material by
botanical and common name.
5. North arrow and scale.
6. Proposed irrigation system. All landscaped areas, including adjacent rights of way shall be provided with an underground irrigation system.
7. Planting details (using Post Falls detail for trees).
8. Name, address and phone number of the person preparing the plan.
9. Landscaping calculations in compliance with subsections C5 and D of this section.
The zoning administrator shall review the submitted landscape plans for compliance with this title and may approve, approve with modifications, or
disapprove the plans. Decisions of the zoning administrator shall be in writing, and if disapproved, shall set forth necessary steps to obtain
approval. Appeal of the zoning administrator's decision shall follow the appeals procedures listed in the appeals section of this title.
No building permits or certificate of occupancy (CO) shall be issued until a landscape plan is reviewed and approved, improvements installed per
the approved landscape plan, and a form (provided by the community development division) is signed off with an official stamp of a landscape
architect certifying the improvements were installed per the approved landscape plan. A suitable guarantee may be provided if installation is not
possible or advisable due to seasonal constraints.
C. General Requirements:
1. All of the lot area that is not covered by building, parking, or driveways shall be landscaped to enhance visual appeal, protect property values, and
integrate buildings with the site. All of the landscaping types (parking lot, right-of-way, buffer, and screening) may be incorporated into the
landscape plan. Parts of larger parcels that have area reserved for future development shall be maintained with a suitable landscape cover
approved by the Zoning Administrator. This reserve area shall be kept maintained and free of noxious weeds.
2. Snow removal and storage shall be accommodated when developing a landscape plan to minimize damage to plants and to complement the
stormwater management design.
3. Public trees shall be selected and installed within the street right-of-way in accordance with the Post Falls "Tree Standards Manual".
4. All trash receptacles, exposed machinery or mechanical equipment and other negative visual impacts shall be screened from the public right-ofway
and from residential uses or zones. To be effective, screens shall consist of one or more of the following elements:
a. Sight obscuring fences or walls.
b. Berms, used in conjunction with landscaping (shall be minimum 75 percent evergreen plant material).
c. Landscaping (75 percent minimum evergreen plant material) that will achieve a height of six feet (6') and totally obscure visibility within three (3)
years.
d. A combination of fences or walls, and landscaping.
5. Where commercial, residential, technology or industrial development abuts a noncompatible use, a buffer shall be incorporated into the landscape
design. Buffers shall be used to reduce the impact of development by creating a horizontal and vertical separation with plants, earth berms,
fences, walls, or a combination of such elements. To determine buffer requirements refer to the following charts:
TABLE A
MINIMUM BUFFER YARD REQUIREMENTS
BETWEEN ADJACENT USES
Use Residential Commercial Industrial
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 223/268
Residential n/a B C
Commercial B n/a A
Industrial C A n/a
TABLE B
MINIMUM BUFFER YARD STANDARDS
A B C
Width 10' 15' 25'
Structure required (fence, wall, or berm [FWB]) n/a FWB FWB
Plants per 100 linear feet of buffer:
Deciduous trees (6 foot minimum height) 4 5 6
Evergreen trees (6 foot minimum height) 4 5 6
Shrubs (minimum 5 gallons) 10 15 25
A berm may be used in conjunction with a fence or wall. The berm may be no more than fifty percent (50%) of the total minimum height of six feet (6')
(berm and fence or wall combined).
6. Where a literal application is impractical, due to the location of utilities or other physical constraints, the zoning administrator shall have the
discretion to grant deviations from strict implementation of this chapter's landscaping requirements provided that the spirit of the code is retained to
the greatest extent possible.
7. Landscaping shall be installed prior to occupancy. The zoning administrator may authorize a delay in the completion of planting due to seasonal
conditions. Should such a delay be approved, suitable surety equal to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated cost of the delayed
improvements shall be provided by the owner/developer. No final certificate of occupancy will be issued until the required landscaping
improvements are complete or guaranteed.
D. Parking Lot Landscaping: Landscaping shall be required for all common or shared parking lots located in any zone, whether developed as part of a
building project, as an addition to an existing parking lot, or as a stand alone lot.
1. The amount of parking lot landscaping required shall be sufficient to provide coverage that achieves a minimum of thirty percent (30%) shading of
the parking area within fifteen (15) years of construction. Refer to the following table to approximate thirty percent (30%) shade coverage.
TABLE C
MINIMUM NUMBER OF TREES PER PARKING AREA
Class I
(Small)
Class II
(Medium)
Class III
(Large)
Interior placement 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. 1 per 2,000 sq. ft. 1 per 3,000 sq. ft.
or
Perimeter placement 2 per 1,000 sq. ft. 2 per 2,000 sq. ft. 2 per 3,000 sq. ft.
or
Equivalent combination of
interior and perimeter trees
a. Exceptions to the thirty percent (30%) shading requirement include:
(1) Parking structures.
(2) Truck maneuvering and loading areas in front of overhead doors.
(3) Automobile dealerships, lumberyards, and similar facilities used for display sales, service, and vehicle storage. (Parking areas for these uses
are still subject to shading requirements.)
(4) Parking areas shaded by structures such as covered stalls, garages, and adjacent buildings.
2. At least one-half (1/2) of the required parking lot landscaping shall be installed within the interior of any parking lot serving more than forty (40)
vehicles. The intent is to provide shade within the lot and to break up the expanse of paving with islands of landscaping. The balance of parking lot
landscaping may be installed as perimeter landscaping. Trees shall be dispersed throughout the interior and perimeter of a parking lot to maximize
the ability to meet the thirty percent (30%) shade requirement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 224/268
3. Landscaped islands or projections within a parking lot shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') wide, and contain a minimum of one hundred fifty (150)
square feet. Islands or projections shall be designed so that any trees planted are protected from damage by vehicles.
4. The landscaped area between a parking lot (including driveways) and exterior property line shall be a minimum of four feet (4') in width, unless
otherwise permitted per section 18.20.150 of this title.
5. The landscape area between a parking lot and a residential zone or use shall be a minimum of fifteen feet (15') in width, except where an
industrial development is located next to a residential use, then the landscape area is twenty five feet (25') in width. This area shall be landscaped
to provide a reduction of visibility at time of planting. The height of the visibility reduction area must be at least six feet (6') from ground level of the
parking lot. This shall be accomplished through the use of plants, fences, walls, berms, or a combination of elements approved by the zoning
administrator.
6. Trees shall be located to avoid conflicts with signage and lighting within parking lots and along rights of way.
7. It is the intent that parking lot shading is accomplished by installation of trees within the parking lot, immediately adjacent to the outer limits of the
parking lot to cast a shadow onto the paved surface, and preferably with shading trees installed along the southern and western extents of the lot.
E. Xeriscape Landscaping: The purpose of this section is to provide an alternative for developing sites with a method for landscaping that conserves
water.
Xeriscaping is applicable to private properties outside the public street rights of way that are either very large and costly to water or desire to
conserve water with plant species more appropriate to planting zone 6. Xeriscaping cannot be applied to areas within the landscape plans that are
designated to facilitate swales.
The xeriscaping design would be a detailed element within the landscape plan as part of the site plan review process. The following required
elements need to be identified within each xeriscaped area of the landscaping plan:
1. Identification: Identify xeriscape areas within the landscape plan and the appropriate plants with a planting plan that reinforces the areas in the
appropriate scale.
2. Soil Amendment: In most cases, soil amendment will not be appropriate. If required, coordinate with the city of Post Falls urban forester and
provide information on agreed course of the application of soil amendment.
3. Irrigation: Identify the application of efficient irrigation with shutoff rain sensors within the landscape plan.
4. Plant Zones: Different areas receive different amounts of light, wind and moisture. Identify the appropriateness of selection of the plant selection to
the planting zone.
5. Mulch: Provide rationale on how mulch will be applied within the landscape plan in order to prevent soil from crusting, minimize evaporation and
reduce weed growth.
6. Alternative Turf: Identify the appropriate turf for planting zone 6 and design with the intent to reduce the watering and maintenance requirements.
7. Maintenance: All landscapes require some degree of care during the year. Provide information in regards to the preferred maintenance schedule
for the applied xeriscape areas within the landscape plans.
F. Maintenance Responsibility Of Owner/Developer: The owner/developer is responsible for the installation, irrigation, and maintenance of landscaping
within the public rights of way adjacent to the property. The adjoining right of way area shall be considered to be part of the site when the landscape
plan is reviewed. The property owner or the property owner's designee shall maintain all landscaping as per approved landscape plan.
1. Street trees shall be selected and installed within the street right of way in accordance with the Post Falls "Tree Standards Manual". Tree selection
shall be from the approved street tree list. It is intended that the number of trees required be calculated using the spacing requirements within the
Post Falls "Tree Standards Manual". The required number of trees may be clustered or arranged to achieve the best design.
2. Visibility between three feet (3') and ten feet (10') from street level shall be maintained at all street intersections in accordance with Idaho Code
and provisions of this code governing same.
3. The sides of a driveway access shall maintain visibility as described above for the area within a triangle on either side of an access, having
perpendicular sides of ten feet (10') or as otherwise required by site plan review.
4. Irrigation for all right of way landscaping shall be the responsibility of adjacent property owners.
5. Right of way areas shall be landscaped with a combination of trees, low growing shrubs, ground covers, and/or turf grass. Larger shrubs and
hedges shall be placed outside the right of way unless approved by the zoning administrator in order to maintain visibility along rights of way.
G. Ground Preparation: Proper ground preparation and installation is required for an approved landscape. The following specifications shall be the
minimum:
1. Topsoil that is reasonably free of stones shall be placed in all planting beds. Subsoil shall not be used for a planting medium. Planting areas must
be filled to the top of all curbing or edging of a planting bed, allowing for settling of approximately two inches (2") to finish grade of turf or ground
cover.
2. Mulch, bark, decorative rock, or other suitable material shall be placed in all planting beds except those to be covered with grass.
3. Grassed slopes requiring mowing shall not exceed a ratio of three to one (3:1). The Zoning Administrator may permit other planted slopes at a
ratio of two to one (2:1), or greater, if appropriate measures are provided to hold the soil. Erosion shall be controlled by design to prevent topsoil
loss and allow plant growth.
4. Trees planted within the right-of-way shall be sized according to the Post Falls "Tree Standards Manual" and staked appropriately.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 225/268
5. Trees planted on site, and not used as a buffer, shall be a minimum of one and one-half inch (11/2") caliper for deciduous, and a four foot (4')
height for evergreen trees, and staked appropriately.
6. Trees must be located so damage from vehicles is avoided.
7. Soils in planting areas shall have adequate porosity to allow root growth. Soils that have been compacted shall be loosened to increase aeration to
a minimum depth of eighteen inches (18") or replaced with imported topsoil.
8. Root barriers shall be used in accordance with the Post Falls "Tree Standards Manual".
H. Landscape Plan Modifications: Under certain site conditions, a strict interpretation of requirements may prove impossible. Changes may be dictated
by plant availability or other factors. In such cases, the following procedure should be followed:
1. Approval: Any deviations from the approved landscape plan must receive written approval from the Zoning Administrator prior to construction.
Deviations must not reduce the required elements of the landscape plan. The approved plan, including any approved deviations, is the plan used
when inspecting the site for completion and compliance.
2. Plant Substitutions: Due to seasonal planting problems and a lack of plant availability, approved landscape plans may require plant substitutions.
Substitutions are accepted if there is no reduction in the quality of plant material or no significant change in the size or location of plant material.
Substitutions need approval by the Zoning Administrator prior to installation.
3. Request For Exception: The Zoning Administrator may grant exceptions to the landscape requirements, due to unusual physical circumstances. A
request for exception shall be in writing and submitted at the time of site plan review, when any of the following conditions exist:
a. Topography, soil, vegetation, or other site conditions are such that full compliance would create a hardship.
b. Implementation may adversely affect public safety.
4. Justification Statement: A justification statement submitted by the applicant is a key element of the granting of an exception. Within the statement,
an applicant must describe which requirements in the ordinance cannot be complied with, which project conditions justify using alternatives, and
how the proposed measures equal or exceed strict compliance. (Ord. 1340, 2018: Ord. 1237, 2012)
Chapter 18.26
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
18.26.010: PURPOSE:
The provisions of this chapter are known as the WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES REGULATIONS. It is the purpose of these provisions to
delineate restrictions, development standards and siting criteria, and establish removal procedures in order to protect the City from the uncontrolled
siting of wireless communication facilities in locations that have significant adverse effects and cause irreparable harm. It is further the purpose of these
provisions:
A. To protect the community's visual quality and safety while facilitating the reasonable and balanced provision of wireless communication services.
More specifically, it is the City's goal to minimize the visual impact of wireless communication facilities on the community, particularly in and near
residential zones;
B. To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare, preserve the aesthetic character of the Post Falls community, and to reasonably
regulate the development and operation of wireless communication facilities within the City to the extent permitted under State and Federal law;
C. To minimize the impact of wireless communication facilities by establishing standards for siting design and screening;
D. To preserve the opportunity for continued and growing service from the wireless industry;
E. To accommodate the growing need and demand for wireless communication services;
F. To establish clear guidelines and standards and an orderly process for review intended to facilitate the deployment of wireless transmission
equipment, to provide advanced communication services to the City, its residents, businesses and community at large;
G. To ensure City zoning regulations are applied consistently with Federal and State telecommunications laws, rules, regulations and controlling court
decisions; and
H. To provide regulations which are specifically not intended to, and shall not be interpreted or applied to: 1) prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision
of wireless services, 2) unreasonably discriminate among functionally equivalent service providers, or 3) regulate wireless communication facilities
and wireless transmission equipment on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such emissions
comply with the standards established by the Federal Communications Commission. (Ord. 1342, 2018)
18.26.020: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 226/268
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings set forth below:
ANTENNA: Means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that sends or
receives digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies or wireless communication signals.
ANTENNA ARRAY: Means a single or group of antenna elements, not including small cell antennas, and associated mounting hardware, transmission
lines, or other appurtenances which share a common attachment device such as a mounting frame or mounting support structure for the sole purpose of
transmitting or receiving wireless communication signals.
APPLICANT: Means any person engaged in the business of providing wireless communication services or the wireless communications infrastructure
required for wireless communications services and who submits an application.
BACKHAUL NETWORK: Means the lines that connect a provider's towers or cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices or long
distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.
BASE STATION: Means a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user
equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined in this chapter or any equipment associated with a tower.
A. The term includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety
services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.
B. The term includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and
comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems and small cell networks).
C. The term includes any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this chapter, supports or
houses equipment described in this chapter that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under State or
local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support.
D. The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the State or the City under this chapter, does not
support or house equipment described in this chapter.
COLLOCATION: Means the mounting or installation of an antenna on an existing tower, building or structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or
receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM OR DAS: Means a network consisting of transceiver equipment at a central hub site to support multiple antenna
locations throughout the desired coverage area.
DOWNTOWN: For the purpose of this chapter means that area bounded by Mullan Avenue on the north, Idaho Street on the east, the Spokane River on
the south and Chase Road extended on the west.
ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST: Means any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the
physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving:
A. Collocation of new transmission equipment;
B. Removal of transmission equipment; or
C. Replacement of transmission equipment.
ELIGIBLE SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Means any tower or base station as defined in this chapter, provided that it is existing at the time the relevant
application is filed with the City under this chapter.
EXISTING: Means a tower or base station that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another State
or local regulatory review process, provided that a tower that has not been reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built,
but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this definition.
FAA: Means the Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC: Means the Federal Communications Commission.
MACROCELL: Means an antenna or antennas mounted on a tower, ground-based mast, rooftops and other towers or structures, at a height that
provides a clear view over the surrounding buildings and terrain.
SITE: Means, in relation to a tower that is not in the public right-of-way, the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower
and any access or utility easements currently related to the site. In relation to support structures other than towers, site means an area in proximity to
the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground.
SMALL CELLS: Mean compact wireless equipment that contain their own transceiver equipment and function like cells in a wireless network but provide
a smaller coverage area than traditional macrocells.
STEALTH DESIGN: Means technology that minimizes the visual impact of wireless communication facilities by camouflaging, disguising, screening or
blending into the surrounding environment. Examples of stealth design include but are not limited to facilities disguised as trees (monopines), flagpoles,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 227/268
utility and light poles, bell towers, clock towers, ball field lights and architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas.
SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE: Means a modification that substantially changes the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure if it meets any of the
following criteria:
A. For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the tower by more than ten percent (10%) or by the height of one
additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty feet (20'), whichever is greater; for other eligible
support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than ten percent (10%) or more than ten feet (10'), whichever is greater.
Changes in height should be measured from the original support structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated horizontally, such
as on buildings' rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height should be measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station,
inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act (47 USC
1455(a));
B. For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the
edge of the tower more than twenty feet (20'), or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater;
for other eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the
structure by more than six feet (6');
C. For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved,
but not to exceed four (4) cabinets; or, for towers in the public rights-of-way and base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment
cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets
that are more than ten percent (10%) larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure;
D. It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site;
E. It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support structure; or
F. It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base
station equipment, provided however that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is non-compliant only in a manner that would not
exceed the thresholds identified in subsections A through D of this definition.
TOWER: Means any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated
facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety
services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site.
TOWER HEIGHT: Means the vertical distance measured from the base of the tower structure at grade to the highest point of the structure including the
antenna. A lightning rod, not to exceed ten feet (10') in height, shall not be included within tower height.
TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT: Means equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service,
including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supplies. The term includes
equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as
unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.
UTILITY SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Means utility poles or utility towers supporting electrical, telephone, cable or other similar facilities; street light
standards; or pedestrian light standards.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES OR WCF: Means a staffed or unstaffed facility or location or equipment for the transmission or reception of
radio frequency (RF) signals or other wireless communications or other signals for commercial communications purposes, typically consisting of one or
more antennas or group of antennas, a tower or attachment support structure, transmission cables and other transmission equipment, and an
equipment enclosure or cabinets, and including small cell technologies. (Ord. 1342, 2018)
18.26.030: APPLICABILITY:
A. New Towers, Antennas, DAS And Small Cells: All new towers, antennas, DAS and small cells in the City are subject to these regulations, except as
otherwise provided herein.
1. New towers and buildings in all zones require a special use permit.
2. New antenna arrays meeting the requirements of subsection 18.26.050K of this chapter are permitted with a building permit.
3. DAS and small cells are permitted pursuant to section 18.26.040 of this chapter.
B. Preexisting Towers Or Antennas: Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this chapter.
C. Exempt Facilities: The following are exempt from this chapter:
1. FCC licensed amateur (ham) radio facilities;
2. Satellite earth stations, dishes and/or antennas used for private television reception not exceeding one meter (1 m) in diameter;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 228/268
3. A WCF installed upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the Federal, State or local government, or a written determination of public
necessity by the City; except that such facility must comply with all Federal and State requirements. The WCF shall be exempt from the provisions
of this chapter for up to one month after the duration of the state of emergency; and
4. A temporary, commercial WCF installed for providing coverage of a special event such as news coverage or sporting event, subject to
administrative approval by the City. The WCF shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter for up to one week before and after the duration
of the special event.
5. Other temporary, commercial WCFs installed for a period of up to ninety (90) days, subject to renewals at the City's discretion; provided that such
temporary WCF will comply with applicable setbacks and height requirements.
6. Ordinary maintenance and repair of the WCF.
7. City facilities and equipment and emergency services including, but not limited to, the City's Police Department and Kootenai County Fire and
Rescue.
D. Conflicts With Other Zoning Regulations: These wireless communication facilities regulations are in addition to other regulations in this title. In case of
a conflict between regulations, the most restrictive will apply. (Ord. 1342, 2018)
18.26.040: DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS AND SMALL CELLS:
A. Distributed antenna systems and small cells are allowed in all zones, regardless of the siting preferences listed in section 18.26.080 of this chapter,
provided the applicant complies with all Federal laws (such as the Americans With Disabilities Act) and State laws and requirements.
B. Distributed antenna systems and small cells in all zones are subject to approval via right-of-way encroachment permits and/or building permits and
administrative review unless their installation requires the construction of a new tower or building. A special use permit shall not be required for
replacement utility support structures, so long as the height of a replacement structure, including antennas, is no more than the greater of:
1. Fifteen feet (15') taller than the existing utility support structure; or
2. The minimum height necessary to provide the required safety clearances from transmission or distribution lines.
C. A single permit application may be used for multiple distributed antennas that are part of a larger overall DAS network. A single permit application
may also be used for multiple small cells. A single license agreement may be used for multiple node locations in DAS and/or small cell networks.
(Ord. 1342, 2018)
18.26.050: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Inventory Of Existing Sites: Each applicant for a tower shall provide to the Zoning Administrator an inventory of its existing towers, antennas, or sites
approved for towers or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the City or within one-half (1/2) mile of the border thereof, including specific
information about the location, height, and design of each tower or antenna. The Zoning Administrator may share such information with other
applicants applying for administrative approvals or special use permits under this section or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the
jurisdiction of the City, provided, however that the Zoning Administrator is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting
that such sites are available or suitable.
B. Color: The antenna array shall be placed and colored to blend into the architectural detail and coloring of the host structure. Support towers shall be
painted a color that best allows it to blend into the surroundings. The use of grays, blues, greens, dark bronze, browns or other site specific colors
may be appropriate; however, each case should be evaluated individually.
C. Lighting: For support towers, only such lighting as is necessary to satisfy FAA requirements is permitted. White strobe lighting will not be allowed,
unless specifically required by the FAA. Security lighting for the equipment shelters or cabinets and other on the ground ancillary equipment is also
permitted, as long as it is appropriately down shielded to keep light within the boundaries of the site.
D. State Or Federal Requirements: All towers and antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other
agency of the State or Federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, and if
WCF equipment is added either through collocation or replacement, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring
such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards
and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling State or Federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas
into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
E. Site Development: All wireless communication facilities shall be required to obtain a permit and shall be subject to the site development standards
prescribed herein. Site development shall include the following information:
1. Construction drawings showing the proposed method of installation;
2. The manufacturer's recommended installations, if any; and
3. A diagram to scale showing the location of the wireless communication facility, property and setback lines, easements, power lines, all structures,
and the required landscaping.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 229/268
F. Building Codes; Safety Standards: To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance
with standards contained in applicable State or local Building Codes and the applicable industry standards for towers, as amended from time to time.
If, upon inspection, the City concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property,
then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance with such
standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said thirty (30) days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower at the owner's
expense. Compliance with this subsection is also subject to the City's Code enforcement pursuant to chapter 18.32 of this title and related
provisions.
G. Signs: No facilities may bear any signage or advertisement(s) other than signage required by law or expressly permitted or required by the City.
H. Visual Impact: All WCFs in residential zones and within two hundred feet (200') of residential zones shall be sited and designed to minimize adverse
visual impacts on surrounding properties and the traveling public to the greatest extent reasonably possible, consistent with the proper functioning of
the WCF. Such WCFs and equipment enclosures shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with the existing characteristics of the
site. Such WCFs shall also be designed to either resemble the surrounding landscape and other natural features where located in proximity to
natural surroundings, or be compatible with the built environment, through matching and complementary existing structures and specific design
considerations such as architectural designs, height, scale, color and texture or be consistent with other uses and improvements permitted in the
relevant zone.
I. Use Of Stealth Design/Technology: The applicant shall provide justification why it is not employing stealth technology. Stealth design is required for
macrocell facilities in residential zones, and to the extent shown in section 18.26.060, table 1 of this chapter and elsewhere as provided in this
chapter, concealment techniques must be appropriate given the proposed location, design, visual environment, and nearby uses, structures, and
natural features. Stealth design shall be designed and constructed to substantially conform to surrounding building designs or natural settings, so as
to be visually unobtrusive. Stealth design that relies on screening wireless communication facilities in order to reduce visual impact must screen all
substantial portions of the facility from view. Stealth and concealment techniques do not include incorporating faux-tree designs of a kind that are not
native to the North Idaho region.
J. Building-Mounted WCFs:
1. All transmission equipment shall be concealed within existing architectural features to the maximum extent feasible. Any new architectural features
proposed to conceal the transmission equipment shall be designed to mimic the existing underlying structure, shall be proportional to the existing
underlying structure or conform to the underlying use and shall use materials in similar quality, finish, color and texture as the existing underlying
structure.
2. All roof-mounted transmission equipment shall be set back from all roof edges to the maximum extent feasible consistent with the need for "line-ofsight"
transmission and reception of signals.
3. Antenna arrays and supporting transmission equipment shall be installed so as to camouflage, disguise or conceal them to make them closely
compatible with and blend into the setting or host structure.
K. Antenna Arrays: Wireless communication antenna arrays are permitted in any zone as long as they are located upon an existing structure (except on
single family houses, duplexes, or signage or a building less than 30 feet in height), that provides sufficient elevation for the array's operation without
the necessity of constructing a tower or other apparatus to extend the antenna array more than fifteen feet (15') above the structure. Installation on
City property requires the execution of necessary agreements. However, if any support tower is needed to achieve the needed elevation, then a
special use permit is required. If a new equipment cabinet is to be installed, it must be screened if it is higher than the existing screened facility.
L. WCFs In The Public Rights-Of-Way:
1. Utility Support Structure - Mounted Equipment: All pole-mounted transmission equipment shall be mounted as close as possible to the pole so as
to reduce the overall visual profile to the maximum extent feasible.
2. License Or Agreement: For all WCFs to be located within the right-of-way, prior to submitting for a permit, the applicant must have a valid
Municipal agreement, license, franchise agreement, right-of-way agreement, encroachment permit or exemption otherwise granted by applicable
law. If the applicant is willing to install its ancillary facilities underground, that determination by the City shall be subject to administrative review.
M. Accessory Uses:
1. Accessory uses shall be limited to such structures and equipment that are necessary for transmission or reception functions, and shall not include
broadcast studios, offices, vehicles or equipment storage, or other uses not essential to the transmission or reception functions.
2. All accessory buildings shall be constructed of building materials equal to or better than those of the primary building on the site and shall be
subject to applicable permits.
3. No equipment shall be stored or parked on the site of the tower, unless used in direct support of the antennas or the tower that is being repaired.
N. Accessory Equipment: In residential zones, all accessory equipment located at the base of a WCF shall be located or placed (at the applicant's
choice) in an existing building, underground, or in an equipment shelter or cabinet that is: 1) designed to blend in with existing surroundings, using
architecturally compatible construction and colors; and 2) located so as to be unobtrusive as possible consistent with the proper functioning of the
WCF.
O. Site Design Flexibility: Individual WCF sites vary in the location of adjacent buildings, existing trees, topography and other local variables. By
mandating certain design standards, there may result a project that could have been less intrusive if the location of the various elements of the
project could have been placed in more appropriate locations within a given site. Therefore, the WCF and supporting equipment may be installed so
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 230/268
as to best camouflage, disguise them, or conceal them, to make the WCF more closely compatible with and blend into the setting or host structure,
upon approval by the City.
P. General Standards And Construction Provisions:
1. Construction And Wind Speed Requirements: All structures shall be constructed and installed to manufacturer's specifications, and constructed to
withstand the minimum wind speed as required by the City's currently adopted International Building Code, as amended.
2. Meeting Current Adopted Building Code: Structures shall be permitted and constructed to meet current, adopted Building Code requirements.
3. FCC And FAA Requirements: All structures shall conform to FCC and FAA regulations, if applicable.
4. Setbacks Or Buffer Yards: If any setback or buffer yard as prescribed within this Code requires a greater distance than required of this chapter, the
greater distance shall apply.
5. Landscaping, Screening And Fencing: In all zoning districts, the following additional landscaping shall be required beyond that which is required
for the zone in which it is located:
a. Equipment shelters and cabinets and other on the ground ancillary equipment shall be screened with buffer yard and street tree landscaping as
required for the zone in which located or with another design acceptable to the Zoning Administrator. Artwork may also be used to screen
ground equipment. At the City's discretion, as an alternative to general landscaping and screening requirements, the applicant, at its expense,
may do an artistic wrap designed by a local artist around the equipment cabinets. Alternatively, where technically feasible, the applicant shall
incorporate the cabinet and other equipment into the base of a new pole (for example, for a small cell) provided there is adequate space in the
right-of-way and that ADA sidewalk accessibility requirements can be met. All provisions of the ADA (including, but not limited to, clear space
requirements) shall be met by the applicant.
b. In particular, the ground level view of towers shall be mitigated by additional landscaping provisions as established through the special use
permit process. The use of large trees from the approved urban forestry list of recommended species or native conifers is required at the
spacing specified for the specific trees chosen. Alternatively, a landscaping plan may be submitted with the special use permit and, if approved,
shall take precedence over the foregoing requirement.
c. Except for locations in the right-of-way, a site-obscuring fence (for example, wrought iron as opposed to barbed wire) no less than six feet (6') in
height from the finished grade shall be constructed around each tower and around related support or guy anchors. Access shall only be through
a locked gate. The fence must include neutral colored slats. Any fence shall comply with the other design guidelines of this Code.
6. New Poles: To the extent technically feasible, new poles must be designed to match the existing street furniture, light fixtures and other poles, and
they shall serve a dual purpose (for example, a new light fixture, flag pole or banner clips).
7. Other Published Materials: All other information or materials that the City may reasonably require, from time to time, make publicly available and
designate as part of the application requirements. (Ord. 1342, 2018)
18.26.060: SHARING OF SUPPORT TOWERS AND COLLOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. Minimizing The Number Of Wireless Communication Support Towers: It is the policy of the City to minimize the number of wireless communication
support towers and to encourage the collocation of antenna arrays of more than one wireless communication service provider on a single support
tower.
B. New Tower Placement Exceptions: No new tower may be constructed within one-half (1/2) mile of an existing tower, unless it can be demonstrated
that the existing tower is not available or feasible for collocation of an additional wireless communication facility, or that its specific location does not
satisfy the operational requirements of the applicant. Factors to be considered in determining whether an applicant has made this demonstration
include those listed in subsection C of this section.
C. Factors Considered In Granting Special Use Permits For Towers: In addition to any standards for consideration of special use permit applications
pursuant to this Code, the Planning and Zoning Commission will also consider the following criteria in determining whether to issue a special use
permit:
1. Height Of The Proposed Tower: Towers exceeding a height of seventy five feet (75') shall be able to accommodate collocation of one additional
provider. Additional height to accommodate additional collocation may be approved if the applicant submits information certifying the tower has
capacity for at least two (2) additional providers. The applicant shall provide a letter indicating their good faith intent to encourage collocation on
the tower.
2. Existing Structures In The Area: No existing structures are located within the geographic area which meet applicant's engineering requirements.
3. Existing Towers Or Structures Lacking Strength: Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's
proposed antenna and related equipment.
4. Electromagnetic Interference: The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers
or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
5. Unreasonable Fees, Costs, Or Contract Provisions: The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing
tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed
to be unreasonable.
6. Other Limiting Factors: The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors not enumerated herein that render existing towers and
structures unsuitable.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 231/268
D. Placement Provisions - Towers: Towers shall be located only in those areas described in table 1 of this section, provided that towers that are
proposed to be located in a residential zone or within two hundred feet (200') of a residential zone shall be subject to the siting priorities set forth for
preferred tower locations in section 18.26.080 of this chapter.
TABLE 1
NEW TOWER CRITERIA
Zone Category
May Be Located
In Public Right-
Of-Way (ROW)
Maximum
Tower Height
Stealth Design
Setback From
Property Lines
(Does Not Apply
Within ROW)
R1S, R1, R2, R3, RMHP, SC3, SC4, SC5
Yes 75'1 Required 50', subject to section 18.26.070 of this chapter
LC, CCS Yes 76' - 90'2 Optional2 50', subject to section 18.26.070 of this chapter
I, HI Yes 91' - 120'3 Optional3 50', subject to section 18.26.070 of this chapter
Notes:
1. If an applicant wants to construct a tower in a residential zone or within 200 feet of a residential zone, then stealth design is required.
2. An additional 20 feet in height is allowed if applicant uses stealth design.
3. An additional 30 feet in height is allowed if applicant uses stealth design.
(Ord. 1342, 2018)
18.26.070: SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
A. Notwithstanding the setbacks provided for in section 18.26.060, table 1 of this chapter, when a residence is located on an adjacent property, the
support tower structures shall be set back from property lines as required by that zone or a minimum of one foot (1') for every foot of tower height,
whichever produces the greater setback, unless:
1. The setback is waived by the owner of the residence; or
2. The tower is constructed with breakpoint design technology. If the tower has been constructed using breakpoint design technology, the minimum
setback distance shall be equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the distance from the top of the structure to the breakpoint level of the
structure, or the applicable zone's minimum side setback requirements, whichever is greater. For example, on a one hundred foot (100') tall
monopole with a breakpoint at eighty feet (80'), the minimum setback distance would be twenty two feet (22') (110 percent of 20 feet, the distance
from the top of the monopole to the breakpoint) or the minimum side yard setback requirements for that zone, whichever is greater. Provided, that
if an applicant proposes to use breakpoint design technology to reduce the required setback from a residence, the issuance of building permits for
the tower shall be conditioned upon approval of the tower design by a structural engineer.
B. Except when located in the right-of-way, all equipment shelters, cabinets, or other on the ground ancillary equipment shall meet the setback
requirement of the zone in which it is located. (Ord. 1342, 2018)
18.26.080: PREFERRED TOWER LOCATIONS:
A. All new towers proposed to be located in a residential zone or within two hundred feet (200') of a residential zone or in the downtown core are
permitted only after application of the following siting priorities, ordered from most-preferred (1) to least-preferred (6);
1. City-owned or operated property and facilities not in the downtown or residential zones and not including right-of-way;
2. Industrial zones (I, HI);
3. Commercial zones (LC, CCS);
4. City rights-of-way in residential zones;
5. Parcels of land in residential zones (R1S, R1, R2, R3, SC3, SC4, SC5);
6. Downtown.
B. The applicant for a tower located in a residential zone or within two hundred feet (200') of a residential zone or in the downtown core shall address
these preferences in an alternative sites analysis prepared pursuant to section 18.26.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 1342, 2018)
18.26.090: SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Alternative Sites Analysis:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 232/268
1. For towers in a residential zone or within two hundred feet (200') of a residential zone or in the downtown core, the applicant must address the
City's preferred tower locations with a detailed explanation justifying why a site of higher priority was not selected. The City's tower location
preferences must be addressed in a clear and complete written alternative sites analysis that shows at least three (3) higher ranked, alternative
sites considered that are in the geographic range of the service coverage objectives of the applicant, together with a factually detailed and
meaningful comparative analysis between each alternative candidate and the proposed site that explains the substantive reasons why the
applicant rejected the alternative candidate.
2. A complete alternative sites analysis provided under this subsection may include less than three (3) alternative sites so long as the applicant
provides a factually detailed written rationale for why it could not identify at least three (3) potentially available, higher ranked, alternative sites.
3. For purposes of disqualifying potential collocations or alternative sites for the failure to meet the applicant's service coverage or capacity
objectives the applicant will provide: a) a description of its objective, whether it be to close a gap or address a deficiency in coverage, capacity,
frequency or technology; b) detailed technical maps or other exhibits with clear and concise RF data to illustrate that the objective is not met using
the alternative (whether it be collocation or a more preferred location); and c) a description of why the alternative (collocation or a more preferred
location) does not meet the objective.
B. Collocation Consent: A written statement will be signed by a person with the legal authority to bind the applicant and the project owner, which
indicates whether the applicant is willing to allow other transmission equipment owned by others to collocate with the proposed wireless
communication facility whenever technically and economically feasible and aesthetically desirable.
C. Documentation: Applications submitted under this section for towers shall include the following materials:
1. Requirement For FCC Documentation: The applicant shall provide a copy of the applicant's FCC license or registration.
2. Visual Analysis: A color visual analysis that includes to-scale visual simulations that show unobstructed before-and-after construction daytime and
clear-weather views from at least four (4) angles, together with a map that shows the location of each view, including all equipment and ground
wires.
3. Design Justification: A clear and complete written analysis that explains how the proposed design complies with the applicable design standards
under this chapter to the maximum extent feasible. A complete design justification must identify all applicable design standards under this chapter
and provide a factually detailed reason why the proposed design either complies or cannot feasibly comply.
4. Noise Study: A noise study, if the proposal is in or within two hundred feet (200') of residentially zoned property or in the downtown core, for the
proposed WCF and all associated equipment.
5. Additional Information Required: Applicants for a special use permit for a tower shall also submit the following information:
a. A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type, height and width of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses
and zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities or the County), separation distances, adjacent roadways, photo simulations, a
depiction of all proposed transmission equipment, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings or renderings of
the proposed tower and any other structures, topography, parking, utility runs and other information deemed by the Zoning Administrator to be
necessary to assess compliance with this chapter.
b. Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if applicable).
c. The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit and residentially zoned properties.
d. The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to this chapter shall be shown on an
updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of the existing
tower(s), if known.
e. A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
f. Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination.
g. A description of compliance with all applicable Federal, State and local laws.
h. Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned or
operated by the applicant in the Municipality.
i. A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers or other structures to provide the services to be provided through the use of the
proposed new tower.
j. A clear and complete written statement of purpose which shall minimally include: 1) a description of the technical objective to be achieved; 2) a
to-scale map that identifies the proposed site location and the targeted service area to be benefited by the proposed project; and 3) full-color
signal propagation maps with objective units of signal strength measurement that show the applicant's current service coverage levels from all
adjacent sites without the proposed site, predicted service coverage levels from all adjacent sites with the proposed site, and predicted service
coverage levels from the proposed site without all adjacent sites. These materials shall be reviewed and signed by an Idaho-licensed
professional engineer or a qualified employee of the applicant. The qualified employee of the applicant shall submit his or her qualifications with
the application.
D. Radio Frequency (RF) Emissions Compliance Report: A written report will be prepared, signed and sealed by an Idaho-licensed professional
engineer or a competent employee of the applicant, which assesses whether the proposed WCF demonstrates compliance with the RF emissions
limits established by the FCC. If the report is prepared by an employee of the applicant, who is not an Idaho-licensed professional engineer, the
report must be accompanied by documentation establishing the employee's competence to complete the report.
E. Application Fees: An applicant shall submit an application fee in accordance with the City's then existing fee schedule or written policy. (Ord. 1342,
2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 233/268
18.26.100: EXCEPTIONS TO STANDARDS:
A. Applicability: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter (under site design flexibility), no WCF shall be used or developed contrary to any applicable
development standard unless an exception has been granted pursuant to this section. These provisions apply exclusively to WCFs and are in lieu of
the generally applicable variance and administrative exceptions provisions in this Code; provided this section does not provide an exception from this
chapter's visual impact and stealth design.
B. Procedure: A WCF's exception is subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
C. Submittal Requirements: An application for a wireless communication facility exception shall include:
1. A written statement demonstrating how the exception would meet the criteria.
2. A site plan that includes:
a. Description of the proposed facility's design and dimensions, as it would appear with and without the exception.
b. Elevations showing all components of the wireless communication facility, as it would appear with and without the exception.
c. Color simulations of the wireless communication facility after construction demonstrating compatibility with the vicinity, as it would appear with
and without the exception.
D. Criteria: An application for a wireless communication facility exception shall be granted if the following criteria are met:
1. Exception Is Consistent: The exception is consistent with the purpose of the development standard for which the exception is sought.
2. Design Minimizes Visual Impact: Based on a visual analysis, the design minimizes the visual impacts to residential zones through mitigating
measures, including, but not limited to, building heights, bulk, color, and landscaping.
3. Requirements: The applicant demonstrates the following:
a. A significant gap in the coverage, capacity, or technologies of the service network exists such that users are regularly unable to connect to the
service network, or are regularly unable to maintain a connection, or are unable to achieve reliable wireless coverage within a building;
b. The gap can only be filled through an exception to one or more of the standards in this chapter; and
c. The exception is narrowly tailored to fill the service gap such that the wireless communication facility conforms to this chapter's standards to the
greatest extent possible.
4. Exceptions In Residential Zones: For a new tower proposed to be located in a residential zone or within two hundred feet (200') of a residential
zone, or in the downtown, unless the proposal qualifies as a preferred location on City-owned or operated property or facilities, the applicant must
also demonstrate that the manner in which it proposes to fill the significant gap in coverage, capacity, or technologies of the service network is the
least intrusive on the values that this section seeks to protect. (Ord. 1342, 2018)
18.26.110: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS:
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna
or tower shall so notify the City in writing and remove the same within ninety (90) days of giving notice to the City of such abandonment. Failure to
remove an abandoned antenna or tower within said ninety (90) days shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense, including
all costs and attorneys' fees. Irrespective of any agreement between them to the contrary, the owner of such unused facility and the owner of a building
or land upon which the WCF is located, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the removal of abandoned WCFs and the WCFs' foundation, if any.
If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. (Ord. 1342, 2018)
18.26.120: INDEPENDENT RF TECHNICAL AND LEGAL REVIEW:
Although the City intends for City staff to review applications to the extent feasible, the City may retain the services of independent RF and legal experts
of its choice to provide technical and legal evaluations of permit applications for WCFs, when they are subject to special use permits or administrative
review. The third party experts shall have recognized qualifications in their fields. The expert's review may include, but is not limited to: a) the accuracy
and completeness of the items submitted with the application; b) the applicability of analysis and techniques and methodologies proposed by the
applicant; c) the validity of conclusions reached by the applicant; and d) whether the proposed WCF complies with the applicable approval criteria set
forth in this chapter. The applicant shall pay the cost for any independent consultant fees through a deposit, estimated by the City, paid within ten (10)
days of the City's request. When the City requests such payment, the application shall be deemed incomplete for purposes of application processing
timelines until the deposit is received. In the event that such costs and fees do not exceed the deposit amount, the City shall refund any unused portion
within thirty (30) days after the final permit is released or, if no final permit is released, within thirty (30) days after the City receives a written request
from the applicant. If the costs and fees exceed the deposit amount, then the applicant shall pay the difference to the City before the permit is issued.
(Ord. 1342, 2018)
18.26.130: FINAL INSPECTION:
A. A certificate of completion will only be granted upon satisfactory evidence that the WCF was installed in substantial compliance with the approved
plans and photo simulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 234/268
B. If it is found that the WCF installation does not substantially comply with the approved plans and photo simulations, the applicant shall make any and
all such changes required to bring the WCF installation into compliance promptly and in any event prior to putting the WCF in operation. (Ord. 1342,
2018)
18.26.140: COMPLIANCE:
A. All wireless communication facilities must comply with all standards and regulations of the FCC and any State or other Federal government agency
with the authority to regulate wireless communication facilities.
B. The site and wireless communication facilities, including all landscaping, fencing and related transmission equipment must be maintained at all times
in a neat and clean manner and in accordance with all approved plans.
C. All graffiti on wireless communication facilities must be removed at the sole expense of the permittee after notification by the City to the
owner/operator of the WCF. The graffiti must be removed within fourteen (14) days after notification by the City.
D. If any FCC, State or other governmental license or any other governmental approval to provide communication services is ever revoked as to any site
permitted or authorized by the City, the permittee must inform the City of the revocation within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of such revocation.
(Ord. 1342, 2018)
18.26.150: INDEMNIFICATION:
Each permit issued for a WCF located on City property shall be deemed to have as a condition of the permit a requirement that the applicant defend,
indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officers, agents, employees, volunteers, and contractors from any and all liability, damages, or charges
(including attorneys' fees and expenses) arising out of claims, suits, demands, or causes of action as a result of the permit process, a granted permit,
construction, erection, location, performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal, or restoration of the WCF. (Ord. 1342,
2018)
18.26.160: ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST:
A. Purpose: This section implements section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act (47 USC section 1455(a)), as interpreted by the FCC in its Report and Order
no. 14-153 and regulated by 47 CFR section 1.40001, which require a State or local government to approve any eligible facilities request for a
modification of an existing tower or base station that does not result in a substantial change to the physical dimensions of such tower or base station.
Eligible facilities requests shall be governed solely by the provisions in this section and Federal law.
B. Application Review:
1. Application: The City shall prepare and make publicly available an application form, the requirements for which shall be limited to the information
necessary for the City to consider whether an application is an eligible facilities request. The City may not require an applicant to submit any other
documentation intended to illustrate the need for any such wireless facilities or to justify the business decision to modify such wireless facilities.
2. Review: Upon receipt of an application for an eligible facilities request pursuant to this section, the City shall review such application, make its final
decision to approve or disapprove the application, and advise the applicant in writing of its final decision.
3. Timeframe For Review: Within sixty (60) days of the date on which an applicant submits an application seeking approval of an eligible facilities
request under this section, the City shall review and act upon the application, subject to the tolling provisions below.
4. Tolling Of The Timeframe For Review: The 60-day review period begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled only by mutual
agreement between the City and the applicant, or in cases where the City determines that the application is incomplete. The timeframe for review
is not tolled by a moratorium on the review of applications.
a. To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the City must provide written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application,
specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application.
b. The timeframe for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the City's notice of
incompleteness.
c. Following a supplemental submission, the City will have ten (10) days to notify the applicant that the supplemental submission did not provide
the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent
notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this section. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing
documents or information that was not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.
5. Failure To Act: In the event the City fails to approve or deny a complete application under this section within the timeframe for review (accounting
for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted provided the applicant notifies the City in writing after the review period has expired. (Ord.
1342, 2018)
18.26.170: COLLOCATION APPLICATIONS:
A. Purpose: This section implements, in part, 47 USC section 332(c)(7) of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended, as interpreted by the
FCC in its Report and Order no. 14-153. Except when a shorter timeframe is otherwise required under this chapter, the following timeframes apply to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 235/268
collocation.
B. Application Review:
1. Application: The City shall prepare and make publicly available an application form, the requirements of which shall be limited to the information
necessary for the City to consider whether an application is a collocation request.
2. Review: Upon receipt of an application for a collocation request pursuant to this section, the City shall review such application, make its final
decision to approve or disapprove the application, and advise the applicant in writing of its final decision.
3. Timeframe For Review: Within ninety (90) days of the date on which an applicant submits an application seeking approval of a collocation request
under this section, the City shall review and act upon the application, subject to the tolling provisions below.
4. Tolling Of The Timeframe For Review: The 90-day review period begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled only by mutual
agreement between the City and the applicant, or in cases where the City determines that the application is incomplete.
a. To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the City must provide written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application,
specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application.
b. The timeframe for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the City's notice of
incompleteness.
c. Following a supplemental submission, the City will notify the applicant within ten (10) days that the supplemental submission did not provide the
information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices
pursuant to the procedures identified in this section. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or
information that was not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.
5. Failure To Act: In the event the City fails to approve or deny a complete application under this section within the timeframe for review (accounting
for any tolling), the applicant shall be entitled to pursue all remedies under applicable law. (Ord. 1342, 2018)
18.26.180: NEW SITE OR TOWER APPLICATIONS:
A. Purpose: This section also implements, in part, 47 USC section 332(c)(7) of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended, as interpreted by
the FCC in its Report and Order no. 14-153.
B. Application Review:
1. Application: The City shall prepare and make publicly available an application form, the requirements of which shall be limited to the information
necessary for the City to consider whether an application is a request for a new site or tower.
2. Review: Upon receipt of an application for a request for a new site or tower pursuant to this section, the City shall review such application, make
its final decision to approve or disapprove the application, and advise the applicant in writing of its final decision.
3. Timeframe For Review: Within one hundred fifty (150) days of the date on which an applicant submits an application seeking approval of a request
for a new site or tower under this section, the City shall review and act upon the application, subject to the tolling provisions below.
4. Tolling Of The Timeframe For Review: The 150-day review period begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled only by mutual
agreement between the City and the applicant, or in cases where the City determines that the application is incomplete.
a. To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the City must provide written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application,
specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application.
b. The timeframe for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the City's notice of
incompleteness.
c. Following a supplemental submission, the City will notify the applicant within ten (10) days that the supplemental submission did not provide the
information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices
pursuant to the procedures identified in this section. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or
information that were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness.
5. Failure To Act: In the event the City fails to approve or deny a complete application under this section within the timeframe for review (accounting
for any tolling), the applicant shall be entitled to pursue all remedies under applicable law. (Ord. 1342, 2018)
Chapter 18.28
NONCONFORMING USES AND PARCELS
18.28.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to permit nonconforming uses, buildings, and lots, to continue while prohibiting expansion of nonconformity, subject to
limitations established by Idaho Code. (Ord. 1061 § 2, 2005)
18.28.020: LEGAL NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 236/268
A legal nonconforming structure is one that was in compliance with all land use and building code requirements at the time it was constructed, or that
was constructed or established before land use regulations were enacted, but does not conform to the structure requirements of the current land use
codes of the city.
A. Any legal nonconforming permanent structure may continue to be used and maintained provided there is no physical change other than necessary
maintenance and repair in such a structure, except as otherwise allowed by this title.
B. A nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged in area, space, or volume, in any way that increases its nonconformity.
C. A damaged or destroyed legal nonconforming structure may be repaired or reconstructed provided that the extent of the previously existing
nonconformance is not increased.
D. Any structure legally built prior to the adoption of land use regulations within a currently required yard setback area shall be deemed a legal
nonconforming structure. (Ord. 1061 § 2, 2005)
18.28.030: LEGAL NONCONFORMING USES:
All existing uses of land that are not permitted uses in the zoning district in which such use is being conducted, and all uses which, if presently initiated,
would require a special use permit, and those uses which do not have a special use permit, are deemed legal nonconforming uses, and the following
provisions shall apply:
A. A legal nonconforming use shall not be expanded or extended in any way, except as otherwise allowed by this title.
B. A legal nonconforming use shall not be changed except to a use that complies with the regulations of the zoning district in which the subject property
lies or to diminish its nonconformity. (Ord. 1237, 2012)
18.28.040: LEGAL NONCONFORMING LOTS:
All existing platted subdivision lots that do not meet the minimum lot area and dimension standards of the district within which they are located are
hereby deemed nonconforming lots, and the following provisions shall apply:
A. Any lot that was legally created prior to the effective date hereof may be used in conformance with the uses permitted by the zoning district within
which it is located, provided that all yard and setback requirements are met.
B. Undeveloped, nonconforming lots may be used and have a structure erected upon them; however, if such lot is contiguous to another lot of the same
ownership and any combination of such lots will meet the area or dimension standards of this title, such lots shall be considered to be an undivided
parcel for the purposes of this title, and the separate lots shall be treated as a single parcel concerning the issuance of a building permit for any
construction on the lot, or contiguous commonly owned lots where this condition exists.
C. No nonconforming or conforming lot shall be reduced in area or dimensions if such reduction would result in a greater degree of nonconformity.
D. In the single-family residential (R1) district, any lot with an area less than the minimum required for the district may only be developed to the R1
district density; provided, that any lot in any R1 district that has an area less than six thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet may only be
developed with a single-family unit. (Ord. 1061 § 2, 2005)
18.28.050: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The zoning administrator is authorized to take such steps as are necessary, including civil or criminal litigation, to abate, penalize or prevent the use of
any unlawful structure, lot or use. (Ord. 1237, 2012)
Chapter 18.32
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
18.32.010: AUTHORITY:
The zoning administrator is authorized to enforce the provisions of this title. It shall be deemed a violation of this title to use any land, building, or
premises, contrary to the provisions of this title, contrary to the terms or conditions of a permit, variance or the terms and conditions imposed by the
planning and zoning commission or city council. Violations of this title are hereby declared to be unlawful and subject to the penalties established by this
code. (Ord. 1237, 2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 237/268
18.32.020: PENALTIES:
Failure to comply with any provision or requirement of this title or terms or conditions of permits shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable as provided
in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this code. The zoning administrator may elect to pursue enforcement by criminal action and/or civil action related to any
violation of this title. Each day a violation continues may be considered a separate offense. The landowner, tenant, subdivider, builder, or any other
nonpublic official, who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may be found guilty of violation. Nothing contained in this title shall
prevent any other public official or private citizen from taking such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this title. (Ord.
1237, 2012)
18.32.030: ABATEMENT PROCEEDINGS:
The city attorney or his designee may commence action or proceedings for the abatement of any violation of this title as a nuisance in the manner
provided by law, and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant relief as to abate, terminate and remove unlawful uses,
buildings or structures, and restrain and enjoin any person, firm, or corporation from setting up, erecting, building, maintaining, or using any building,
structure, vehicle, or property contrary to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1061 § 2, 2005)
Chapter 18.36
SIGNS
18.36.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate all signs in the city of Post Falls that are visible from the public rights of way, public facilities, public pedestrian
and bicycle pathways, and navigable waterways. Signs provide an important medium through which individuals and businesses may convey a variety of
noncommercial and commercial messages. Depending on their size, number, and design, signs may attract or repel visitors, affect the visual quality of
the community, affect the safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and impact, positively or negatively, the character of the community. Aesthetic
considerations impact economic values as well as public health, safety, and welfare. Therefore, it is the intent of these regulations to establish standards
for the following purposes:
A. Recognize and protect the rights of individuals and businesses to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected
against the unrestricted proliferation of signs;
B. Further the objectives of the city's comprehensive plan;
C. Maintain and enhance the visual quality (aesthetics) of the community;
D. Improve pedestrian and motorist safety by minimizing distractions, obstacles and visual clutter, and to ensure clear views of the roadway and
directional or warning signs;
E. Protect and enhance economic viability by ensuring that Post Falls will be a visually pleasant place to visit and/or reside;
F. Protect property values and public/private investments in property;
G. Protect views of the natural landscape and sky;
H. Avoid personal injury and property damage from unsafe signs;
I. Provide businesses with effective and efficient opportunities for identification by reducing competing demands for visual attention; and
J. Ensure fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. (Ord. 1219, 2011)
18.36.020: RESTRICTIONS:
No sign shall be constructed, installed, structurally altered, enlarged or relocated except in conformity with the provisions contained herein, and only
after a sign permit issued by the city of Post Falls has been secured, if so required. The changing or maintenance of movable parts or components of an
approved sign, or permitted nonconforming sign, designed for such changes, or the changing of sign copy, business name, lettering, sign faces, colors,
display, graphic matter, and/or the content of any sign copy shall not be deemed a structural alteration. (Ord. 1219, 2011)
18.36.030: DEFINITIONS:
ABANDONED SIGN: Any sign that does not display a well maintained message for a period of one hundred twenty (120) consecutive days; any sign
that is no longer fully supported by the structure designed to support the sign for a period of one hundred twenty (120) consecutive days; or a sign that
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 238/268
pertains to a business, industry or service that is no longer located on the premises where the sign is located.
BANNER: A strip of cloth, canvas, or other flexible material on which a sign is painted and may be suspended between two (2) structures or hung on the
face of a single structure.
BUILDING SIGN: A sign attached to a building, including, but not limited to, wall signs; window signs; blade signs; roof signs; awning, canopy, and/or
marquee signs.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN: Any sign that is designed and erected for the principal purpose of providing direction and/or orientation for vehicular or pedestrian
traffic.
DOUBLE FACED SIGN: A sign with two (2) faces, back to back or in the shape of a "V", with identical messages and images, where each face is
located not more than twelve inches (12") apart at the narrowest point, and not more than thirty six inches (36") apart at the widest point.
FACADE, FRONT BUILDING: The exterior building wall of a structure facing a public or private right of way.
FLAG: Any fabric or bunting containing colors, patterns, or symbols used as a symbol of an entity and affixed on one side to a pole attached to either a
building or the ground.
FLASHING SIGN: Signs whose illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period of illumination is either the same or less than the
period of nonillumination. For the purpose of this chapter, a sign will not be considered "flashing" if the cyclical period between on and off phases
exceeds four (4) seconds.
FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign principally supported by a structure affixed to the ground, and not supported by a building, including pole signs,
monument signs, and ground signs.
FRONTAGE, STREET: The length of the property line(s) of a single premises along a public or private right of way.
GOVERNMENTAL SIGNS: Signs governmental entities are required by law to post, erect, provide, use or maintain, including, but not limited to, signs
required by the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", and signs which governmental entities post, erect, provide, use or maintain for the purpose
of protecting public health or safety, or providing direction to or identification of governmental facilities.
GROSS AREA, SIGN: The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such sign, excluding any structural elements
outside the limits of the sign and not forming an integral part of the display. For double faced signs, the gross area shall only include one of the sides. If
the sign consists only of individual letters affixed directly to the wall of a building, only the area of a simple geometric figure which will encompass the
letters is counted as part of the gross area.
HEIGHT, SIGN: The vertical distance from the natural grade of the property at the base of the sign to the highest point on a sign or sign structure.
MANSARD: An inclined, decorative rooflike projection that is attached to an exterior building facade.
MARQUEE: A rooflike structure of a permanent nature which projects from the wall of a building.
MARQUEE SIGN: Any sign attached to or constructed on a marquee.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the effective date hereof, which does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter, and/or would otherwise not be authorized under this chapter.
OFF PREMISES COMMERCIAL SIGN: A sign which, for commercial purposes, directs attention to a business operated for profit, or to a product,
commodity or service for sale, at a location other than the property on which it is displayed.
RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign at the entrance of a residential neighborhood, subdivision, or multi-family residential
complex identifying the neighborhood.
ROOFLINE: The top edge of a peaked roof or, in the case of an extended facade or parapet, the uppermost point of said facade or parapet.
SMALL SIGN: A freestanding sign not exceeding six (6) square feet in gross sign area and six feet (6') in height, which is not illuminated.
WINDOW SIGN: A sign affixed to, painted upon, or etched into the surface of a window with its message intended to be visible to, and readable from,
the public way or an adjacent property. (Ord. 1219, 2011)
18.36.040: SIGNS AUTHORIZED WITHOUT A SIGN PERMIT:
While subject to other applicable requirements and permits, the following signs are authorized without a sign permit:
A. Small Signs: Small signs are authorized without a sign permit, but are subject to the following limitations:
1. Small signs may carry any lawful message;
2. Small signs shall not be illuminated;
3. No small sign shall exceed six feet (6') in height above ground level; a sign placed within the vision triangle as defined per section 10.52.020 of
this code, shall not exceed three feet (3') in height;
4. One small sign shall be authorized per lot, except in the case of warning signs;
5. Warning signs (e.g., "Beware Of Dog" or "No Trespass") shall be limited to no more than two (2) such small signs along frontage on the parcel,
unless otherwise required by state law; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 239/268
6. Small signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in gross area.
B. Governmental Signs: "Governmental signs", as defined in this chapter, do not require a sign permit.
C. Directional Signs: Directional signs do not require a sign permit, but are subject to the following limitations:
1. Only one exit and one entrance directional sign shall be authorized per legal approach.
2. Directional signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet in gross area.
3. Not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the area of such sign shall be devoted to personal or business identification or logos.
4. Regulatory and/or traffic control signs shall not be considered directional signs, as defined herein.
D. Flags: Flags do not require a sign permit, but are subject to the following limitations:
1. Groupings of more than three (3) flags on a single lot shall require a sign permit.
2. A flagpole for such an exempted flag may not exceed thirty feet (30') above ground level in any residential zone; and a flagpole for such an
exempted flag may not exceed forty five feet (45') above ground level in any commercial or industrial zone.
3. Such flag shall not exceed a maximum area of sixty (60) square feet in the agricultural zone or any residential zone; and such flag shall not
exceed one hundred thirty five (135) square feet in any commercial or industrial zone.
E. Danger/Hazard Signs: Signs exclusively devoted to warning the public of dangerous conditions or hazards (e.g., drop offs, high voltage, fire danger,
or explosives) are authorized without a permit, provided that such signs do not exceed three (3) square feet in gross area, unless otherwise provided
by state or federal law.
F. Street And Address Signs: Street name and addressing signs, meeting the standards for such signs as detailed in title 12, chapter 12.24 of this code
shall not require a sign permit.
G. Window Signs: Signs that are painted, posted or etched on windows are allowed for all zones, subject to the following limitations:
1. The aggregate area of all such signs shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the window area on which such signs are displayed.
2. Windows separated by mullions shall be considered one continuous window area.
3. Window signs shall not be assessed against the sign area permitted for other sign types.
H. Banners: Banners used on private property for a period of no more than thirty (30) days in any calendar year do not require a sign permit. (Ord. 1219,
2011)
18.36.050: SIGNS AUTHORIZED WITH A SIGN PERMIT:
Subject to the applicable requirements of this chapter, this title, and the official building code as adopted by the city of Post Falls, signs shall be
authorized with an approved sign permit, as detailed below for each of the identified zoning designations:
A. In Residential Zone Designations: In addition to those signs authorized without a sign permit, the following signs shall be allowed in all residential
zones with an approved sign permit, subject to standards as detailed below, the general provisions and requirements for all signs, and specific
standards for each sign type as detailed in this chapter:
1. For all nonresidential uses, excluding home occupations:
a. Building Signs: Building signs, subject to the following limitations:
(1) Wall, blade, window, awning, canopy or marquee signs, are permitted, subject to standards applicable to the specific sign type, provided total
building signage does not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the front building facade.
(2) Roof signs shall be prohibited.
b. Freestanding Monument Or Ground Signs: Freestanding monument or ground signs, subject to the following limitations: One such sign per
street frontage with an approved approach may be permitted, subject to the following restrictions:
(1) The gross area for each such authorized monument or ground sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet;
(2) The area of structural support elements for the sign shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the message portion of the sign; and
(3) The height of said monument/ground signs shall not exceed five feet (5').
c. Signs For Neighborhood Commercial Complexes In A SmartCode Zoning District: For multiple-occupancy neighborhood commercial
condominium or lease developments under unified control, the requirements for a master sign plan, as detailed in subsection B3 of this section,
shall apply.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 240/268
2. Residential neighborhood signs (e.g., single-family subdivision, multi-family housing complexes, etc.) and subdivision signs shall be limited to one
monument or ground sign per public or private street entrance located on a collector or arterial street, subject to the following restrictions:
a. Gross area of each permitted sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet;
b. The area of structural support elements for the sign shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the message portion of the sign;
c. The height of the sign shall not exceed five feet (5') from the natural grade of the land at the base of the sign.
3. Flashing, animated, revolving and/or neon signs of any type are prohibited in all residential zones.
B. In All Commercial And Industrial Zones: In addition to those signs authorized without a sign permit, the following signs shall be allowed in all
commercial and industrial zones, with an approved sign permit, subject to standards as detailed below, the general provisions and requirements for
all signs, and specific standards for each sign type as detailed in this chapter:
1. Building Signage: Each building or business is permitted, wall, window, awning, canopy or marquee signs, and/or blade signs, subject to standards
applicable to the specific sign type, provided total building signage does not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the area of the front building facade.
2. Freestanding Signs: One freestanding sign meeting the height and area limitations set out herein shall be permitted for every one hundred fifty
(150) linear feet of public street frontage or thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of lot area per public street frontage, up to a maximum of three (3)
freestanding signs per development lot, subject to the height and area limits detailed herein. Where more than one freestanding sign is permitted,
the total linear feet of street frontage is divided by the number of proposed signs on the development lot to determine the street frontage per sign.
These requirements are not applicable to integrated shopping center signs.
Height limitation: Thirty five feet (35') from the surface of the ground to the top of the highest part of the sign, including projections.
Area limitation: Two hundred (200) square feet maximum display area.
3. Integrated Shopping Center Signs: For multiple-occupancy commercial and industrial condominium or lease developments under unified control
(e.g., shopping centers or industrial complexes), the following regulations shall apply:
a. Height And Size Limitations: The following height and size limitations shall apply:
For street frontage other than the I-90:
Height limitation: Thirty five feet (35') from the surface of the ground to the top of the highest part of the sign, including projections.
Area limitation: Four hundred (400) square feet maximum total display area for each side of a sign, with a total combined maximum of eight
hundred (800) square feet for all signs.
For I-90 frontage:
Height limitation: Sixty feet (60') from the surface of the ground to the top of the highest part of the sign, including projections.
Area limitation: Four hundred (400) square feet maximum total display area for each side of a sign, with a total combined maximum of eight
hundred (800) square feet for all signs.
b. Master Sign Plan Required:
(1) Standards And Criteria: A master sign plan shall be required prior to the issuance of new sign permits in the development complex. The
master plan shall identify standards and criteria for all signs in the complex that require permits. The master plan shall be consistent with the
standards for all signs generally, and the specific regulations associated with the zoning district in which the complex is located, and shall
address at a minimum, the following:
(A) Proposed sign locations.
(B) Materials.
(C) Type of illumination.
(D) Design of freestanding signs.
(E) Size of signs.
(F) Quantity of different sign types.
(G) Uniform standards proposed for all signage, including signage that does not require a permit (e.g., directional signage), as well as building
and freestanding signage which does require a permit.
(2) Compliance With Master Sign Plan: All applications for sign permits for signage within the complex shall comply with the approved master
sign plan.
(3) Review Of Master Sign Plan: The master sign plan will be reviewed in accordance with procedures for processing a sign permit application.
(4) Amendments To The Sign Plan: Any amendments to the sign plan must be signed by the owner(s) of the development complex before such
amendment will become effective.
C. In The SmartCode Zoning Districts: In addition to those signs authorized without a sign permit, the following signs shall be allowed in the SmartCode
zoning districts, with an approved sign permit, subject to standards as detailed below, the general provisions and requirements for all signs, and
specific standards for each sign type as detailed in this chapter:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 241/268
1. Limitations: Each business shall be limited to:
a. One blade sign; and
b. One awning, banner, valance or canopy sign; and
c. One wall, window or facade sign, subject to the following standards:
(1) The sign shall be located on the upper portion of the storefront, within or just above the enframed storefront opening; and
(2) The sign shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the building's overall front facade.
2. Total Sign Area: The total area of all blade, marquee, wall, window, and facade signage combined shall not exceed one hundred sixty (160) square
feet per building. Physical business addressing signs shall not be included in this calculation. (Ord. 1219, 2011)
18.36.060: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs are expressly prohibited in all districts within the city of Post Falls:
A. Signs Constructed Without Required Permit: Any sign constructed after the effective date hereof without a sign permit approved by the city of Post
Falls, excepting those signs expressly identified as signs authorized without a sign permit.
B. Signs Which Obstruct Or Interfere With Traffic: Signs located in such a manner as to obstruct or otherwise interfere with an official traffic sign, signal
or device, or obstruct or interfere with a driver's view of approaching, merging or intersecting traffic.
C. Signs Which Simulate Traffic Control Devices: Signs which simulate or imitate the size, lettering, illumination, or design of any traffic control device in
such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse the public.
D. Signs On Public Property: No portion of a privately owned sign, or its supporting structure may be located on, extend into, encroach upon, or
overhang publicly owned property, or a public right of way (such as a street, sidewalk, or waterway).
E. Flashing Signs: Signs which blink, flash, or are animated by lighting in such a way as to have the appearance of traffic safety signs and/or lights, or
municipal vehicle warnings from a distance, or flash directly into residentially zoned properties or flash directly toward any roadway in a manner that
is a hazard to the roadway operations.
F. Signs Attached To Vehicles; Exception: Any sign attached to, or placed on a vehicle or trailer parked on public or private property in a position visible
to traffic on a public road, waterway, or parking area for a period longer than six (6) days in a sixty (60) day period, except for signs meeting the
following conditions:
1. The primary purpose of such vehicle or trailer is not the display of signs;
2. The signs are magnetic, decals, or painted upon an integral part of the vehicle or equipment as originally designed by the manufacturer, and do
not break the silhouette of the vehicle; and
3. The vehicle is in operating condition, currently registered and licensed to operate on public streets when applicable, and actively used or available
for use in the daily function of the business to which such signs relate.
G. Revolving Signs: Revolving signs; and
H. Off Premises Commercial Signs: Off premises commercial signs, as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 1219, 2011)
18.36.070: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SIGNS:
A. Conformance To Codes: Any sign hereafter erected shall conform to provisions of this title, and all other applicable provisions of this code.
B. Sign Setbacks, Generally: All freestanding signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') behind the back of sidewalk (or the property line, where
no sidewalk is present), and shall not extend into the public right of way, or over the edge of sidewalk, if said sidewalk is located in an easement
rather than right of way.
C. Traffic Visibility: Signs and sign structures shall not be erected in such location as to cause visual obstruction or interference with motor vehicle traffic,
or traffic control devices. Signs and/or sign structures shall not obstruct the line of vision in any direction from any street intersection or driveway.
Specifically, signs and sign structures shall not be located within the "sight triangle" as defined by this code, and/or street standards as adopted by
Post Falls city council.
D. Construction: The following standards shall apply to the construction of all signs in the city, regardless of whether the sign does or does not require a
sign permit:
1. Code Requirements: All signs shall be constructed in compliance with the adopted building and electrical codes of the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 242/268
2. Engineering: Engineering must be provided for all signs over eight feet (8') in height above ground level.
3. Fastenings: All signs must remain safe and secure during the period of use. All parts of the signs, including bolts and cables, shall remain painted,
and free of corrosion.
4. Stability: Signs shall be constructed so that they will withstand wind pressure of at least seventy (70) pounds per square foot of surface and will
otherwise structurally be safe, and securely anchored or otherwise fastened, suspended, or supported so that they will not be a hazard to persons
or property.
5. Lighting: External lighting shall be shielded from view and shall be focused on the sign to avoid stray lighting. Flashing, rotating, and intermittent
lighting is prohibited.
6. Identification: All signs shall identify the name and an operating phone number of the owner and person responsible for maintenance of the sign.
This information shall be posted on a weatherproof label of two inches by four inches (2" x 4"), located on the bottom portion of the sign frame
nearest the closest right of way.
7. Proximity To Electrical Conductors: Signs and their supporting structures shall be located no closer to electrical utilities than is permitted by the
applicable code. No sign, including cables and support shall, in any event, be within six feet (6') of any electrical conductor, electrical light pole,
electric streetlight, traffic light, or public utility pole.
8. Prohibited Obstruction: Signs shall not be erected in any manner which interferes with free passage from, or otherwise obstructs a fire escape,
downspout, window, door, stairway, ladder or opening required as a means of ingress or egress, or required by code for the provision of light, air,
or stormwater drainage.
E. Maintenance Of Signs: All signs and sign structures shall be properly maintained in good condition and repair. Should any sign become structurally
unsafe or a safety hazard, the owner, upon notification by the city, shall be required to return the sign to a safe condition or remove the sign.
F. Removal Of Obsolete, Nonmaintained Or Abandoned Signs: All signs, including those painted on a building, which no longer serve the purpose for
which they were intended, are not maintained, have been determined to present a hazard, or have otherwise been abandoned, shall be removed or
restored by the business or property owner within thirty (30) days of notice by the city, unless the sign is of part of the building structure or painted on
the building structure.
G. Nonconforming Signs: Any sign legally existing at the passage date hereof that does not conform in use, location, height, or size with the regulations
of the zone in which the sign is located, shall be considered a legal nonconforming use or structure, and shall be permitted to continue in such status
until such time as the sign is abandoned, removed, relocated or replaced, subject to the following restrictions:
1. The structure of the sign may not be altered in any way except toward compliance with this chapter. Structural alterations which are necessary for
the maintenance, repair or restoration of the nonconforming sign are permissible, provided said alterations do not increase the size, height, degree
of nonconformity, or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value of the sign.
2. The legal, nonconforming sign may not be replaced, except with a sign conforming to the requirements of this chapter.
3. The legal nonconforming sign is subject to all requirements of this chapter regarding safety, maintenance, and repair. If, however, the sign suffers
damage or deterioration in excess of fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value, it must be brought into compliance with this chapter or removed
within thirty (30) days of notification by the city.
4. The changing of sign copy, business name, lettering, sign faces, colors, display, graphic matter, and/or the content of any sign copy shall not be
deemed an alteration or replacement.
H. First Amendment Protection: Any sign allowed under this chapter may contain, in lieu of any other text, any otherwise lawful noncommercial message
that does not, for commercial purposes, direct attention to a business operated for profit or to a product, commodity, or service for sale, provided said
sign complies with all other provisions of this chapter, including the specific provisions for the type of sign, within the land use designation/zone
where the sign is placed. This provision prevails over any more specific provisions to the contrary. (Ord. 1219, 2011)
18.36.080: STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC SIGN TYPES:
A. Building Signs, Generally: If a building contains walls facing more than one street frontage, the sign area will be computed for each building wall
facing a different street frontage. The sign area(s) thus calculated shall be allowed to then apply to permitted signs placed on each separate wall
facing a street frontage.
B. Freestanding Signs, Generally: For lots with more than one street frontage, sign area for each frontage shall be calculated separately for each
different street frontage, however, in no event shall a development lot exceed the maximum number of freestanding signs allowed.
C. Awning, Canopy And Marquee Signs:
1. Sign lettering and logos shall not comprise more than thirty percent (30%) of the total exterior surface.
2. Shall be located a minimum of eight feet (8') above ground level.
3. Shall not project more than eight feet (8') from the building.
D. Projecting/Blade Signs: Projecting/blade signs, attached to and projecting from a building face or wall at a ninety degree (90°) angle:
1. Shall not project more than six feet (6') from the building;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 243/268
2. Shall not exceed a maximum height of four feet (4');
3. Shall not exceed a maximum area of twenty four (24) square feet;
4. Shall be located a minimum of eight feet (8') and a maximum of fourteen feet (14') above the sidewalk grade, as measured from the sidewalk to
the bottom of the frame of the sign; and
5. For buildings with multiple commercial tenants, each business may be permitted one blade sign, provided that blade signs are separated by a
minimum of twenty five feet (25').
E. Wall Signs:
1. Shall be mounted flush and fixed securely to a building wall; and
2. May project no more than twelve inches (12") from the face of the building wall, and shall not extend sideways beyond the building face or the
highest line of the building to which it is attached;
3. Shall be located a minimum of eight feet (8') above the sidewalk grade. (Ord. 1219, 2011)
18.36.090: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND ADMINISTRATION:
A. Permit Required; Exception: A permit shall be required for all signs, except those expressly authorized without a permit. Exemption from permit shall
not, however, exempt the owner of the sign from responsibility for its erection and maintenance in a safe manner, and in a manner in accordance
with all other provisions of this chapter.
B. Alteration, Enlargement, Or Relocation Of Signs: No sign shall be structurally altered, enlarged, or relocated except in conformity to the provisions
herein, and only upon applying for and securing a permit, unless expressly authorized without a permit.
C. Application Requirements:
1. The applicant must complete and submit the City's standard sign permit application form, which shall be accompanied by a signed letter of
consent from the property owner, if the property owner is not the applicant;
2. The application shall include the location and dimension of all existing and proposed signs on the development lot;
3. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, depicting the dimensions of lot, location of all right-of-way/street frontages,
and ingress/egress to the site; building footprint, including size and dimensions of the building, and building facade where existing signs are
located, and where proposed signs are to be located;
4. The applicant shall provide a graphic depiction, drawn to scale, of the dimension and design of all existing and proposed signs on the development
lot; and
5. Construction plans required for all proposed new signs shall be drawn to scale, and shall include dimensions, materials, and required details of
construction including loads, stresses, anchorage and other pertinent data. Said building plans shall contain the seal and signature of a registered
design professional or professionals, if so required by the adopted Building Code of the City.
D. Permit Fees: Fees for sign permits, as established by resolution of Post Falls City Council, shall be due and payable at the time of permit issuance.
E. Processing Of Permit Applications:
1. Within twenty (20) business days of receipt of a complete application for sign permit, City staff will:
a. Approve the sign permit application;
b. Approve the sign permit application with conditions; or
c. Deny the permit application.
2. If the permit application is denied, staff will provide a written statement of the reasons for denial, and what, if anything, can be done to make the
application approvable.
3. Upon approval of the sign permit application, satisfaction of any conditions that may be applicable prior to permit issuance, and receipt of the
applicable sign permit fees, the sign permit will be issued by the City.
F. Standards For Sign Permit Approval: City staff shall approve the permit application, if all of the following standards have been met (or if said
standards can be met, with conditions as may be included in a conditional approval):
1. The sign, as proposed, meets all applicable requirements of this chapter;
2. The sign, as proposed, meets all applicable requirements of the City's adopted Building and Electrical Codes;
3. The sign, as proposed, does not violate any other applicable Code and/or standards of the City, State and Federal government.
G. Appeal Of Decision By City Staff: Shall meet the provisions set forth within section 18.20.110 of this title. (Ord. 1219, 2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 244/268
Title 18A
SMARTCODE ZONING
Chapter 18A.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
18A.04.010: NAME, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
This title shall be known as the POST FALLS SMARTCODE. The adoption of this SmartCode is authorized pursuant to article 12, section 2 of the Idaho
constitution and title 67, chapter 65 of the Idaho Code, as they now exist or may be subsequently amended. The adoption of this SmartCode is
appropriate to promote the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the residents of Post Falls and to assist in bringing about coordinated,
efficient and economical development of the city.
A. This SmartCode includes chapters 18A.04 through 18A.28 of this title and any adopted modules and the SmartCode future land use map adopted as
part of the Post Falls comprehensive plan. SmartCode zoning shall be depicted on the official zoning map of the city of Post Falls. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.04.020: APPLICABILITY AND USE OF TERMS:
A. This SmartCode may, in the discretion of the city council, be applied as the land use regulation for all land annexed into the city subsequent to its
enactment and shall apply to all areas depicted with SmartCode zoning on the official zoning map of the city, subject to limiting conditions as
otherwise provided herein or by requirements established by title 18 of this code. The city council, at the time of initial zoning, will determine whether
newly annexed sites will be zoned consistent with this title or be zoned under the conventional zoning regulations pursuant to title 18 of this code.
Use of the verb "shall" is mandatory; the verb "may" is optional. All provisions of this code or other approved ordinances of the city in existence on
the effective date of enactment of this title shall continue to be applicable for land areas not subject to the provisions of this title.
B. Terms expressly defined in this title shall be applied as defined herein. Those terms not defined in this title shall be accorded their generally accepted
meanings. In the event of conflicts between the definitions set forth herein and express definitions used elsewhere in this code, the express
definitions found in this title shall apply to interpretation of this title. Where in conflict, numeric metrics shall prevail over graphic metrics. (Ord. 1297,
2016: Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.04.030: INTENT:
The intent and purpose of this title is to enable, and require implementation of the following policies:
A. The Community:
1. That the community should retain its natural infrastructure and visual character derived from natural topography, woodlands, farmlands, riparian
corridors and shorelines.
2. That growth strategies should encourage infill development in parity with development of agricultural lands that have not been previously
developed.
3. That development contiguous to urban areas should be integrated with the existing urban pattern to the greatest extent possible while achieving
the goals of walkable neighborhoods with services readily at hand.
4. That interconnected networks of thoroughfares should be designed to disperse traffic and reduce the length of automobile trips.
5. That affordable workforce housing should be an integral element of new development throughout the community.
6. That transportation corridors in the master transportation plan should be reserved and implemented in coordination with land use.
7. That appropriate building densities and land uses should be provided within walking distance of planned transportation system nodes.
8. That the community should include a framework of transit, pedestrian, and bicycle systems that blend with and provide transportation alternatives
to the automobile.
9. That civic, institutional, and commercial activity should be embedded in the city center, not isolated in remote single use complexes.
10. That schools should be sized and located to enable children to walk or bicycle to them.
B. The Neighborhood: The neighborhood should be shaped with the following intent:
1. That neighborhoods and commercial centers should be compact, pedestrian oriented and mixed use, when possible.
2. That neighborhoods and commercial centers should be the preferred pattern of development and that zoning districts focusing on a single use or
type of use should be the exception.
3. That many activities of daily living should occur within walking distance of most dwellings, allowing a measure of independence to those who do
not drive.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 245/268
4. That within neighborhoods, a range of housing types and price levels should be provided to accommodate diverse ages and incomes and remove
barriers that might prevent the market from effectively providing affordable housing while maintaining desirable neighborhoods.
5. That a range of open space options including parks, squares, and playgrounds should be distributed within neighborhoods and commercial
centers.
C. The Block And The Building: Each block and building that comprises the component parts of a neighborhood should be developed with the following
intent:
1. That buildings and landscaping should contribute to the physical definition of thoroughfares as public spaces.
2. That development should adequately accommodate automobiles while respecting the pedestrian and the spatial form of public space.
3. That the design of thoroughfares and buildings should reinforce safe environments, but not at the expense of accessibility.
4. That architecture and landscape design should apply in ways that are consistent with local climate, topography, history, and building practice.
5. That civic buildings and public gathering places should be provided locations that reinforce community identity and support self-government.
6. That civic buildings should be distinctive and appropriate to their role.
7. That the harmonious and orderly evolution of urban areas should be secured through the provisions of this title that establishes guides for design
and function.
D. SmartCode Zone(s); Approach And Purpose:
1. Communities should provide choices in living arrangements as manifested by distinct physical environments. SmartCode zones are designated in
order to provide a blend of land use intensities that will create variety and sustainable neighborhoods.
2. The SmartCode zone descriptions on table 1, attached to the ordinance codified herein, shall constitute an expression of the intent of this code
with regard to the general character of each of these environments. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.04.040: ADMINISTRATION AND STRUCTURE:
A. The city council of Post Falls shall by resolution establish a development review committee ("DRC") comprised of designated public services
department staff to process applications and plans for projects proposed pursuant to this title.
B. The geographic locations of growth designations and the standards for SmartCode zones shall be determined as set forth in this title. Projects that
require only administrative authorizations shall be administered by the zoning administrator or designee.
C. Should a violation of an approved neighborhood plan or building scale plan occur during construction, or should any construction, site work, or
development be commenced without an approved neighborhood plan or building scale plan, the city acting through the DRC has the right to require
the owner to stop, remove, and/or mitigate the violation or to be subject to the infraction or criminal misdemeanor penalties established by this code
for violation of a municipal ordinance. (Ord. 1297, 2016)
18A.04.050: ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORIZATIONS AND VARIATIONS:
A. There shall be two (2) circumstances where strict application of the requirements of this title might not be applied. A variance is an exception from an
express dimensional or area requirement. An administrative authorization is grant of a degree of administrative flexibility by the zoning administrator
or designee to address the context in which new development is proposed or by which design options might result in a better developed
environment.
B. An administrative authorization is an approval by the zoning administrator or designee that must be consistent with the provisions of section
18A.04.030, "Intent", of this chapter, while allowing a design alternative deemed to provide a result that more closely conforms to the statements of
intent incorporated into this title. The zoning administrator or designee shall have the authority to act upon a request for administrative authorization
pursuant to provisions of this title when it can be shown that such authorization will not conflict with the intent of this title and will result in a more
durable, cost effective or desirable design than literal compliance with design standards would produce. An administrative authorization decision by
the zoning administrator or designee may be appealed by an affected person to the planning and zoning commission in accordance with the appeals
section of this title.
C. A variance is governed by the standards established by the local land use planning act. Variances may be granted after hearing by the DRC acting as
a hearing examiner pursuant to the local land use planning act. In performing the duties of a hearing examiner, the DRC shall have final decision
making authority concerning variances, subject to appeal to the planning and zoning commission. A request for a variance shall not subject the entire
application to the procedures required by law, but only that portion necessary to rule on the specific issue for which an applicant requests relief.
D. The following standards and requirements shall not be the proper subject matter of administrative authorizations or variance:
1. The maximum dimensions of traffic lanes. (See table 3C, attached to ordinance 1200 on file in the city.)
2. The minimum base residential densities. (See table 14, attached to ordinance 1200 on file in the city.)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 246/268
3. The minimum requirements for parking (except with respect to shared use). (See table 11, attached to ordinance 1200 on file in the city.) (Ord.
1297, 2016)
18A.04.060: AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS:
A. Amendments: Amendment of this title may be carried out in accordance with the procedures set forth for zoning ordinance text amendments pursuant
to applicable provisions of state law. Changes to the zoning map must be processed in accordance with applicable provisions of state law regarding
changes to zoning district boundaries. Amendments to the zoning map should be in accordance with the Post Falls comprehensive plan, the
SmartCode future land use map and provisions of the intent section of this title.
B. Application: An application for a SmartCode zoning map amendment or SmartCode zoning upon annexation shall include the information required by
the application forms supplied by the public services department, the information required by state law to consider zoning attendant to annexation,
and information otherwise required by this title or by the administrator, planning and zoning commission or city council. In addition, the application
shall provide a description of the amendment or zoning requested along with a statement that describes the rationale for the request, how it conforms
to the comprehensive plan and other provisions of applicable law. An applicant requesting annexation should also describe why the city council
should favorably consider the amendment or establish the SmartCode zone(s) requested.
C. Public Hearing(s): A public hearing(s) shall be held before the planning and zoning commission, using the hearing and notice procedure required by
law and by the hearing procedures resolution approved by the governing board. After receiving a recommendation from the planning and zoning
commission, the city council shall conduct an additional public hearing, or hearings as it sees fit, provided, however, that if state law changes, a
subsequent hearing before the city council will be optional at the discretion of the city council.
D. SmartCode Text Or Zoning Amendments: The city council, after consideration of any recommendation from the planning and zoning commission,
concerning amendment of this title or the SmartCode zoning map may adopt, modify, or reject any proposed amendment by passage of an
ordinance.
E. Amendments To Neighborhood Plans: Any proposed modification of an approved neighborhood plan or an infill neighborhood scale plan must be
submitted in writing by the applicant to the zoning administrator or designee. The application must be accompanied by a written explanation of what
modifications are proposed and why the changes are necessary. The zoning administrator or designee will review the application for consistency with
the initial approved plan and determine if the proposed modification is determined to be minor or major modification. If the proposed modification is
determined to be minor modification, the zoning administrator may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed modification. All major
modifications must follow the quasi-judicial procedures found in section 18.20.060 of this code. (Ord. 1297, 2016: Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.04.070: APPEALS:
A. An appeal is a request for review of an administrative decision based upon application of this title. Fees governing appeals must be paid and the legal
basis for appeals must be stated in writing before an appeal will be scheduled for consideration. Appeals may be filed by an applicant for a permit or
an affected person within the meaning applied by Idaho law. Appeals will follow the procedures specified below in addition to those set forth in the
hearing procedures resolution adopted by the city council.
B. Appeals of final decisions made by the DRC or the zoning administrator or designee shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the planning and zoning
commission, but only if a written request for reconsideration has been submitted to the DRC or the zoning administrator or designee within fourteen
(14) days of the final decision stating the legal basis therefor. The DRC or the zoning administrator or designee shall respond in writing to any
request for reconsideration within fourteen (14) days of its filing, either modifying its original decision or affirming its prior action. Following the DRC
or the zoning administrator or designee's decision regarding reconsideration, the appeal process may proceed in accordance with provisions of this
title and the hearing procedures resolution of the city. A request for appeal shall include the explanation of the basis for appeal and the result sought
and must be filed no more than fourteen (14) days after the reconsideration decision is entered. After considering the written decision by the DRC or
the zoning administrator or designee and the written appeal explanation submitted by the applicant, the planning and zoning commission may
determine that the appeal has no legal basis and dismiss it, may rule upon the appeal based upon the written record placed before it or schedule an
appeal hearing to allow oral presentation of the issues associated with the appeal. Following conclusion of the procedures it chooses to invoke, the
planning and zoning commission will render a written, reasoned decision that will be communicated to the appellant and the DRC or the zoning
administrator or designee.
C. Further appeals of appellate decisions made by the planning and zoning commission shall be determined by the city council. A request for appeal
shall include an explanation of the basis for appeal and the result sought and must be filed no more than fourteen (14) days after the planning and
zoning commission decision is entered. After determining what procedures it might follow, including the options available to the planning and zoning
commission by this title, the city council will render a written, reasoned decision that will be communicated to the appellant and other affected parties.
(Ord. 1297, 2016: Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.04.080: ADOPTION OF INTEGRATED ZONING MAP:
There is hereby adopted an official zoning map that includes zoning to implement both title 18, "Zoning", of this code and this title. Such map shall be
dated as effective on the effective date of this title and shall be updated at the time of any future change of zoning pursuant to this title or title 18 of this
code. Such map shall be maintained by the community services department and may be examined at any time at Post Falls City Hall. The community
services department shall maintain records of all changes made to such map by subsequent city council action. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.04.090: PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 247/268
Any acts or omissions in violation of the provisions of this title shall be punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 1.24 of this code, or its successor. Such
penalties may include misdemeanor criminal penalties including fines of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation and/or imprisonment for up
to one hundred eighty (180) days for each violation and by any means of civil enforcement, including, but not limited to, actions to compel, to abate or to
cease and desist; or injunctions to require or prohibit specific conduct. Additionally, administrative staff of the city is authorized to deny permits or invoke
stop work authority to curtail occupancy or development of land uses subject to the requirements of this title, but not in compliance herewith. (Ord. 1200,
2010)
18A.04.100: AUTHORIZATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF:
Administrative staff of the city of Post Falls is hereby authorized and directed to undertake all actions necessary and appropriate to implement the
provisions of this title. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
Chapter 18A.08
SMARTCODE APPLICABILITY AND PROCEDURES
18A.08.010: APPLICABILITY OF THIS TITLE:
A. SmartCode zoning designations may be applied to lands annexed to the city subsequent to July 16, 2009, in accordance with this title, unless zoning
designation(s) conforming to standards established by title 18 of this code are approved by the city council.
B. The zoning districts established and mapped pursuant to title 18 of this code shall remain applicable to all lands situated within the city corporate
limits prior to July 16, 2009, the effective date of Post Falls ordinance 1176 (SmartCode), except lands designated as city center on the revised
zoning map adopted pursuant to this title.
C. Requirements of title 18 of this code, except those expressly applying zoning districts to subject lands, shall be applicable to all lands annexed into
the city subsequent to July 16, 2009. SmartCode zones for any such lands shall be designated on the official zoning maps of the city. A rezoning
may be accomplished by ordinance in accordance with rezoning procedures established by ordinance and applicable provisions of Idaho law. (Ord.
1297, 2016)
18A.08.020: PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURES:
Public hearings required to comply with the requirements of this title shall be conducted as required by state law and in accordance with the hearing
procedures resolution adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1297, 2016)
Chapter 18A.12
NEW NEIGHBORHOOD PLANS
18A.12.010: INSTRUCTIONS:
A. Within the growth designations (G1, G2, G3) as shown on the Post Falls SmartCode future land use map, the provisions of this chapter and this title
in general shall be applicable. A neighborhood plan provides a framework for SmartCode zoning to implement the SmartCode future land use plan
and provide the groundwork for establishing SmartCode zoning boundaries consistent with a neighborhood configuration that conforms to land use
and design standards established by this title.
B. A new neighborhood plan application shall be prepared by an applicant as part of the annexation/subdivision process for lands to be considered for
annexation into the city.
C. New neighborhood plans may contain more than a single neighborhood and/or more than one neighborhood type. New neighborhood plans
submitted in accordance with the provisions of this code shall be reviewed by the DRC and submitted for public hearing and a recommendation by
the planning and zoning commission or the DRC and then be forwarded to the city council for final action after a subsequent public hearing.
D. A new neighborhood plan may also include area within the city limits in addition to property to be annexed. Such areas may be processed for a zone
change concurrent with consideration of a request for annexation. Once the city council approves a new neighborhood plan, an ordinance will be
prepared and adopted and the lands encompassed by a new neighborhood plan shall be depicted and referenced as such on the SmartCode zoning
map of Post Falls. Within the new neighborhood planning area, this title and the designated SmartCode zones and development conditions of the
approved new neighborhood plan shall be the exclusive and mandatory land use regulation, and their respective provisions shall be applied
exclusively to lands annexed subsequent to July 16, 2009, unless expressly zoned pursuant to title 18 of this code by city council action.
E. The new neighborhood plan review process shall also include consideration of annexation and rezoning as appropriate, as provided by state law, to
include SmartCode zoning and subdivision, where applicable.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 248/268
F. An annexation agreement and a master development agreement shall be prepared in accordance with this code and any resolutions addressing such
subject matter. Such agreements shall be reviewed and approved by the city council and signed by the parties, including performance of steps
referenced in such agreement, prior to adoption of an ordinance annexing the property.
G. An ordinance, annexing the property and applying the approved SmartCode zones to the Post Falls zoning map, shall be prepared and adopted
subsequent to execution of agreements pursuant to subsection F of this section, as authorized by the city council. Within the new neighborhood
planning area, the SmartCode shall be the mandatory land use regulation except as applied to lands within the scope of the neighborhood plan, but
located within the city at the time of annexation and thereby zoned in accordance with title 18 of this code.
H. New neighborhood plans shall include a zoning plan consisting of one or more maps showing the following for each neighborhood type in the plan
area, in compliance with the standards described in this title:
1. SmartCode zones.
2. Civic space.
3. Preliminary utility layout.
4. Thoroughfare network.
5. Phasing plan (includes the lot layout, approximate units, types of development, and associated infrastructure).
6. Special districts, if any.
7. Special requirements, if any to clarify (street furniture, building styles, architectural features, etc.).
8. Administrative authorizations or variances sought, if any.
I. Approved new neighborhood plans must have final development plans, including construction and infrastructure plans, reviewed and approved by the
appropriate staff before development construction can begin. The DRC may authorize the start of construction involving facilities that will not be
subject to the discretionary decision making of the DRC or of the planning and zoning commission or the city council.
J. The approved subdivision plan element found within the new neighborhood plan is approved so long as all future plat applications adhere to the
conditions set forth within the appropriate zoning districts and all elements found within the approved plan. Any changes to the approved plan would
require a neighborhood plan amendment. (Ord. 1297, 2016: Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.12.020: SEQUENCE AND REQUIREMENTS OF NEIGHBORHOOD DESIGN:
A. The framework of any new neighborhood plan shall be structured using one or several pedestrian sheds, which should be located consistent with
existing conditions, such as traffic intersections, adjacent developments, and natural features. Any site to be developed or any neighborhood unit
within it may be smaller or larger than its related pedestrian shed(s).
B. Pedestrian sheds may be adjusted to include land falling between or outside them, but the extent of each shall not exceed the acreage limit specified
in section 18A.12.030 of this chapter for the applicable neighborhood unit type. An adjusted pedestrian shed becomes the boundary of a
neighborhood unit.
C. Remnants of the site outside the adjusted pedestrian shed(s) shall be assigned to SmartCode zones or civic space by city council action or as zoned
pursuant to title 18 of this code.
D. Areas of SmartCode zones (section 18A.12.040 of this chapter) shall be allocated within the boundaries of each neighborhood unit as appropriate to
its type pursuant to section 18A.12.030 of this chapter and table 14A, attached to the ordinance codified herein. Such zones and related
requirements established by this title shall be assigned by ordinance.
E. Civic space shall be assigned according to section 18A.12.050 of this chapter.
F. Special districts, if any, shall be assigned according to section 18A.12.060 of this chapter.
G. The thoroughfare network shall be laid out according to section 18A.12.070 of this chapter.
H. Density shall be calculated according to section 18A.12.080 of this chapter. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.12.030: NEIGHBORHOOD TYPES:
A. Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND):
1. A traditional neighborhood development (TND) shall be permitted within the G2 managed growth designation, the G3 focused growth designation,
and the G4 infill growth designation as identified on the SmartCode future land use map of the comprehensive plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 249/268
2. A TND within the G2 managed growth designation and the G3 focused growth designation shall be structured by one standard or linear pedestrian
shed and shall include no less than forty (40) acres, nor more than one hundred sixty (160) acres. Chapter 18A.16 of this title defines acreage
requirements for infill TND in the G4 infill growth designation.
3. A TND shall include SmartCode zones as allocated on tables 2 and 14A, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
4. Larger sites shall be designed and developed as multiple neighborhoods, each subject to individual SmartCode zone requirements for its type as
allocated on tables 2 and 14A, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
5. In the general urban zone SC-4, a minimum residential mix of three (3) building placement/location types (none less than 10 percent) shall be
required, selected from table 9, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
B. Regional Center Development (RCD):
1. A regional center development (RCD) may be permitted within the G3 focused growth designation and the G4 infill growth designation.
2. An RCD within the G3 focused growth designation shall be structured by one long pedestrian shed or linear pedestrian shed and shall consist of
no fewer than eighty (80), nor more than six hundred forty (640) acres. Chapter 18A.16 of this title defines acreage requirements for infill RCD in
the G4 infill growth designation.
3. An RCD shall include SmartCode zones as allocated on table 2 and table 14A, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
4. For larger sites, an RCD may be adjoined by one or more TNDs, each subject to the individual SmartCode zone requirements for TND as
allocated on table 2 and table 14A, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
C. Transit Oriented Development (TOD):
1. Any TND or RCD on an existing or projected transit route may be redesignated in whole or in part as TOD and permitted the higher density
represented by the effective parking allowance in subsection 18A.20.090B4 of this title.
2. The use of a TOD overlay can be approved by administrative authorization. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.12.040: SMARTCODE (SC) ZONES:
A. SmartCode (SC) zones shall be assigned and mapped on each new neighborhood plan according to the percentages allocated on tables 2 and 14A,
attached to the ordinance codified herein.
B. A SmartCode zone may include any of the elements indicated for its SmartCode zone number throughout this code, in accordance with intent
described in table 1, attached to the ordinance codified herein, and the standards summarized in table 14, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
(Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.12.050: CIVIC SPACE:
A. General:
1. Civic spaces dedicated for public use shall be required for each neighborhood type and designated on neighborhood plan.
2. Civic spaces are public sites dedicated to open space. Private sites with an acceptable public use easement may be accepted as civic space.
3. Civic building sites are allocated for buildings generally operated by not for profit organizations dedicated to culture, education, religion,
government, recreation, transit and municipal parking, or for a community use approved by the city council.
4. Parking for civic spaces shall be determined by the DRC pursuant to general principles set forth in this title.
B. Civic Spaces Specific To SC-1 And SC-2 Zones:
1. Civic building sites and civic spaces within SC-1 natural and SC-2 rural zones shall be permitted only by planning and zoning commission
approval.
C. Civic Space (CS) Specific To SC-3 Through SC-6 Zones:
1. Each pedestrian shed shall assign at least five percent (5%) of its urbanized area (areas zoned SC-3 or higher) to civic space. Lands to be
designated as civic space must be approved by the DRC.
2. Civic spaces shall be designed as generally described in table 13, attached to the ordinance codified herein, and approved by administrative
authorization, and distributed throughout SmartCode zones as described in table 14E, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
3. Those portions of the SC-1 natural zone that occur within a development parcel shall be part of the civic space allocation and should conform to
the civic space types specified in table 13a or 13b, attached to the ordinance codified herein, if such land is open to public use.
4. Each pedestrian shed shall contain at least one main civic space. The main civic space shall be within eight hundred feet (800') of the geographic
center of each pedestrian shed, unless topographic conditions, preexisting thoroughfare alignments or other circumstances prevent such location.
A main civic space shall conform to one of the types specified in table 13b, 13c, or 13d, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 250/268
5. Within eight hundred feet (800') of every lot in residential use, a civic space designed and equipped as a playground shall be provided. A
playground shall conform to the requirements included in table 13e, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
6. Each civic space shall have a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of its perimeter enfronting a thoroughfare, except for playgrounds, unless otherwise
permitted by administrative authorization.
7. Parks may be permitted in SmartCode zones SC-4, SC-5 and SC-6 by administrative authorization by the DRC.
D. Civic Buildings (CB) Specific To SC-3 Through SC-6 Zones:
1. A landowner should covenant, in a development agreement or by other means, to provide a site or construct a meeting hall or a third place in
proximity to the main civic space of each pedestrian shed. Its corresponding public frontage should be designed for a transit stop or space should
be reserved for a future transit stop.
2. Civic building lots suitable for a childcare facility should be reserved where appropriate in new neighborhoods. The owner, developer, or a
homeowners' association or other entity may organize, fund and construct an appropriate building as the need arises.
3. Civic building sites shall not occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of each pedestrian shed unless approved by administrative
authorization.
4. Civic building sites should be located within or adjacent to a civic space, or at the terminated vista of a significant thoroughfare.
5. Civic buildings may be permitted within special districts. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.12.060: SPECIAL DISTRICTS:
A. Special district designations may be assigned to areas that, by their intrinsic size, function, or configuration, cannot conform to the requirements of
any SmartCode zone or combination of zones. Conditions of development for special districts shall be determined by the planning and zoning
commission, after a public hearing and recommendation by the DRC. Decisions regarding designations of special districts may be appealed to the
city council in accordance with procedures set forth elsewhere in this title for appeals from decisions of the planning and zoning commission. Terms
of each special district shall be recorded on table 16, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
1. Special districts over five (5) acres in size shall assign at least five percent (5%) of its area to civic space.
2. The function of civic space in a special district shall be determined by the owner and the DRC prior to approval. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.12.070: THOROUGHFARE STANDARDS:
A. General:
1. Thoroughfares are intended for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic and to provide access to lots and open spaces.
2. Thoroughfares shall generally consist of vehicular lanes and public frontages.
3. Thoroughfares shall be designed in context with the urban form and desired design speed of the SmartCode zones through which they pass. The
public frontages of thoroughfares that pass from one SmartCode zone to another shall be adjusted accordingly or, alternatively, the SmartCode
zone may follow the alignment of the thoroughfare to the depth of one lot, retaining a single public frontage throughout its trajectory.
4. Functionally classified thoroughfares, as identified within the city of Post Falls transportation master plan as principal arterial through minor
collector, shall be extended in accordance with said transportation master plan. The standards of this code (title 17, chapter 17.28, "Design And
Improvement Standards", of this code) shall apply for the design of functionally classified roadways, excepting minor collectors. Thoroughfares that
are identified as truck routes by the city of Post Falls may require additional design considerations at intersections, as determined by the city
engineer. Such considerations shall be implemented by administrative authorization.
5. Within the SC-1 and SC-2 zones pedestrian comfort shall be a secondary consideration of the thoroughfare. Design conflict between vehicular and
pedestrian traffic generally shall be decided in favor of the vehicle within such zones. Such standard of balancing vehicle and pedestrian conflict
shall not compromise the requirement that pedestrians be accommodated throughout each neighborhood. Within the more urban SmartCode
zones (SC-3 through SC-6) pedestrian comfort shall be a primary consideration of the thoroughfare that is not functionally classified as CL, MA or
RA. Design conflict between vehicular and pedestrian movement generally shall be decided in favor of the pedestrian, irrespective of SC zone.
6. The thoroughfare network shall be designed to define blocks not exceeding the size prescribed in table 14C, attached to the ordinance codified
herein. The perimeter shall be measured as the sum of lot frontage lines. Block perimeter at the edge of the development parcel shall be subject to
approval by administrative authorization.
7. All thoroughfares shall terminate at other thoroughfares, forming a network. Internal thoroughfares shall connect wherever possible to those on
adjacent sites. Cul-de-sacs shall be subject to approval by administrative authorization only to accommodate specific site conditions.
8. Each lot shall enfront a vehicular thoroughfare, except that twenty percent (20%) of the lots may enfront a passage within the SC-4, SC-5, SC-6
zones.
9. Standards for paths and bicycle trails must be approved by administrative authorization for nonfunctionally classified thoroughfares.
10. The standards for thoroughfares within special districts shall be determined by administrative authorization of the DRC upon the advice of the
engineering division.
11. The design of thoroughfares, other than those referenced in subsection A4 of this section, shall use the requirements identified in title 17 of this
code for alignment, grades, shoulders, intersections, and clear zones.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 251/268
12. Rolled curbs will only be allowed along ST thoroughfare assemblies within the SC-3 and SC-4 zones when an RL or RA thoroughfare assembly
is not provided.
B. Vehicular Lanes:
1. Thoroughfares may include vehicular lanes in a variety of widths for parked and for moving vehicles, including bicycles. The generalized vehicular
lane and parking assemblies are depicted in table 3B, attached to the ordinance codified herein. Lane width is predicated upon density, volume
and context of the project and surrounding area. Base lane width is twelve feet (12'). Lane widths and thoroughfare configurations other than those
shown in table 3C, attached to the ordinance codified herein, are by administrative authorization only.
2. A bicycle network consisting of bicycle trails, bicycle routes and bicycle lanes must be provided throughout as defined in chapter 18A.28,
"Definitions", of this title, referenced in subsection A of this section and provided as specified in table 14D, attached to the ordinance codified
herein. The community bicycle network shall be connected to existing or proposed regional networks wherever possible. Where the thoroughfare
assembly requires the accommodation of bicycle lanes in the transportation provisions, the pavement width and right of way shall be increased by
the bicycle lane widths.
C. Public Frontages:
1. General To All SC Zones:
a. The public frontage contributes to the character of the neighborhood and includes the types of sidewalk, curb, planter, bicycle lanes and street
trees.
b. Public frontages shall be designed as shown in table 4A and table 4B, attached to the ordinance codified herein, and allocated within
SmartCode zones as specified in table 14D, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
c. Within the public frontages, the prescribed types of public planting and public lighting shall be as shown in tables 4A, 4B, 5 and 6 respectively,
attached to the ordinance codified herein. Spacing may be adjusted by administrative authorization to accommodate specific site conditions.
d. All stormwater facilities shall be designed and implemented in conformance with city of Post Falls stormwater management ordinance or its
successor.
e. Bicycle lanes shall be provided along functionally classified thoroughfares with an MA or CL designation regardless of SmartCode zone
designation. Multiuse trails shall be provided, on at least one side, along all thoroughfares, functionally classified major collector and higher,
through neighborhoods in general conformance with the Post Falls master bicycle trail map adopted by resolution of the Post Falls city council.
Bicycle lanes shall be six feet (6') in width when adjacent to curb and gutter on the street side. In other locations a five foot (5') width shall be
provided.
f. Excepting functionally classified thoroughfares, sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of a thoroughfare unless replaced with a minimum
ten foot (10') multiuse path. Where multiuse paths are provided to replace sidewalks, a fifteen foot (15') easement or additional fifteen feet (15')
of right of way will be required on the path side of the thoroughfare.
g. Where a thoroughfare assembly allows for either continuous street side swales or planter strips and the desired application is to utilize both, the
dedicated rights of way shall be of sufficient width to accommodate the entire roadway to the back of sidewalk.
2. Specific To Zones SC-1, SC-2:
a. The public frontage shall include trees of various species authorized by the community forest ordinance of the city.
b. The introduced landscape shall consist of authorized trees or retained native species requiring minimal maintenance.
c. Sidewalks and multiuse pathways may be substituted for by administrative authorization.
3. Specific To Zone SC-3 Through SC-6:
a. The introduced landscape shall consist primarily of durable species tolerant of soil compaction and authorized by the community forester for the
chosen location.
4. Specific To Zone SC-3, SC-4:
a. The public frontage shall include trees planted in a regularly spaced pattern of single or alternated species with shade canopies of a height that,
at maturity, clears at least one story. Such planting must conform to the community forest ordinance of the city.
5. Specific To Zones SC-5, SC-6:
a. The public frontage shall include trees planted in a regularly spaced pattern of approved species with shade canopies of a height that, at
maturity, clears at least one story. At retail frontages, the spacing of the trees may be irregular, to avoid visually obscuring the shopfronts.
b. Thoroughfares with a right of way width of forty feet (40') or less shall be exempt from the tree requirement.
6. Specific To Special Districts:
a. The public frontage in special districts shall adhere to the general principles of the requirements established by this chapter in establishing a tree
planting plan for the special district. Any such approved landscaping plan for a special district shall be approved only by administrative
authorization. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.12.080: DENSITY CALCULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 252/268
A. The net site area shall be allocated to the various SmartCode zones according to the parameters specified in table 2, attached to the ordinance
codified herein.
B. Density shall be expressed in terms of housing units per gross acre as specified for the area of each SmartCode zone by table 14B, attached to the
ordinance codified herein. For purposes of density calculation, the SmartCode zones include the land dedicated to thoroughfares.
C. Within the percentage range shown on table 14B, attached to the ordinance codified herein, for other functions, the housing units specified on table
14B, attached to the ordinance codified herein, may be substituted at the following rates:
1. For lodging: Two (2) bedrooms for each unit of net site area density.
2. For office or retail: One thousand (1,000) square feet for each unit of net site area density.
3. The number of units exchanged shall be subject to approval by administrative authorization.
D. The housing and other functions for each SmartCode zone shall be subject to further adjustment at the building scale as limited by table 10 building
function and table 11 parking calculations, attached to the ordinance codified herein, and section 18A.20.090 of this title. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.12.090: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. The visibility triangle shall be indicated on the plans and protected at the intersections within all SC-4, SC-5 and SC-6 zones. The design for areas
within the visibility triangle of thoroughfares identified as RL or RA shall be approved by the zoning administrator or designee prior to issuance of a
building permit for these areas. The design criteria that will be assessed by the zoning administrator consists of the following elements:
1. Public safety; and
2. On street parking; and
3. Street trees and landscaping; and
4. Signage.
B. A new neighborhood plan may designate any of the following special requirements:
1. Locations for retail/office frontage.
2. A designation for coordinated frontage such that a single, coherent landscape and paving design is employed.
3. A designation for cross block passages, requiring that a minimum eight foot (8') wide pedestrian access will be reserved between buildings when
buildings are longer than two hundred feet (200'). (Ord. 1297, 2016: Ord. 1200, 2010)
Chapter 18A.16
INFILL NEIGHBORHOOD SCALE PLANS
18A.16.010: INSTRUCTIONS:
A. Within the G4 infill growth sector designation of the SmartCode future land use map, or other areas designated as infill, the public services
department is authorized to prepare, or have prepared on its behalf, infill regulating neighborhood plans to guide further development within the infill
growth designation. Infill neighborhood plans shall be prepared in a public process subject to approval in accordance with section 18A.04.060 of this
title.
B. Infill neighborhood plans shall address, at a minimum, an area the size of the pedestrian shed commensurate with its neighborhood type as listed in
section 18A.16.020 of this chapter. The public services department shall determine a neighborhood type based on existing conditions and trends in
the plan area.
C. Infill neighborhood plans shall consist of one or more maps showing the following:
1. The outline(s) of the pedestrian shed(s) and the boundaries of the overall planning area.
2. SmartCode zones and civic zones spaces within each pedestrian shed, assigned according to an analysis of existing conditions and future needs.
3. A thoroughfare network, existing or planned pursuant to tables 3, 3B, 4A and 4B respectively, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
4. Special districts, if any pursuant to section 18A.16.050 of this chapter.
5. Special requirements, if any pursuant to section 18A.16.060 of this chapter (street furniture, building styles, architectural features, etc.).
6. Phasing plan (includes the lot layout, approximate units, types of development, and associated infrastructure).
7. Administrative authorizations or variances sought, if any.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 253/268
D. Within any area subject to an approved infill neighborhood plan, this title along with other applicable portions of title 18 of this code becomes the
mandatory regulation. Landowners within any plan area that is within the city, may submit building scale plans pursuant to chapter 18A.20 of this title.
Building scale plans requiring no exceptions may be approved administratively by the DRC.
E. The owner of any parcel, or abutting parcels, consisting of thirty (30) acres or more of contiguous lots, whether inside or outside an area already
subject to an infill neighborhood plan, may initiate the preparation of a new neighborhood plan. New neighborhood plans for the G4 designation, or
other areas designated as infill by the DRC, shall regulate, at minimum, an area the size of the pedestrian sheds with its neighborhood type as listed
in section 18A.16.020 of this chapter, even if it overlaps adjacent parcels. Both the site and plan area should connect and integrate with appropriate
development that meets the intent of the code to the greatest extent possible.
F. Infill neighborhood plans that cover an area larger than the property to be annexed should be used to assist in designating appropriate SmartCode
zones and thoroughfare assemblies for future development and annexation of those lands beyond the boundaries of the land being considered for
annexation. (Ord. 1297, 2016: Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.16.020: INFILL NEIGHBORHOOD TYPES:
A. General Provisions: Infill neighborhood plans shall encompass one or more of the following neighborhood types. The allocation percentages of table
2, attached to the ordinance codified herein, do not apply to infill neighborhood plans. Allocation of zone percentages should be accomplished
through an analysis of the neighborhood future trends of the area and the intent of the SmartCode, section 18A.04.030 of this title.
B. Infill Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND):
1. An infill TND should be assigned to neighborhood areas that are predominantly residential. An infill TND shall be mapped as at least one complete
standard pedestrian shed, which may be adjusted to accommodate a network pedestrian shed (illustrated in table 17g, attached to the ordinance
codified herein), oriented around one or more existing or planned common destinations.
2. The edges of an infill TND should integrate with and complement adjacent neighborhoods.
C. Infill Regional Center Development (RCD):
1. An infill RCD may be assigned to the city center areas that include significant office and retail uses as well as government and other civic
institutions of regional importance. An infill RCD may be mapped as at least one complete long or linear pedestrian shed, which may be adjusted
as a network pedestrian shed, oriented around an important mixed use corridor or center.
2. The edges of an infill RCD should integrate with and complement adjacent neighborhoods.
D. Infill Transit Oriented Development (TOD):
1. Any infill TND or infill RCD on an existing or projected rail or bus network may be redesignated in whole or in part as a TOD and may be permitted
the higher density represented by the effective parking allowance in subsection 18A.20.090B4 of this title.
2. The use of a TOD overlay must be approved by administrative authorization. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.16.030: SMARTCODE ZONES:
A. SmartCode zone standards for infill neighborhood plans should be determined by surveying of existing and intended conditions, in the surrounding
neighborhood, and in accordance with section 18A.04.030, "Intent", of this title, subject to the approval of the city council in accordance with
procedures specified by this title.
B. A SmartCode zone may include any of the elements indicated for its SmartCode zone number throughout this title, in accordance with intent
described in table 1, attached to the ordinance codified herein, and the standards set forth in table 14, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
(Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.16.040: CIVIC SPACE:
A. General:
1. Civic space dedicated for public use should be required for each infill neighborhood plan as appropriate.
2. Civic spaces are public sites dedicated to open space. Private sites with acceptable public use easements may be accepted as civic space.
3. Civic building sites are allocated for buildings generally operated by not for profit organizations dedicated to culture, education, religion,
government, recreation, transit and municipal parking, or for a community use approved by the city council.
4. Parking for civic space shall be determined by administrative authorization. Civic parking areas not owned by the city and used only on an
intermittent basis may remain unpaved if approved by administrative authorization.
B. Civic Space Specific To SC-1 And SC-2 Zones:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 254/268
1. Civic buildings within SC-1 natural and SC-2 rural zones are permitted.
C. Civic Space (CS) Specific To SC-3 Through SC-6 Zones:
1. Each neighborhood plan, should assign at least five percent (5%) of its urbanized area to civic space when appropriate.
2. Civic spaces shall be designed as generally described in table 13, attached to the ordinance codified herein, approved by administrative
authorization, and distributed throughout SmartCode zones as described in table 14E, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
3. Those portions of the SC-1 natural zone that occur within a development parcel shall be part of the civic space allocation and conform to the civic
space types specified in table 13a or 13b, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
4. Each pedestrian shed shall contain at least one main civic space. The main civic space shall be within eight hundred feet (800') of the geographic
center of each pedestrian shed, unless topographic conditions, preexisting thoroughfare alignments or other circumstances prevent such location.
A main civic space shall conform to one of the types specified in tables 13b, 13c, or 13d, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
5. Within eight hundred feet (800') of every lot in residential use, a civic space designed and equipped as a playground shall be provided. A
playground shall conform to table 13e, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
6. Each civic space shall have a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of its perimeter enfronting a thoroughfare, except for playgrounds unless otherwise
permitted by administrative authorization.
7. Parks shall be permitted in SmartCode zones SC-4, SC-5 and SC-6.
D. Civic Buildings (CB) Specific To SC-3 Through SC-6 Zones:
1. The owner should covenant, in a development agreement or by other means, to provide a site or construct a meeting hall or a third place in
proximity to the main civic space of each pedestrian shed. Its corresponding public frontage should be designed for a transit stop or future transit
stop.
2. Civic building lots suitable for a childcare facility should be reserved where appropriate in infill communities. The owner, developer, or a
homeowners' association or other entity may organize, fund and construct an appropriate building as the need arises.
3. Civic building sites shall not occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of each pedestrian shed unless approved by administrative
authorization.
4. Civic building sites should be located within or adjacent to a civic space, or at the terminated vista of a significant thoroughfare.
5. Civic buildings may be permitted within special districts by administrative authorization. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.16.050: SPECIAL DISTRICTS:
A. Special district designations shall be assigned to areas that, by their intrinsic size, function, or configuration, cannot conform to the requirements of
any SmartCode zone or combination of zones. Conditions of development for special districts shall be determined by public hearing of the planning
and zoning commission and shall be recorded on table 16, attached to the ordinance codified herein. Such conditions may be appealed to the city
council by any affected person.
1. Each special district shall assign at least five percent (5%) of its area to civic space.
2. The function of civic space in a special district shall be determined by the owner subject to DRC prior to approval. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.16.060: PREEXISTING CONDITIONS1:
A. Properties identified for infill growth, which have preexisting development that may not comply with the requirements of SmartCode, may have
development provisions established by recommendation from the DRC to the planning and zoning commission subject to final approval by the city
council. Such provisions include, but shall not be limited to, designation of both conventional zoning and SmartCode zoning upon annexation and
restrictions on new development in order to ensure compatibility with the surrounding properties and neighborhood character. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
Chapter 18A.20
BUILDING SCALE PLANS
18A.20.010: PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lots and buildings located within an approved new neighborhood plan or infill neighborhood plan governed by this title shall be subject to the
requirements of this chapter.
B. Owners and developers may have the design plans required under this chapter prepared on their behalf. Approval of such plans shall be subject to
administrative approval by the DRC.
C. Building and site plans submitted under this chapter shall show the following, in compliance with the standards described in this title:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 255/268
1. For preliminary site and building approval:
a. Building placement/location.
b. Building configuration.
c. Building function.
d. Parking location standards.
2. For final approval, in addition to the above:
a. Landscape standards.
b. Signage standards.
c. Special requirements.
d. Drainage standards and site details (spot elevations, engineering plans, etc.).
e. Architectural standards (if required).
f. Lighting standards.
g. Utility connections. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.20.020: PREEXISTING CONDITIONS1:
A. Existing buildings and appurtenances that do not conform to the provisions of this code may continue in use as they are until a substantial
modification is requested, at which time the DRC shall determine the provisions of this section that shall apply. In such circumstances, the intent of
the SmartCode shall serve to provide guidance in determining applicability.
B. The modification of existing buildings is permitted by right if such changes result in greater conformance with the standards established by this title
and comply with applicable construction codes and standards.
C. Where buildings exist on adjacent lots, the DRC may authorize a proposed building to match adjacent setback and heights rather than the nominal
standards of this title.
D. The restoration or rehabilitation of an existing building shall not require the provisions of: 1) parking in addition to that existing or 2) on site stormwater
retention/detention in addition to that existing. Existing parking requirements that exceed those for this code may be reduced to maintain compliance
with the requirements of tables 10 and 11, attached to the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.20.030: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. A new neighborhood plan or an infill neighborhood plan may designate any of the following special requirements to be applied according to the
standards of this chapter and shall be reflected in the approved development agreement:
1. Locations for retail/office frontage.
2. A designation for coordinated frontage such that a single, coherent landscape and paving design is employed.
3. A designation for cross block passages, required that a minimum eight foot (8') wide pedestrian access will be reserved between buildings when
buildings are longer than two hundred feet (200'). (Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.20.040: CIVIC SPACES:
A. General:
1. Civic spaces are designated on neighborhood plans as civic space (CS) or civic building (CB).
2. Parking provisions for civic space shall be determined by administrative authorization.
B. Civic Space (CS):
1. Civic spaces shall be generally designed as described in table 13, attached to the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.20.050: SPECIFIC TO SC-1 NATURAL ZONE:
A. Buildings in the SC-1 natural zone are permitted only by administrative authorization. Permission to build in SC-1 and the standards for this chapter
shall be determined concurrently as administrative authorizations by the DRC. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 256/268
18A.20.060: BUILDING:
A. Specific to zone SC-2:
1. Building placement/location shall be determined by administrative authorization.
B. Specific to zones SC-3 through SC-6:
1. Platted lots shall be dimensioned according to table 14F and table 15, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
2. Building placement/location types shall be as shown in table 9, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
3. Buildings shall be placed or located in relation to the boundaries of their lots according to table 14G and table 15, attached to the ordinance
codified herein.
4. One principal building at the frontage, and outbuildings to the rear of the principal building, may be built in compliance with building placement
standards.
5. Lot coverage by building shall not exceed that recorded in table 14F and table 15, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
6. Facades shall be built parallel to a rectilinear principal frontage line or parallel to the tangent of a curved principal frontage line, and along a
minimum percentage of the frontage length at the setback, as specified on table 14G and table 15, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
7. Setbacks for principal buildings shall be as shown in table 14G and table 15 attached to the ordinance codified herein. In the case of an infill lot,
setbacks shall match one of the existing adjacent setbacks. Setbacks may otherwise be adjusted by administrative authorization.
8. A fifteen foot (15') setback for outbuildings from centerline of rear lane and rear alley shall be required. No portion of a building's main structure
may encroach into alley right of way. Eaves or overhangs may encroach up to three feet (3') if they provide vertical clearance of not less than
sixteen feet (16').
9. To accommodate slopes over ten percent (10%), relief from front setback requirements is available by administrative authorization.
10. The visibility triangle shall be indicated and protected as required by state law at all thoroughfare intersections. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.20.070: BUILDING CONFIGURATION:
A. General to zones SC-2 through SC-6:
1. The private frontage of buildings shall conform to and be allocated in accordance with table 7 and table 14I, attached to the ordinance codified
herein.
2. Buildings on corner lots shall have two (2) private frontages as shown in table 17, attached to the ordinance codified herein. Requirements for the
second and third layers pertain only to the principal frontage. Prescriptions for the first layer pertain to both frontages.
3. Building heights, step backs, expression lines, and extension lines shall conform to table 8 and table 14J, attached to the ordinance codified
herein.
4. Stories may not exceed fourteen feet (14') in height from finished floor to finished ceiling, except for a first floor commercial function, which shall be
a minimum of eleven feet (11') and may be a maximum of twenty five feet (25'). A single floor level exceeding fourteen feet (14'), or twenty five feet
(25') at ground level, shall be counted as two (2) stories. Mezzanines extending beyond thirty three percent (33%) of the floor area shall be
counted as an additional story.
5. In a parking structure or garage, each level counts as a single story regardless of its relationship to habitable stories.
6. Height limits do not apply to attics or raised basements, masts, belfries, clock towers, chimney flues, water tanks, or elevator bulkheads.
B. Specific to zones SC-2 through SC-5: The minimum size of a dwelling within a principal building shall be six hundred (600) square feet in interior
space. Outbuildings may be any size, not to exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet unless an administrative authorization is obtained
from the DRC.
C. Specific to zone SC-3:
1. No portion of private frontage may encroach upon the sidewalk.
2. Open porches may encroach the first layer fifty percent (50%) of its depth. (Table 17d, attached to the ordinance codified herein.)
3. Balconies and bay windows may encroach the first layer twenty five percent (25%) of its depth.
D. Specific to zone SC-4:
1. Balconies, open porches and bay windows may encroach the first layer more than fifty percent (50%) of its depth. (Table 17d, attached to the
ordinance codified herein.) Where a rear lane or rear alley is provided encroachments are prohibited from easements on the ground or subground
levels. Encroachments may occur into public utility easements on the second floor or higher building level, so long as they are supported by the
main structure unless specifically prohibited.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 257/268
2. Street screens should be between 3.5 and six feet (6') in height. The street screen may be replaced by a hedge or fence by administrative
authorization. Street screens shall have openings no larger than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access.
3. A one-story structure may be permitted by administrative authorization.
E. Specific to zones SC-5, SC-6:
1. Awnings, arcades, and galleries may encroach the sidewalk to within two feet (2') of the curb but must clear the sidewalk vertically by at least eight
feet (8').
2. Maximum encroachment heights (extension lines) for arcades shall be as shown on table 8, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
3. Stoops, light wells, balconies, bay windows, and terraces may encroach the first layer one hundred percent (100%) of its depth. (Table 17d,
attached to the ordinance codified herein.)
4. Loading docks and service areas shall be permitted on frontages only by administrative authorization.
5. In the absence of a building facade along any part of a frontage line, a street screen shall be built coplanar with the facade.
6. Street screens should be between 3.5 and six feet (6') in height. The street screen may be replaced by a hedge or fence by administrative
authorization. Street screens shall have openings no larger than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access. Street screens above six
feet (6') in height may be permitted by administrative authorization.
7. A first level residential or lodging function shall be raised a minimum of two feet (2') from average sidewalk grade. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.20.080: BUILDING FUNCTION:
A. General to zones SC-2 through SC-6:
1. Buildings in each SmartCode zone shall conform to the functions on table 10 and table 12 and table 14K, attached to the ordinance codified
herein. Functions that do not conform shall require approval by administrative authorization as specified on table 12, attached to the ordinance
codified herein.
B. Specific to zones SC-2, SC-3:
1. Accessory functions of restricted lodging or restricted office shall be permitted within an outbuilding. See table 10, attached to the ordinance
codified herein.
C. Specific to zones SC-4, SC-5:
1. Accessory functions of limited lodging or limited office shall be permitted within an outbuilding. See table 10, attached to the ordinance codified
herein.
D. Specific to zones SC-5, SC-6:
1. First story commercial functions shall be permitted.
2. Manufacturing functions within the first story may be permitted by administrative authorization. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
18A.20.090: PARKING AND DENSITY CALCULATIONS:
A. Specific to zones SC-2, SC-3:
1. Buildable density on a lot shall be determined by the actual parking provided within the lot as applied to the functions permitted in table 10,
attached to the ordinance codified herein.
B. Specific to zones SC-4, SC-5, SC-6:
1. Buildable density on a lot shall be determined by the sum of the actual parking calculated as that provided: a) within the lot, b) along the parking
lane corresponding to the lot frontage, and c) by purchase or lease from a civic parking reserve within the pedestrian shed, if available.
2. The actual parking may be adjusted upward according to the shared parking factor of table 11, attached to the ordinance codified herein, to
determine the effective parking. The shared parking factor is available for any two (2) functions within any pair of adjacent blocks.
3. Based on the effective parking available, the density of the projected function may be determined according to table 10, attached to the ordinance
codified herein.
4. Within the overlay area of a transit oriented development (TOD) the effective parking may be further adjusted upward by thirty percent (30%).
5. The total density within each SmartCode zone shall not exceed that specified by an approved neighborhood plan based on chapter 18A.12 or
18A.16 of this title.
6. Accessory units do not count toward density calculations. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 258/268
18A.20.100: PARKING LOCATION STANDARDS:
A. General to zones SC-2 through SC-6:
1. Parking shall be accessed by rear alleys or rear lanes, when such are available on the neighborhood plan.
2. Open parking areas shall be masked from the frontage by a building or street screen.
B. Specific to zones SC-2, SC-3:
1. Open parking areas shall be located at the second and third lot layers, except that driveways, drop offs and parking areas may be located at the
first lot layer. (Table 17d, attached to the ordinance codified herein.)
2. Garages shall be located at the second or third layer except that side or rear entry types may be allowed in the first or second layer by
administrative authorization.
C. Specific to zones SC-3, SC-4:
1. Driveways at frontages shall be no wider than twenty four feet (24') in the first layer.
D. Specific to zone SC-4:
1. All parking areas and garages shall be located at the second or third layer.
E. Specific to zones SC-5, SC-6:
1. All parking lots, garages, and parking structures shall be located at the second or third layer. (Table 17d, attached to the ordinance codified
herein.)
2. Vehicular entrances to parking lots, garages, and parking structures shall be no wider than twenty four feet (24') at the frontage.
3. Pedestrian exits from all parking lots, garages, and parking structures shall be directly to a frontage line (i.e., not directly into a building) except
underground levels which may be exited by pedestrians directly into a building.
4. Parking structures along thoroughfares with a CS or BV designation shall have liner buildings lining the first and second stories.
5. A minimum of one bicycle rack place shall be provided within the public or private frontage for every ten (10) vehicular parking spaces. (Ord. 1200,
2010)
18A.20.110: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
A. General to zones SC-2 through SC-6:
1. Impermeable surface shall be counted within the ratio of lot coverage specified in table 14F, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
2. Commercial, office, civic, or retail uses shall also comply with section 18.24.080, "Landscaping", of this code (or its successor).
B. Specific to zones SC-2, SC-3, SC-4: The first layer may not be paved, with the exception of driveways as specified in subsections 18A.20.100B and
C of this chapter. (Table 17d, attached to the ordinance codified herein.)
C. Specific to zone SC-3:
1. A minimum of one tree shall be planted within the first layer for each thirty feet (30') of frontage line or portion thereof. (Table 17d, attached to the
ordinance codified herein.)
2. Trees may be of single or multiple species as shown on table 6, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
D. Specific to zone SC-4:
1. A minimum of one tree shall be planted within the first layer for each thirty feet (30') of frontage line or portion thereof. (Table 17d, attached to the
ordinance codified herein.)
2. Trees shall be a single species to match the species of street trees on the public frontage, or as shown on table 6, attached to the ordinance
codified herein.
3. Lawn shall be permitted by right.
E. Specific to zones SC-5, SC-6:
1. Trees shall not be required in the first layer.
2. The first layer may be paved to match the pavement of the public frontage. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 259/268
18A.20.120: SIGNAGE STANDARDS:
A. General To All Zones:
1. All signage shall comply with this code.
2. The address number shall comply with this code, street naming and numbering regulation. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
Chapter 18A.24
STANDARDS AND TABLES
18A.24.010: ADOPTED:
In order to implement the provisions of this title the standards and tables incorporated herein shall be the standards applicable to development of new
and infill neighborhoods through the establishment or extension of thoroughfares, configuration of neighborhoods, setting requirements for landscaping,
street lighting, frontage design and configuration, building configuration and disposition, determining allowable function, requiring civic space, setting
standards for building placement and establishing special district standards. Such standards established by the text and tables set forth herein must be
applied in a manner complementary to the construction specification standards adopted by resolution of the city council. Applicable standards and tables
are adopted and incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 1200, 2010)
Chapter 18A.28
DEFINITIONS
18A.28.010: TERMS DEFINED:
This chapter provides definitions for terms in this title that are technical in nature or that otherwise may not reflect a common usage of the term. If a term
is not defined in this chapter, then the DRC shall determine the correct definition, by first determining if a dictionary definition is appropriate.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: An outbuilding subordinate to the primary building.
ACCESSORY UNIT: An apartment sharing ownership with a principal building; it may or may not be within an accessory building.
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORIZATION (AA): A ruling that would permit a practice that is not expressly limited by a specific provision of this code, but that
is justified by the intent of this title (section 18A.04.030 of this title). Administrative authorizations are granted administratively by the DRC. See section
18A.04.050 of this title.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING: Dwellings consisting of rental units or for sale units. Both shall be economically within the means of someone earning eighty
percent (80%) of the median wage or current HUD standards.
ARCADE: A private frontage conventional for retail use wherein the facade is a colonnade supporting habitable space that overlaps the sidewalk, while
the facade at sidewalk level remains at the frontage line.
AVENUE (AV): A thoroughfare of high vehicular capacity and low to moderate speed, acting as a short distance connector between urban centers, and
usually equipped with a landscaped median.
BACK BUILDING: A single-story structure connecting a principal building to an outbuilding. See table 17, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
BASE DENSITY: The number of dwelling units per gross acre. Applied to residential development of any given project, excludes mixed use
buildings/projects and other uses.
BED AND BREAKFAST: Lodging type offering one to five (5) bedrooms, permitted to serve breakfast in the mornings to guests.
BICYCLE LANE (BL): A dedicated lane for cycling within a moderate speed vehicular thoroughfare, demarcated by striping.
BICYCLE ROUTE (BR): A thoroughfare suitable for the shared use of bicycles and automobiles moving at low speeds.
BICYCLE TRAIL (BT): A bicycle/pedestrian way running independently of a vehicular thoroughfare with the intent of recreational use.
BLOCK: The aggregate of areas circumscribed by thoroughfares.
BLOCK FACE: The aggregate of all the building facades on one side of a block.
BOULEVARD (BV): A thoroughfare designed for high vehicular capacity and moderate speed, traversing an urbanized area. Boulevards are usually
equipped with slip roads buffering sidewalks and buildings.
CIVIC: The term defining not for profit organizations dedicated to arts, culture, education, recreation, government, transit, and municipal parking.
CIVIC BUILDING: A public/private building dedicated to arts, culture, education, recreation, government, transit, and municipal parking, or for use
approved by the legislative body.
CIVIC PARKING RESERVE: Parking structure or parking lot within a quarter mile of the site that it serves. See subsection 18A.20.090B of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 260/268
CIVIC SPACE: An outdoor area dedicated for public/private use. Civic space types are defined by the combination of certain physical constants
including the relationships among their intended use, their size, their landscaping and their enfronting buildings. See table 13, attached to the ordinance
codified herein.
COMMON DESTINATION: An area of focused community activity, usually defining the approximate center of a pedestrian shed. It may include, without
limitation, one or more of the following: a civic space, a civic building, a commercial center, or a transit station, and may act as the social center of a
neighborhood.
COMMON YARD: A planted private frontage wherein the facade is set back from the frontage line. It is visually continuous with adjacent yards. See
table 7, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
COMMUNITY: A regulatory category defining the physical form, density, and extent of a settlement. The three (3) community types addressed in this title
are CLD, TND, and RCD. Variants of TND and RCD for infill (chapter 18A.16 of this title) are called infill TND and infill RCD. The TOD community type
may be created by an overlay on TND or RCD.
CONFIGURATION: The form of a building, based on its massing, private frontage, and height.
CORRIDOR: A linear geographic system incorporating transportation and/or greenway trajectories. A transportation corridor may be a linear SmartCode
zone.
COTTAGE: An edge yard building type. A single-family dwelling, on a regular lot, often shared with an accessory building in the back yard.
COURTYARD BUILDING: A building that occupies the boundaries of its lot while internally defining one or more private patios. See table 9, attached to
the ordinance codified herein.
DENSITY: The number of dwelling units within a standard measure of land area.
DESIGN SPEED: The velocity at which a thoroughfare tends to be driven without the constraints of signage or enforcement. Design speed shall be as
indicated for a particular thoroughfare type (table 3C, attached to the ordinance codified herein).
DEVELOPABLE AREAS: Lands other than those in the O-1 preserved open sector.
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE (DRC): Part of the community development divisions, a DRC is comprised of representatives designated for
service pursuant to a resolution of the city council.
DOORYARD: A private frontage type with a shallow setback and front garden or patio, usually with a low wall at the frontage line. See table 7, attached
to the ordinance codified herein. (Variant: light well, light court.)
EDGE YARD BUILDING: A building that occupies the center of its lot with setbacks on all sides. See table 9, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
EFFECTIVE PARKING: The amount of parking required for mixed use after adjustment by the shared parking factor. See table 11, attached to the
ordinance codified herein.
ENCROACH: To break the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit with a structural element, so that it extends into a setback, into the public
frontage, or above a height limit.
ENCROACHMENT: Any structural element that breaks the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit, extending into a setback, into the public
frontage, or above a height limit.
ENFRONT: To place an element along a frontage, as in "porches enfront the street".
EXPRESSION LINE: A line prescribed at a certain level of a building for the major part of the width of a facade, expressed by a variation in material or
by a limited projection such as a molding or balcony. See table 8, attached to the ordinance codified herein. (Synonym: transition line.)
EXTENSION LINE: A line prescribed at a certain level of a building for the major part of the width of a facade, regulating the maximum height for an
encroachment by an arcade frontage. See table 8, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
FACADE: The exterior wall of a building that is set along a frontage line. See elevation.
FORECOURT: A private frontage wherein a portion of the facade is close to the frontage line and the central portion is set back. See table 7, attached to
the ordinance codified herein.
FRONT LOADED: A structure with an attached garage or carport, where the entryway for the vehicle is on the principal face and not accessed from the
alley.
FRONTAGE: The area between a building facade and the vehicular lanes, inclusive of its built and planted components. Frontage is divided into private
frontage and public frontage. See table 4A and table 7, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
FRONTAGE LINE: A lot line bordering a public frontage. Facades facing frontage lines define the public realm and are therefore more regulated than the
elevations facing other lot lines. See table 17, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
FUNCTION: The use or uses accommodated by a building and its lot, categorized as restricted, limited, or open, according to the intensity of the use
pursuant to tables 10 and 12, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
GALLERY: A private frontage conventional for retail use wherein the facade is aligned close to the frontage line with an attached cantilevered shed or
lightweight colonnade overlapping the sidewalk. See table 7, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
GREEN: A civic space type for unstructured recreation, spatially defined by landscaping rather than building frontages. See table 13, attached to the
ordinance codified herein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 261/268
GREENFIELD: An area that consists of open or wooded land or farmland that has not been previously developed.
GREENWAY: An open space corridor in largely natural conditions which may include trails for bicycles and pedestrians.
GROWTH DESIGNATION: One of four (4) sectors where development is permitted by right in the SmartCode, three (3) for new neighborhoods and one
for infill. See chapter 18A.08 of this title.
HOME OCCUPATION: As defined in title 18 of this code.
HOUSE: An edge yard building type, usually a single-family dwelling on a large lot, often shared with an accessory building in the back yard. (Synonym:
single.)
INFILL: New development on land that had been previously developed or undeveloped land surrounded by developed land within city boundaries.
INN: A lodging type, offering, permitted to serve breakfast in the mornings to guests. See table 10, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
LAYER: A range of depth of a lot within which certain elements are permitted. See table 17, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
LIGHT WELL: A private frontage type that is a below grade entrance or recess designed to allow light into basements. See table 7, attached to the
ordinance codified herein. (Synonym: light court.)
LINEAR PEDESTRIAN SHED: A pedestrian shed that is elongated along an important mixed use corridor such as a main street. A linear pedestrian
shed extends approximately one-fourth (1/4) mile from each side of the corridor for the length of its mixed use portion. It may be used to structure a TND,
RCD, infill TND, or infill RCD. (Synonym: elongated pedestrian shed.)
LINER BUILDING: A building specifically designed to mask a parking lot or a parking structure from a frontage.
LIVE-WORK: A mixed use unit consisting of a commercial and residential function. The commercial function may be anywhere in the unit. It is intended
to be occupied by a business operator who lives in the same structure that contains the commercial activity or industry. See definition of Work-Live.
(Synonym: flex house.)
LODGING: Premises available for daily and weekly renting of bedrooms. See tables 10 and 12, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
LONG PEDESTRIAN SHED: A pedestrian shed that is an average one-half (1/2) mile radius or two thousand six hundred forty feet (2,640'), used when
a transit stop (bus or rail) is present or proposed as the common destination. A long pedestrian shed represents approximately a ten (10) minute walk at
a leisurely pace. It is applied to structure an RCD community type. See definition of Pedestrian Shed.
MAIN CIVIC SPACE: The primary outdoor gathering place for a community. The main civic space is often, but not always, associated with an important
civic building.
MEETING HALL: A building available for gatherings, including conferences, that accommodates at least one room equivalent to a minimum of ten (10)
square feet per projected dwelling unit within the pedestrian shed in which it is located.
MIXED USE: Multiple functions within the same building through superimposition or adjacency, or in multiple buildings by adjacency, or at a proximity
determined by administrative authorization.
NET SITE AREA: All developable land within a site including thoroughfares but excluding land allocated as civic space.
NETWORK PEDESTRIAN SHED: A pedestrian shed adjusted for average walk times along thoroughfares. This type may be used to structure infill
community plans. See table 17, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
OPEN PARKING AREAS: Off street residential parking or a commercial parking lot.
OPEN SPACE: Land intended to remain undeveloped; it may be reserved for civic space.
OUTBUILDING: An accessory building, usually located toward the rear of the same lot as a principal building, and sometimes connected to the principal
building by a back building. See table 17, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
PARK: A civic space type that is a natural preserve available for unstructured recreation. See table 13, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
PARKING STRUCTURE: A building containing one or more stories of parking above grade.
PASSAGE (PS): A pedestrian connector, open or roofed, that passes between buildings to provide shortcuts through long blocks and connect rear
parking areas to frontages.
PATH (PT): A pedestrianway traversing a park or rural area, with landscape matching the contiguous open space, ideally connecting directly with the
urban sidewalk network.
PEDESTRIAN SHED: An area that is centered on a common destination. Its size is related to average walking distances for the applicable community
type. Pedestrian sheds are applied to structure communities. See definition of Standard Pedestrian Shed, Long Pedestrian Shed, Linear Pedestrian
Shed or Network Pedestrian Shed. (Synonym: walkshed, walkable catchment.)
PLACEMENT/LOCATION: The placement of a building on its lot. See table 9 and table 17, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
PLANTER: The element of the public frontage which accommodates street trees, whether continuous or individual.
PLAZA: A civic space type designed for civic purposes and commercial activities in the more urban SmartCode zones, generally paved and spatially
defined by building frontages.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 262/268
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: The main building on a lot, usually located toward the frontage. See table 17, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE: The main point of access for pedestrians into a building.
PRINCIPAL FRONTAGE: On corner lots, the private frontage designated to bear the address and principal entrance to the building, and the measure of
minimum lot width. Prescriptions for the parking layers pertain only to the principal frontage. Prescriptions for the first layer pertain to both frontages of a
corner lot. See definition of Frontage.
PRIVATE FRONTAGE: The privately held layer between the frontage line and the principal building facade. See table 7 and table 17, attached to the
ordinance codified herein.
PUBLIC FRONTAGE: The area between the curb of the vehicular lanes and the frontage line. See table 4A and table 4B, attached to the ordinance
codified herein.
RCD: See definition of Regional Center Development (RCD).
REAR ALLEY (RA): A vehicularway located to the rear of lots providing access to service areas, parking, and outbuildings and containing utility
easements. Rear alleys should be paved from building face to building face, with drainage by inverted crown at the center or with roll curbs at the edges.
REAR LANE (RL): A vehicularway located to the rear of lots providing access to service areas, parking, and outbuildings and containing utility
easements. Rear lanes may be paved lightly to driveway standards. The streetscape consists of gravel or landscaped edges, has no raised curb, and is
drained by percolation.
REAR YARD BUILDING: A building that occupies the full frontage line, leaving the rear of the lot as the sole yard. See table 9, attached to the ordinance
codified herein. (Variant: row house, townhouse, apartment house.)
RECESS LINE: A line prescribed for the full width of a facade, above which there is a step back of a minimum distance, such that the height to this line
(not the overall building height) effectively defines the enclosure of the enfronting public space. Variant: extension line. See table 8, attached to the
ordinance codified herein.
REGIONAL CENTER: Regional center development or RCD.
REGIONAL CENTER DEVELOPMENT (RCD): A community type structured by a long pedestrian shed or linear pedestrian shed, which may be
adjoined without buffers by one or several standard pedestrian sheds, each with the individual SmartCode zone requirements of a TND. RCD takes the
form of a high density mixed use center connected to other centers by transit. See infill RCD, table 2 and table 14A, attached to the ordinance codified
herein. (Variant: town center, downtown. Synonym: regional center.)
REGULATING PLAN: A zoning map or set of maps that shows the SmartCode zones, civic space, special districts if any, and special requirements if
any, of areas subject to, or potentially subject to, regulation by the SmartCode.
RESIDENTIAL: Characterizing premises available for long term human dwelling.
RETAIL: Characterizing premises available for the sale of merchandise and food service. See table 10 and table 12, attached to the ordinance codified
herein.
RETAIL FRONTAGE: Frontage designated on a regulating plan that requires or recommends the provision of a shopfront, encouraging the ground level
to be available for retail use. See definition of Special Requirements.
ROAD (RD): A local, rural and suburban thoroughfare of low to moderate vehicular speed and capacity. This type is allocated to the more rural
SmartCode zones (SC-1 to SC-3). See table 3A, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
ROW HOUSE: A single-family dwelling that shares a party wall with another of the same type and occupies the full frontage line. See definition of Rear
Yard Building. (Synonym: townhouse.)
SECONDARY FRONTAGE: On corner lots, the private frontage that is not the principal frontage. As it affects the public realm, its first layer is regulated.
See table 17, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
SETBACK: The area of a lot measured from the lot line to building facade or elevation that is maintained clear of permanent structures, with the
exception of encroachments listed in section 18A.20.070 of this title. See table 14G, attached to the ordinance codified herein. (Variant: build-to line.)
SHARED PARKING FACTOR: An accounting for parking spaces that are available to more than one function. See table 11, attached to the ordinance
codified herein.
SHOPFRONT: A private frontage conventional for retail use, with substantial glazing and an awning, wherein the facade is aligned close to the frontage
line with the building entrance at sidewalk grade. See table 7, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
SIDE YARD BUILDING: A building that occupies one side of the lot with a setback on the other side. This type can be a single or twin depending on
whether it abuts the neighboring house. See table 9, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
SIDEWALK: The paved section of the public frontage dedicated exclusively to pedestrian activity.
SMARTCODE SC ZONE: One of several areas on a zoning map regulated by the SmartCode. SmartCode zones are administratively similar to the land
use zones in conventional codes, except that in addition to the usual building use, density, height, and setback requirements, other elements of the
intended habitat are integrated, including those of the private lot and building and public frontage. See table 1, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
SMARTCODE ZONING MAP: The official map or maps that are part of this title and that delineate the boundaries of individual zoning (SC zones)
districts. See definition of Neighborhood Plan.
SPECIAL DISTRICT (SD): An area that, by its intrinsic function, placement/location, or configuration, cannot or should not conform to one or more of the
typical community types or SmartCode zones specified by the SmartCode. Special districts may be mapped and regulated at the regional scale or the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 263/268
neighborhood scale.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS: Provisions of sections 18A.12.090, 18A.16.060, and 18A.20.030 of this title and/or the associated designations on a
regulating plan or other map for those provisions.
SPECIALIZED BUILDING: A building that is not subject to residential, commercial, or lodging classification. See table 9, attached to the ordinance
codified herein.
SQUARE: A civic space type designed for unstructured recreation and civic purposes, spatially defined by building frontages and consisting of paths,
lawns and trees, subject to placement/location standards established by table 13, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
STANDARD PEDESTRIAN SHED: A pedestrian shed that is an average one-fourth (1/4) mile radius or one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320'),
about the distance of a five (5) minute walk at a leisurely pace. See definition of Pedestrian Shed.
STEP BACK: A building setback of a specified distance that occurs at a prescribed number of stories above the ground. See table 8, attached to the
ordinance codified herein.
STOOP: A private frontage wherein the facade is aligned close to the frontage line with the first story elevated from the sidewalk for privacy, with an
exterior stair and landing at the entrance. See table 7, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
STORY: A habitable level within a building, excluding an attic or raised basement. See table 8, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
STREET (ST): A local urban thoroughfare of low speed and capacity. See table 3B and table 4B, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
STREET SCREEN: A freestanding wall built along the frontage line, or coplanar with the facade. It may mask a parking lot from the thoroughfare,
provide privacy to a side yard, and/or strengthen the spatial definition of the public realm. (Synonym: street wall.) See subsection 18A.20.070E6 of this
title.
SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATION: Alteration to a building that is valued at more than fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost of the entire building, if
new.
SWALE: A low or slightly depressed natural area for drainage.
TND: Traditional neighborhood development, a community type structured by a standard pedestrian shed oriented toward a common destination
consisting of a mixed use center or corridor, and in the form of a medium sized settlement near a transportation route. See tables 2 and 14A, attached to
the ordinance codified herein. (Synonym: village. Variant: infill TND, neighborhood.)
TOD: Transit oriented development. TOD is created by an overlay on all or part of a TND or RCD, or by designation on a regional plan, permitting
increased density to support rail or bus rapid transit (BRT) as set forth in subsection 18A.20.090B4 of this title.
TERMINATED VISTA: A location at the axial conclusion of a thoroughfare. A building located at a terminated vista designated on a regulating plan is
required or recommended to be designed in response to the axis.
THIRD PLACE: A private building that includes a space conducive to unstructured social gathering. Examples of third places include cafes and corner
stores.
THOROUGHFARE: A way for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic and to provide access to lots and open spaces, consisting of vehicular lanes and
the public frontage. See tables 3, 4, 17a, attached to the ordinance codified herein.
THOROUGHFARE ASSEMBLY: An assembly that includes all improvements within the right of way (sidewalks, curb, gutter, travel lanes, bike lanes,
swales, medians, etc.).
TOWNHOUSE: See definition of Rear Yard Building. (Synonym: row house.)
TURNING RADIUS: The curved edge of a thoroughfare at an intersection, measured at the inside edge of the vehicular tracking. The smaller the turning
radius, the smaller the pedestrian crossing distance and the more slowly the vehicle is forced to make the turn. See tables 3B and 17, attached to the
ordinance codified herein.
URBANISM: Collective term for the condition of a compact, mixed use settlement, including the physical form of its development and its environmental,
functional, economic, and social cultural aspects.
URBANIZED: Generally, developed. Specific to the SmartCode, developed at SC-3 (suburban) density or higher.
VARIANCE: A ruling that would permit a practice that is not consistent with either a specific provision or the intent of this title (section 18A.04.030 of this
title). Variances are usually granted by the planning and zoning commission after a public hearing conducted pursuant to the procedures specified for
processing a variance request pursuant to the LLUPA. A variance need not conform to the legal standards applicable to a variance. See section
18A.04.050 of this title.
WORK-LIVE: A mixed use unit consisting of a commercial and residential function. It typically has a substantial commercial component that may
accommodate employees and walk-in trade. The unit is intended to function predominantly as workspace with incidental residential accommodations
that meet basic habitability requirements. See definition of Live-Work. (Synonym: live-with.)
YIELD: Characterizing a thoroughfare that has two-way traffic but only one effective travel lane because of parked cars, necessitating slow movement
and driver negotiation. Also, characterizing parking on such a thoroughfare. (Ord. 1297, 2016: Ord. 1200, 2010)
Title 19
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 264/268
Chapter 19.04
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE
19.04.010: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the CITY OF POST FALLS DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE. The purpose of these
regulations is to prescribe the procedure whereby developers of land shall pay an impact fee as set forth in this chapter for the purpose of providing the
public facilities and system improvements needed to serve future residents and users of such development. It is further the purpose of this chapter to:
A. Ensure that adequate facilities are available to serve new growth and development;
B. Promote orderly growth and development by establishing uniform standards by which the City may require that those who benefit from new growth
and development pay a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve new growth and development;
C. Ensure that those who benefit from new growth and development are required to pay no more than their proportionate share of the cost of public
facilities needed to serve new growth and development and to prevent duplicate and ad hoc development requirements;
D. Collect and expend development impact fees pursuant to the enabling powers granted by the provision of the Idaho Development Impact Fee Act,
Idaho Code title 67, chapter 82;
E. Provide the legal and procedural basis for the implementation of development impact fees within the City; and
F. Ensure that any capital improvement funded wholly or in part with impact fee revenue shall first be included in an approved capital improvements plan
that lists the capital improvements that may be funded with impact fee revenues as well as the estimated costs and projected timing for each
improvement. (Ord. 1081 § 1, 2005: Ord. 896 § 1, 1997)
19.04.020: DEFINITIONS:
Unless defined herein, words and terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings defined in the Idaho Development Impact Fee Act.
BEDROOM: A private room in a dwelling that is larger than one hundred (100) square feet gross floor area, including closet space, meets the Building
Code egress requirements of the International Building Code, is separable from other rooms by a door or doorframe that can be used for a standard
door, does not have facilities or furnishings for cooking, eating, or laundering and is not solely a bathroom, a living room, a den/family room, a kitchen, a
dining room, a laundry room or a utility room for HVAC equipment.
DIRECTOR: The Post Falls Director of Public Works or his/her designee. (Ord. 1343, 2018: Ord. 1230, 2011)
19.04.030: APPLICATION:
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply uniformly to those who seek permits to establish new land uses or to engage in new construction to develop
new or materially revised land uses consistent with ordinances of the City.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
1. Rebuilding the same amount of floor space of a structure which was destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, providing the structure is rebuilt and
ready for occupancy within two (2) years of its destruction;
2. Remodeling or repairing a structure which does not increase the number of service units;
3. Replacing a residential unit, including a modular building or manufactured/mobile home, with another residential unit on the same lot, provided that
the number of service units does not increase;
4. Placing a temporary construction trailer or office on a lot;
5. Constructing an addition on a residential structure which does not increase the number of service units;
6. Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses, such as tennis courts, a private clubhouse, or accessory buildings in a residential
zone, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the use creates a significant impact on the capacity of system improvements;
7. Upon demonstration by fee payer by documentation such as utility bills and tax records, the installation of a modular building,
manufactured/mobile home or recreational vehicle on that same lot or space for which a development impact fee has been paid previously, and as
long as there is no increase in service units.
C. An exemption must be claimed by the fee payer upon application for a building permit. Any exemption not so claimed shall be deemed waived by the
fee payer. Applications for exemption shall be submitted to and determined by the Public Works Director, hereafter Director, or his or her duly
designated agent, within ninety (90) days. Appeals of the Director's, or his or her duly designated agent's, determination shall be made under the
provisions of section 19.04.110, "Appeals", of this chapter. (Ord. 1343, 2018: Ord. 1230, 2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 265/268
19.04.040: COLLECTION OF IMPACT FEE:
A. The development impact fee shall be paid and collected at the time of issuance of a building permit, a site development permit, or a
manufactured/mobile home installation or placement permit, or at such time as there is a change of use to a different use which requires a larger
impact fee (under such circumstance, the difference in the impact fees will be collected).
B. No building permit or other equivalent City approval shall be issued for "development" as herein defined unless the impact fee is paid pursuant to this
chapter.
C. A manufactured/mobile home unit may not initially locate on a manufactured/mobile home site unless the impact fee has been paid pursuant to this
chapter or has been paid on a previous manufactured/mobile home unit on the same site.
D. When it is determined pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter that a project will have extraordinary impacts, an additional impact fee shall
be paid, or bonded for, prior to commencement of construction or development.
E. In the event payment of a development impact fee is dishonored, the City shall have all lawful remedies including, but not limited to, the withholding of
utility services, the imposition of liens pursuant to Idaho Code title 45, chapter 5, the withholding of other City approvals required for the development
of other properties owned by the fee payer, and the issuance of "stop work" orders, and the revocation or suspension of the building or development
permit. (Ord. 1230, 2011)
19.04.050: CAPITAL/SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS:
The capital/system improvement projects to be financed by the impact fees are those as listed in the report, incorporated herein by reference along with
all footnotes, exhibits, appendices, and other attachments referenced therein including, but not limited to, the City of Post Falls capital improvements
plan, attached to the ordinance codified herein as part of addendum A as adopted in section 19.04.130 of this chapter. (Ord. 1081 § 5, 2005: Ord. 896
§ 5, 1997)
19.04.060: CALCULATION OF IMPACT FEE:
A. Time Limits: The City shall calculate the amount of the impact fee due for each building permit, and manufactured/mobile home installation permit, or
change in use, by the procedure set forth in the report within thirty (30) days of submittal of complete permit plans for residential development and
within sixty (60) days of submittal of complete permit plans for commercial development.
B. Validity: The calculation of a development impact fee shall be in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A development impact fee
shall not be deemed invalid because payment of the fee may result in incidental benefit to owners or developers within the city, other than the person
paying the fee.
C. Capacity Demands: A development impact fee shall be calculated in accordance with the methods established by addendum A as adopted in section
19.04.130 of this chapter and in the amounts established by the then current fee resolution adopted by the city council.
D. Mix Of Uses; Fee Calculated For Each Type: If the development for which a building permit, or manufactured/mobile home installation permit, is
sought contains a mix of uses, the impact fee will be calculated for each type of development or use.
E. Certification: Prior to making an application for a building permit, or manufactured/mobile home installation permit, a prospective applicant may
request in writing a written certification of the development fee for a period of one year from the date of certification. The certification shall include an
explanation of facilities considered under Idaho Code section 67-8207. The certification shall specify the system improvement(s) for which the impact
fee is intended to be used.
F. Individual Assessment: Individual assessment of impact fees is permitted in situations where the fee payer can demonstrate by clear and convincing
evidence that the established impact fee is inappropriate for the development contemplated.
1. Application: Individual assessments of development impact fees may be made by application to the director, prior to receiving building permits, site
development permits, manufactured/mobile home installation permits, or other necessary approvals from the city. The director shall evaluate such
individual assessments under the guidelines provided for in subsection F4 of this section. If the guidelines are met and the individual assessment
would conform to the standards and principles established by the development impact fee statute, the individual assessment may be approved by
the director and forwarded to the city council for their information.
2. Late Application: Late application for individual assessment may be submitted within thirty (30) days after the receipt of a building permit only if the
fee payer makes a showing that the facts supporting such application were not known or discoverable prior to receipt of a building permit and that
the undue hardship would result if said application is not considered.
3. Decision: The director shall render a written decision regarding any request for individual assessment within thirty (30) days of the date a complete
application is submitted. The decision of the director, or his or her duly designated agent, shall establish the impact fee for the project in question
for a period of one year from the date said decision becomes final.
4. Conditions For Individual Assessment Approval: The director, or his or her duly designated agent, shall evaluate an application for individual
assessment and may approve the same if the fee payer has shown by clear and convincing evidence that the established impact fee is
inappropriate and that the following facts and conditions exist:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 266/268
a. Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions apply to the development that do not apply generally to other properties in the vicinity
of the development.
b. An individual assessment is necessary for the reasonable and acceptable development of the property.
c. The approval of the individual assessment will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property in the vicinity in which
the development is located.
d. The approval of the individual assessment will not adversely affect implementation of the capital improvements plan of the city.
5. Appeals: Determination of individual assessment may be appealed to the city administrator by the filing of a written appeal with the planning
department within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing, faxing, or personal delivery of written notice of the decision of the director. Final
determination regarding individual assessments shall be made by the city administrator.
G. Impact Fee Schedule Modification: The impact fee schedule shall be modified by the city council from time to time by resolution as allowed by law.
(Ord. 1230, 2011)
19.04.070: GENERAL METHODOLOGY FOR CALCULATION:
A. Calculation Methodology: The amount of the impact fee shall be calculated using the methodology contained in the report labeled addendum A as
adopted in section 19.04.130 of this chapter.
B. Proportionate Share Not To Be Exceeded: A development impact fee shall not exceed a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements
determined in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-8207. Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or
reasonable estimates of such costs.
C. Fee Schedule: A developer shall be responsible to pay a project's proportionate share of system improvement costs by payment of development
impact fees according to the fee schedule as full and complete payment of the development project's proportionate share of system improvement
costs. The schedule of development impact fees for various land users per unit of development shall be as set forth in the report and as implemented
in the fee resolution adopted by the city council.
D. Proportionate Share Determination:
1. All development impact fees shall be based upon the formula or method set forth in addendum A as adopted in section 19.04.130 of this chapter
and the fee resolution enacted by the city council to implement provisions. The proportionate share of the costs attributable to new development
are based upon the plans and formulas made applicable through addendum A as adopted in section 19.04.130 of this chapter in a manner
consistent with requirements of chapter 82, title 67, Idaho Code. (Ord. 1230, 2011)
19.04.080: ADMINISTRATION OF IMPACT FEE:
A. Transfer Of Funds To Treasurer: Upon receipt of impact fees, the treasurer shall be responsible for placement of such funds into separate accounts
as hereinafter specified. All such funds shall be deposited in interest bearing accounts, within the capital project fund, in a bank authorized to receive
deposits of city funds. Interest earned by each account shall be credited to that account and shall be used solely for the purposes specified for funds
of such account.
B. Establishment And Maintenance Of Accounts: The treasurer shall establish separate accounts and maintain records for each such account. All
accounting and expenditure of development impact revenues shall comply with the then current requirements of chapter 82, title 67, Idaho Code.
C. Review And Modification: Unless the city council deems some lesser time period is appropriate, the city shall at least once every five (5) years
commencing from the date of the original adoption of the capital improvements plan, review the development potential of the city and update the
capital improvements plan in accordance with the procedures set forth in Idaho Code section 67-8206. The city may make any updates as are
deemed necessary as a result of: 1) development occurring in the prior year; 2) capital improvements actually constructed; 3) changing facility
needs; 4) inflation; 5) revised cost estimates for capital improvements; 6) changes in the availability of other funding projects; and 7) such other
factors as may be relevant.
D. Idaho Code Requirements Applicable: All requirements of Idaho Code section 67-8210 or its successor, regarding earmarking and expenditure of
collected development impact fees, shall apply. (Ord. 1230, 2011)
19.04.090: CREDITS, REIMBURSEMENT AND WAIVERS:
A. In the calculation of development impact fees for a particular project, a credit or reimbursement shall be given for the present value of construction of
system improvements or contribution or dedication of land or money required by the city from a developer for system improvements of the category
for which the development impact fee is being collected. Such credit or reimbursement shall not be given for project improvements.
B. If a developer is required to construct, fund or contribute system improvements in excess of the development project's proportionate share of system
improvement costs, the developer shall receive a credit on future impact fees or be reimbursed at the developer's choice for such excess
construction, funding or contribution from development impact fees paid by future development which impacts the system improvements constructed,
funded or contributed by the developer(s) or fee payer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 267/268
C. If a credit or reimbursement is due to the developer pursuant to this section, the city shall enter into a written agreement with the fee payer,
negotiated in good faith, prior to the construction, funding or contribution. The agreement shall provide for the amount of credit or the amount, time
and form of reimbursement.
D. No credits shall be given for the construction of local on site facilities, structures, improvements, or other project improvements required by zoning,
subdivision, or other city regulations unless the improvement is identified in the capital improvements plan or there is a finding that the proposed
improvements meet the same need as improvements identified in the capital improvements plan.
E. Any person requesting such credit or reimbursement shall submit his/her request in writing on a form provided by the city and present documentation
of costs or payments for facilities to the director for use in determining the amount of credit or reimbursement to be given. Requests for credit or
reimbursement shall be submitted to the director prior to issuance of a building permit, site development permit, or manufactured/mobile home
installation permit. The determination shall be made no more than forty five (45) days after complete documentation is submitted to the director. Any
appeal from such a determination by the director shall be pursuant to section 19.04.110 of this chapter.
F. Construction or development by the city and by political subdivisions that are classified as taxing districts pursuant to Idaho Code section 63-201, or
its successor, shall be exempt from payment of the development impact fees provided for herein. Political subdivisions of the state which are legally
eligible to receive the proceeds of development impact fees and which have entered into an agreement with the city to do so may be exempt from
payment of development impact fees upon determination by the director that the development or construction for which the fee would be charged is a
system improvement within the capital improvement plan. Nonprofit charitable organizations may be exempt from payment of development impact
fees upon showing that the construction or development activities undertaken by the charitable organization are for purposes of providing direct
public benefit through construction of facilities or improvements to be used by the general public. Any request for waiver shall follow the procedures
for appeal set forth in this chapter, except that the director's responsibility shall be limited to compiling the documentation related to an exemption
request by a nonprofit charitable organization for final determination by the city council. (Ord. 1230, 2011)
19.04.100: REFUNDS:
A. The current owner of record of property on which an impact fee has been paid may request a refund of such fee if:
1. The project, for which a building permit has been issued within one year, has been lawfully and permanently altered resulting in a decrease in the
amount of the impact fee due; or
2. The city, after collecting the fee when service is not available, has failed to appropriate and expend the collected development impact fees
pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-8210(4);
3. A building permit or permit for installation of a manufactured/mobile home is denied or abandoned prior to placement.
B. The request for refund must be in writing and submitted to the director on a form provided by the city for such purpose. The owner shall provide such
documentation as the director may require to prove such satisfaction, reconveyance, or releases from contract sellers, mortgagees, lienholders,
and/or others having an interest in the real property for which an impact fee has been paid.
C. A request for refund must be filed within the time allowed by law.
D. Within ninety (90) days of the date of receipt of a request for refund, the director must provide the owner, in writing, with a decision on the refund
request including the reasons for the decision. If a right to a refund exists, the city is required to send a refund to the owner of record within ninety
(90) days after it is determined that a refund is due. A refund shall include a refund of interest at the rate required by statute.
E. Owner may appeal the determination of the director to the city administrator pursuant to the provisions in section 19.04.110 of this chapter. (Ord.
1230, 2011)
19.04.110: APPEALS:
A. A developer or fee payer may appeal the written determination of the applicability and amount of the development impact fee, or refund, or any
discretionary action or inaction by or on behalf of the city to the director.
B. The developer or fee payer must file a notice of appeal with the director within thirty (30) days following the written determination, discretionary action
or inaction. When filing an appeal, the fee payer shall submit a letter providing a full explanation of the request, the reason for the appeal, as well as
all supporting documentation.
C. The decision of the director shall be final unless appealed to the city administrator within ten (10) days after the filing of the written decision of the
director. Such appeal shall be based on the record before the director and on such other written argument which appellant has filed with the appeal
and the staff response to such argument. Oral argument by appellant and city staff shall not exceed fifteen (15) minutes, respectively, with additional
time for appellant rebuttal, but no additional written evidence shall be before the city administrator for final action.
D. The filing of an appeal shall not stay required payment of the impact fee, however, a fee payer can pay a development impact fee under protest in
order to obtain development approval or building permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=350 268/268
E. Upon voluntary agreement by the fee payer and the city, any disagreement related to the impact fee for the proposed development may be mediated
by a qualified independent party.
1. Mediation may take place at any time during the appeals process and participation in mediation does not preclude the fee payer from pursuing
other remedies provided for in this chapter.
2. Mediation costs shall be shared equally by the fee payer and the city. (Ord. 1230, 2011)
19.04.120: EXTRAORDINARY IMPACTS:
In determining the proportionate share of the cost of system improvements to be paid by the developer, the director or his or her designee shall consider
whether any extraordinary costs will be incurred in serving the development based upon an "extraordinary impact" as defined in chapter 82, title 67
Idaho Code. This determination shall be made prior to issuance of any permit for development and shall be paid prior to any such issuance except as
may be provided pursuant to an agreement between the parties as authorized by Idaho Code section 67-8214 or its successor.
If the director or his or her designee determines that the development will result in an extraordinary impact, it shall advise the fee payer in writing what
the extraordinary impact is, the reason(s) for the extraordinary impact determination, and the estimated costs to be incurred as a result of the
extraordinary impact.
The fee payer may appeal the determination of an extraordinary impact or the amount of the extraordinary costs incurred in writing by filing a notice of
appeal to the city administrator with the director. When filing an appeal, the fee payer shall submit a letter providing the reason for the appeal along with
supporting documentation. The city administrator shall consider the appeal and make a final determination within sixty (60) days of receipt of the written
appeal. (Ord. 1230, 2011)
19.04.130: ADOPTION OF ADDENDUM A:
Addendum A entitled the "Capital Improvement Plans And Development Impact Fees" prepared by TischlerBise, dated September 29, 2011, along with
all footnotes, exhibits, appendices, addenda, and other attachments referenced therein, all of which are by this reference incorporated herein as if set
forth fully, herein, is hereby adopted as the technical foundation upon which Post Falls development impact fees are to be based. A description of
acceptable levels of service for system improvements are described in the report. (Ord. 1230, 2011)
19.04.140: BONDING:
Funds pledged toward retirement of bonds, revenue certificates, or other obligations of indebtedness for such projects may include impact fees and
other city revenues as may be appropriated by the city council. (Ord. 1230, 2011)
19.04.150: EFFECT OF IMPACT FEE ON ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS:
This chapter shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density of development, design and improvement standards and
requirements, or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of capital improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or
other regulations of the city, which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development. (Ord.
1081 § 15, 2005: Ord. 896 § 15, 1997)
19.04.160: OTHER POWERS AND RIGHTS NOT AFFECTED:
A. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from requiring a developer to construct reasonable project improvements in conjunction with a
development project.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent or prohibit private agreements between property owners or developers, the Idaho transportation
department, the city, and other governmental entities in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements or providing for credits or
reimbursements for system improvements or providing for credits or reimbursements for system improvement costs incurred by a developer
including interproject transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project improvements which are used or shared by more than one
development project.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to create any additional right to develop real property or diminish the power of the city in regulating the
orderly development of real property.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall work to limit the use by the city of the power of eminent domain or supersede or conflict with requirements or procedures
authorized in the Idaho Code for local improvement districts or general obligation bond issues.
E. Nothing herein shall restrict or diminish the power of the city to annex property into its territorial boundaries or exclude property from its territorial
boundaries upon request of a developer or owner, or to impose reasonable conditions thereon, including the recovery of project or system
improvement costs required as a result of such voluntary annexation. (Ord. 1230, 2011)