6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 1/467
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to
the left, have been passed, but have not been incorporated in
the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there
are any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary
from the official hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the
official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE 1460
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF PAYETTE, IDAHO, AMENDING THE PAYETTE MUNICIPAL
ZONING CODE CHAPTER 2.52 PLANNING & ZONING COMMISSION, OF TITLE 2
ADMINISTRATION & PERSONNEL UPDATE AND DEFINE DUTIES OF THE PLANNING &
ZONING COMMISSION; AMENDING CHAPER 16.32, VARIANCES AND APPEALS IN TITLE
16, SUBDIVISONS, ALLOWING THE PLANNING & ZONING COMMISSION TO DECIDE
VARIANCES IN ACCORDANCE WITH CHAPTER 17.78; AMENDING CHAPTER 17.68
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT IN TITLE 17 ZONING, TO DEFINE POWERS &
DUTIES OF THE PLANNING & ZONING COMMISSION; AMENDING CHAPTER 17.78
VARIANCES IN TITLE 17, ZONING TO ALLOW THE PLANNING & ZONING COMMISSION TO
DECIDE APPEALS AND TO DEFINE THE PROCESS FOR APPEALS TO THE CITY COUNCIL;
SETTING AN EFFECTIVE DATE; ALLOWING PUBLICATION IN SUMMARY FORM;
ESTABLISHING SEVERABILITY; ESTABLISHING A REPEALER.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF PAYETTE, IDAHO:
Section 1. Section 2.52 of Title 2, of the Payette Municipal Code is
hereby amended as follows:
Chapter 2.52
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
2.52.010: CREATED:
2.52.020: COMPOSITION; QUALIFICATIONS; TERM OF OFFICE:
2.52.030: ORGANIZATION:
2.52.0430: COMPENSATION; SECRETARY; MEETINGS:
2.52.050: POWERS AND DUTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 2/467
2.52.060: COOPERATION FROM CITY DEPARTMENTS REQUIRED; AUTHORITY TO CALL FOR
ASSISTANCE:
2.52.070: PUBLIC WORKS; SUBMITTAL FOR STUDY AND RECOMMENDATION:
2.52.080: COORDINATION WITH OTHER COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS:
2.52.090: EXPENDITURE OF CITY MONEY; COUNCIL AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED:
2.52.100: STANDING COMMITTEES:
2.52.010: CREATED: There is created a planning and zoning commission for
the city, pursuant to Idaho Code section 67-6504. Such which commission
shall be known and designated as the "city of Payette planning and zoning
commission". The planning and zoning commission may from time to time be
referred to as simply the planning commission or as the commission.
2.52.020: COMPOSITION; QUALIFICATIONS; TERM OF OFFICE:
A. The planning and zoning commission shall consist of seven (7) voting
members to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of
the council.
B. All appointed members shall be residents of the city for two (2) years
prior to appointment and must remain a resident of the city during service
on the commission., except that oOne member may be a resident of the
Payette city impact area for two (2) years prior to appointment.
C. All appointed members of the planning commission shall be appointed for
and shall hold office for a term of six (6) years. In the event of the
death, resignation or any vacancy in said commission, such vacancy shall be
filled by appointment by the mayor and confirmation by the council for the
unexpired term of such member or members.
2.52.030: ORGANIZATION:
The planning commission shall at its first meeting elect a president and a
vice president, who shall be members appointed by the mayor and who shall
hold office during the pleasure of the commission.
2.52.0430: COMPENSATION; SECRETARY; MEETINGS, RECORDS:
A. Members of the planning commission shall may receive a monthly stipend
in the amount of thirty five dollars ($35.00) mileage and per diem
compensation as provided by the City Council. Members of the planning
commission who do not attend the regular monthly meeting of the planning
and zoning commission, or if a planning and zoning commission meeting is
not held in any one month, will not receive a stipend compensation for that
month.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 3/467
B. The planning commission shall elect a secretary who need not be a member
of the commission. Such secretary shall keep an accurate record of all
proceedings of the commission and the commission shall on the first Monday
of May of each year make and file with the council a report of all
transactions of the commission.
CB. The commission shall hold meetings at least once each calendar month,
for not less than nine (9) months in a calendar year, and at such other
times as may be necessary. A majority of voting members of the commission
shall constitute a quorum.
DC. The members of the planning and zoning commission shall attend
regularly scheduled meetings unless excused from attendance prior to the
meeting. Reasons to be excused include personal illness, family emergencies
or out of town business trips. Members whose unexcused absences exceed
forty percent (40%) in any given calendar year may be removed from the
planning and zoning commission by the mayor with the majority approval of
council.
D. Written bylaws consistent with Idaho Code Title 67 and other laws of the
state for the transaction of business of the commission shall be adopted. A
record of meetings, hearings, resolutions, studies, findings, permits and
actions taken shall be maintained. All meetings and records shall be open
to the public.
2.52.050: POWERS AND DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the planning commission to study economic, social
and physical conditions of the city, and to recommend and make suggestions
to the council and to all other public authorities concerning the laying
out, widening, extending, parking and locating of streets, sidewalks and
boulevards, the establishment of setback lines, the relief of traffic
congestion, the betterment of housing and sanitation conditions, and the
establishment of zones and districts limiting the use, height, area and
bulk of buildings and structures; to recommend to the council and all other
public authorities, plans for the regulation of the future growth,
development and beautification of the municipality in respect to its public
and private buildings and work, streets, parks, grounds and vacant lots,
and plans consistent with the future growth and development of the city, in
order to secure the city and its inhabitants sanitation, proper service of
all public utilities, and transportation facilities; and in general to
study and to propose such measures as may be advisable for the promotion of
the public interest, health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience and
welfare of the city, and of the area for five (5) miles adjacent thereto.
2.52.060: COOPERATION FROM CITY DEPARTMENTS REQUIRED; AUTHORITY TO CALL FOR
ASSISTANCE:
All departments and employees of the city are instructed to cooperate with
and furnish to the planning commission maps, reports and all available data
necessary for the commission to properly and adequately carry out its
functions. The planning commission is also authorized to appoint such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 4/467
technical and advisory committees as are necessary to carry out its work,
and to call upon the citizens of the community and the various civic
organizations for cooperation and assistance to the end that a coordinated
program of city planning may be promoted.
2.52.070: PUBLIC WORKS; SUBMITTAL FOR STUDY AND RECOMMENDATION:
All matters pertaining to the planning, laying out, and the development and
construction of public works shall be submitted to the planning commission
for its study and recommendations before being presented to the council.
The various departments of the city government, in submitting plans and
recommendations to the council, are required to furnish copies in full
duplicate to the planning commission.
2.52.080: COORDINATION WITH OTHER COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as infringing upon the authority
previously granted to any existing commission or board but provides that
such commissions or boards shall coordinate their efforts with the planning
commission to the end that a more comprehensive plan of the city
development may be evolved.
2.52.090: EXPENDITURE OF CITY MONEY; COUNCIL AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED:
The planning commission shall have no authority to make expenditures on
behalf of the city nor to obligate the city for the payment of any sum of
money, unless authorized by the council who shall specify the
administrative method by which such funds shall be expended.
2.52.100: STANDING COMMITTEES:
The mayor shall have the power to provide for various standing committees
composed of members of the planning commission, and he shall appoint from
the planning commission the members of each committee. Each standing
committee shall have the duty and power to study the problems and
conditions existing within its particular scope and field, and each
standing committee shall submit its recommendations and suggestions
relating to the problems and conditions existing within its particular
scope and field to the planning commission.
Section 2. Chapter 16.32 VARIANCES AND APPEALS, in Title 16,
SUBDIVISIONS, of the Payette Municipal Code is hereby amended as follows:
Chapter 16.32
VARIANCES AND APPEALS
16.32.010: VARIANCES; PERMISSIBLE WHEN:
16.32.0210: VARIANCES; REQUEST PROCEDURE:
16.32.030: VARIANCES; CITY COUNCIL'S AUTHORITY TO SET CONDITIONS:
16.32.040: RIGHT OF APPEAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 5/467
16.32.010: VARIANCES; PERMISSIBLE WHEN:
The city council shall consider variances to the terms of this title which
will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title will
result in unnecessary hardship and under such conditions that the spirit of
this title shall be observed and substantial justice done. A variance shall
not be considered a right or special privilege, but may be granted to an
applicant only upon showing of undue hardship because of characteristics of
the site and that the variance is not in conflict with the public interest.
In acting upon such variance the city council shall make full investigation
and shall only recommend granting a variance upon finding that the
following are true:
A. That the granting of the variance will not be in conflict with the
spirit and intent of the comprehensive plan for the city, and will not
effect a change in zoning.
B. That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions, applicable to the property involved, so that denial of the
relief sought will result in:
1. Undue loss in value of the property;
2. Inability to preserve the property rights of the owner;
3. The prevention of reasonable enjoyment of the property.
C. The granting of such relief will not be materially detrimental to
the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to the property or
improvements of other property owners, or the quiet enjoyment of such
property improvements.
D. That the reason for a variance was not caused by the owners, or
previous owner's actions or inactions.
16.32.0210: VARIANCES; REQUEST PROCEDURE:
A. In requesting any modification of or variance to the provisions of this
title, an owner, developer or his engineer authorized designee shall make
written request to the city clerk in accordance with and following the
procedures as set out in Chapter 17.78 of this code.
B. Such request, together with such related data and maps as necessary to
fully illustrate the relief sought, shall be referred by the city clerk in
writing to the planning and zoning commission.
C. The city clerk shall notify all adjoining property owners of the
variance request and determine whether to hold a public hearing. The
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 6/467
planning and zoning commission shall act upon such request and make
recommendation to the council at its next regular meeting.
D. The city council, after receiving the recommendations of the planning
and zoning commission, may act upon such request at its next regular
meeting.
E. Approval of such modifications shall require a majority vote of the
regular membership of the city council.
16.32.030: VARIANCES; CITY COUNCIL'S AUTHORITY TO SET CONDITIONS:
In granting variances and/or modification from the regulations of this
title, the city council may require such conditions as will, in its
judgment, secure substantially the objective of the standards or
requirements so varied or modified.
16.32.040: RIGHT OF APPEAL:
Any person, firm or corporation may appeal the decision of the city council
to the district court in the same manner and within the same time as other
appeals may be taken from orders of the city council.
Section 3. Section 17.68 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT, in Title 17,
ZONING, of the Payette Municipal Code is hereby amended as follows:
Chapter 17.68
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
17.68.010: DUTY OF CITY CLERK OR BUILDING OFFICIAL:
17.68.020: POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
17.68.020: BUILDING PERMITS; REQUIRED; APPLICATION INFORMATION; FEE:
17.68.030: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY; REQUIRED WHEN; APPLICATION;
RECORDKEEPING:
17.68.040: FEE SCHEDULE FOR CERTAIN ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REQUESTS:
17.68.010: DUTY OF CITY CLERK OR BUILDING OFFICIAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 7/467
Except as otherwise provided in this title, the building official, city
clerk or his designee, shall administer and enforce this title, including
the receiving of applications and the issuing of building permits. No
building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued by him except
where the provisions of this title have been complied with.
17.68.020: POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
A. Duties of the Commission: For the purpose of this title, the commission
shall have the following duties:
1. Initiate proposed amendments to this title and conduct a biennial
review of the complete zoning ordinance;
2. Review all proposed amendments to Title 16 and 17 of this code,
preliminary plat requests, comprehensive plan changes, comprehensive
plan map changes, annexation and rezone requests and make
recommendations to the council;
3. Grant conditional use permits as specified under the conditions as
herein specified with such additional safeguards as will uphold the
intent of this title;
4. Hear appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision, interpretation or determination made by the
city clerk or building official;
5. Issue such variances in accordance with chapter 17.78 of this title;
and
6. Perform such other duties as are prescribed for it in this title.
17.68.040: FEE SCHEDULE FOR CERTAIN ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REQUESTS:
The following fee schedule for certain types of applications is hereby
created:
A. Applications for conditional use permits or special use permits shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee set by resolution.
B. Applications for rezones, variances, annexation and nonconforming uses
shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee set by resolution.
C. All other applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee set
by resolution.
D. An application for subdivision approval shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee as required by section 16.16.050 of this code and the
applicant shall be advised that in addition to the application fee,
applicant may be responsible for all expenses incurred by the city.
E. By naming specific categories of applications which require fees with
applications, the city does not intend to imply that other unnamed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 8/467
categories are to be exempt from application fees.
Section 4. Chapter 17.78 VARIANCES of Title 17 ZONING, of the Payette
Municipal Code is hereby amended as follows:
Chapter 17.78
VARIANCES
17.78.010: VARIANCES; PERMISSIBLE WHEN:
17.78.020: VARIANCES; REQUEST PROCEDURE:
17.78.030: VARIANCES; COUNCIL'S AUTHORITY TO SET CONDITIONS:
17.78.040: RIGHT OF APPEAL ON VARIANCES:
17.78.010: VARIANCES; PERMISSIBLE WHEN:
The city council planning and zoning commission shall consider variances to
the terms of this title which will not be contrary to the public interest
where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions
of this title will result in undue hardship upon a landowner and under such
conditions that the spirit of this title shall be observed and substantial
justice done. A variance shall not be considered a right or special
privilege, but may be granted to an applicant only upon showing of undue
hardship because of the characteristics of the site. In acting upon a
variance request, the city council planning and zoning commission shall
make full investigation and shall only grant a variance upon finding that
the following are true:
A. That the granting of the variance will not be in conflict with the
spirit and intent of the comprehensive plan for the city, and will not
affect a change in zoning.
B. That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions,
applicable to the property involved, or the intended use thereof, which do
not apply generally to the property or class of use in the district, so
that a denial of the relief sought will result in:
1. Undue loss in value of the property.
2. Inability to preserve the property rights of the owner.
3. The prevention of reasonable enjoyment of any property right of the
owner.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 9/467
C. The granting of such relief will not be materially detrimental to the
public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to the property or
improvements of other property owners or the quiet enjoyment of such
property improvements.
D. That the reason for a variance was not caused by the owners, or previous
owner's actions.
E. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in
the same district and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands,
structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for
issuance of a variance.
17.78.020: VARIANCES; REQUEST PROCEDURE:
A. In requesting any modification to the provisions of this title, a
landowner, developer or his engineer authorized designee shall make written
request to the city clerk.
B. Such request, together with such related data and maps as necessary to
fully illustrate the relief sought, shall be referred by the city engineer
or city clerk in writing to the planning and zoning commission.
C. The planning and zoning commission after conducting a public hearing,
shall act upon such request make a recommendation to the city council at
its next regular meeting or within thirty sixty (30 60) days. If no
recommendation is made within such time, the matter shall be forwarded to
the city council as if there were a favorable recommendation. Upon granting
or denying application, the commission shall specify:
1. The regulations and standards used in evaluating the application;
2. The reason for approval or denial;
3. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the
variance.
D. The council, after receiving the recommendations of the planning
commission, shall hold its own public hearing and shall act upon the matter
within sixty (60) days.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 10/467
E. Approval of such modifications shall require a majority vote of the
regular membership of the city council.
F. Any decision of the planning and zoning commission may be appealed to
the city council. Any person including, but not limited to, the city clerk,
public works director or zoning commission may file an appeal.
17.78.030: VARIANCES; COUNCIL'S AUTHORITY TO SET CONDITIONS:
In granting variances and/or modifications from the regulations of this
title, the council planning and zoning commission may require such
conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objective of
the standards or requirements so varied or modified.
17.78.040: RIGHT OF APPEAL OF VARIANCES; PROCEDURES:
A. Any decision of the planning and zoning commission on a variance may be
appealed to the city council within fifteen (15) days of the decision by
the commission. Any person including, but not limited to, the city clerk,
public works director or zoning commissioner may file an appeal. When a
notice of appeal of a decision by the commission on a variance has been
timely filed, the transcribed recording of the hearing before the
commission and all documents, including the application filed or entered
into evidence before the commission shall constitute the record on appeal.
The record shall be prepared and provided to the council. When the council
has received the record, a notice of the time, date and place of hearing
shall be sent to the appellant, city staff and other persons who testified
at or submitted documents into the record at the hearing before the
commission. The appellant shall be required to pay a fee in addition to the
fee for filing the appeal which is set by resolution of the council.
B. No new evidence, either written or by way of verbal testimony shall be
presented or considered at the appeal hearing. The appellant shall have the
burden of proof as to why the decision appealed from is in error based upon
the record transmitted to the council.
C. The appellant shall present its case first. Following the appellant, any
person supporting the appeal who participated in the hearing before the
commission shall be permitted to testify. The city staff shall then present
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 11/467
its case on behalf of the city following which any person who opposes the
appeal may testify. The appellant may then present any rebuttal argument
following which the appeal hearing shall be concluded.
D. The council, in its discretion, may permit persons with standing to
testify at the hearing the opportunity to submit a brief in support of
their position.
E. The council may set reasonable limits on the time for testimony or
argument provided each participant in the hearing.
F. The council may ask questions of any participant in the hearing at any
time.
G. A verbatim record of the hearing on the appeal shall be made and
preserved as part of the record on the appeal.
H. The council shall render a written decision on the appeal within twenty
(20) days of the completion of the appeal and mail a copy to the appellant
and each person who participated in the appeal hearing by testifying,
presenting argument or who submitted a brief. The council may uphold,
reverse, or remand the matter appealed to the commission for further
proceedings
BI. Any person, firm or company may appeal the decision of the council to
the district court.
Section 5. This Ordinance may be published in summary form allowed by
Idaho Code.
Section 6. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately
upon passage and publication as required by the laws of the State of Idaho.
Section 7. Any ordinances or resolutions which are in conflict with this
Ordinance are hereby repealed, but only insofar as the conflict exists.
Section 8. If any portion of this Ordinance should be found to be
unconstitutional or unenforceable for any reason, the remainder of the
Ordinance shall be applied to effectuate the purposes of this Ordinance.
PASSED and APPROVED by the Mayor and City Council of the
City of Payette, Idaho this __6____ day of _______May________________, 2019.
CITY OF PAYETTE, IDAHO
BY_______________________________________
Jeffrey T. Williams, Mayor
ATTEST:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 12/467
City Clerk
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Payette, as supplemented, contains ordinances and resolutions up to and
including ordinance 1456, passed December 17, 2018, and resolution 2011-06, passed October 17,
2011. Ordinances and resolutions of the City adopted after said ordinance and resolution supersede
the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult
the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended,
superseded or repealed.
The City Code of the City of Payette has been kept current by regular supplementation. In 2009,
Sterling Codifiers began providing supplement service for the City Code.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
Title 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01
CODE ADOPTION1
1.01.010: ADOPTION:
Pursuant to chapter 9 of title 50 of the Idaho Code, there is adopted the "Payette municipal code" as
published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. (Ord. 889 § 1, 1978)
1.01.020: TITLE; CITATION; REFERENCE:
This code shall be known as the "Payette municipal code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to such
code as the "Payette municipal code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in
any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending,
correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or
repeal of the "Payette municipal code". Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections
and subsections of the "Payette municipal code" and such reference shall apply to that numbered title,
chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 889 § 2, 1978)
1.01.030: CODIFICATION AUTHORITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 13/467
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative
ordinances of the city of Payette, Idaho codified pursuant to the provisions of chapter 9 of title 50 of
the Idaho Code. (Ord. 889 § 3, 1978)
1.01.040: ORDINANCES PASSED PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF THE CODE:
The last ordinance included in this code was ordinance 874, passed November 7, 1977. The following
ordinances, passed subsequent to ordinance 874, but prior to adoption of this code, are hereby
adopted and made a part of this code: ordinances 877, 880, 881, 885, 886, 887. (Ord. 889 § 4, 1978)
1.01.050: REFERENCE APPLIES TO ALL AMENDMENTS:
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the Payette municipal code or to any portion thereof, or
to any ordinances of the city of Payette, Idaho, the reference shall apply to all amendments,
corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 889 § 5, 1978)
1.01.060: TITLE, CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS:
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in
any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof.
(Ord. 889 § 6, 1978)
1.01.070: REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES:
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are
otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or
otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to
the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 889 § 7, 1978)
1.01.080: REPEAL OF PRIOR MUNICIPAL CODE:
So far as the provisions this code are the same as those in the previously existing municipal code,
they shall be construed as continuations thereof; but subject to the above limitation and the provisions
of section 1.01.090 of this chapter, the prior municipal code of the city of Payette, heretofore in force
(except such as are of a private, local or temporary nature, including franchises, grants, dedications
and specific levies for local assessments) is repealed. (Ord. 889 § 8, 1978)
1.01.090: EFFECT OF CODE ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS:
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment of any prior municipal code of the city
of Payette shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations
were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 14/467
penalty as such effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting
any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty,
or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash
deposit in lieu required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and
obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 889 § 9, 1978)
1.01.100: CONSTITUTIONALITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid
or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code.
The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence,
clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this
code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be
in full force and effect. (Ord. 889 § 11, 1978)
1.01.110: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the Payette
municipal code shall become effective. (Ord. 889 § 10, 1978)
Chapter 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS1
1.04.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city of Payette, Idaho, shall
be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or
unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such
words or phrases:
CITY AND TOWN: Each means the city of Payette, Idaho, or the area within the territorial limits of the
city of Payette, Idaho, and such territory outside the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control
by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Payette. "All its members" or "all councilmen" means the total
number of councilmen holding office.
COUNTY: The county of Payette.
LAW: Denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the state of Idaho, the
ordinances of the city of Payette and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may
be promulgated thereunder.
MAY: "May" is permissive.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 15/467
MONTH: A calendar month.
MUST AND SHALL: "Must" and "shall" are each mandatory.
OATH: Includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the
words "affirm" and "affirmed".
OWNER: Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint
tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club,
company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or
employee of any of them.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for
the use of pedestrians.
STATE: The state of Idaho.
STREET: Includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or
other public ways in the city which have been or may be dedicated and open to public use after
November 7, 1977, or such other public property so designated in any law of the state.
TENANT AND OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole
or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WRITTEN: Includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed or otherwise reproduced in
permanent visible form.
YEAR: A calendar year. (Ord. 871 § 1, 1977)
1.04.020: TITLE OF OFFICE:
Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer,
employee, department, board or commission of the city. (Ord. 871 § 2, 1977)
1.04.030: INTERPRETATION OF LANGUAGE:
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the
language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 16/467
appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and
appropriate meaning. (Ord. 871 § 3, 1977)
1.04.040: GRAMMATICAL INTERPRETATION:
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city of Payette, unless it is
apparent from the context that a different construction is intended:
A. Gender: Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders.
B. Singular And Plural: The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.
C. Tenses: Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa,
unless manifestly inapplicable. (Ord. 871 § 4, 1977)
1.04.050: ACTS BY AGENTS:
When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an
agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by
an authorized agent. (Ord. 871 § 5, 1977)
1.04.060: PROHIBITED ACTS INCLUDE CAUSING AND PERMITTING:
Whenever in the ordinances of the city of Payette, any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall
include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or
omission. (Ord. 871 § 6, 1977)
1.04.070: COMPUTATION OF TIME:
Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a
holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. (Ord. 871 § 7, 1977)
1.04.080: CONSTRUCTION:
The provisions of the ordinances of the city of Payette and all proceedings under them are to be
construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 871 § 8, 1977)
1.04.090: PRESENTATION:
All ordinances of a general or permanent nature shall be written or printed and presented to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 17/467
council by a member at a regular or special meeting. (Prior code § 1-4-1)
1.04.100: READING, DISCUSSION AND PASSAGE:
Every ordinance shall be read in meetings of the council on three (3) different days. At each reading of
an ordinance, it shall be open for discussion and amendment and may be referred to a committee,
and shall be passed to the next reading unless, by a vote of the meeting, some other disposition is
made. All ordinances that have been amended shall be engrossed, as amended, by the city clerk after
the second reading. On final passage, the ayes and nays shall be called and recorded and a
concurrence of a majority of all the members elected to the council shall be required for passage;
provided, that three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the council may by aye and nay vote, recorded in
the minutes, dispense with the three (3) readings of the ordinance and pass the same at one meeting.
(Prior code § 1-4-2)
1.04.110: SIGNING AND APPROVAL:
When any ordinance is passed, it shall be signed by the city clerk, and the date of its passage by the
council shall be added thereto; and it shall, within three (3) days thereafter, be presented to the mayor
or, in case of his absence from the city, to the president of the council for his approval. If he approves
the same, he shall attach his signature thereto. (Prior code § 1-4-3)
1.04.120: DISAPPROVAL; RECONSIDERATION:
A. Should the mayor not approve the ordinance, he shall, before the next regular meeting after such
ordinance is presented to him for his approval, return the same to the council with his objections to
the same in writing. When any ordinance is so returned by the mayor, it shall be reconsidered by
the council at the first regular meeting thereafter. If, on such reconsideration, two-thirds (2/3) of the
members elected to the council vote in the affirmative, the ordinance shall become a law,
notwithstanding the mayor's veto.
B. The city clerk, in such a case, shall annex a certificate to the ordinance stating that the same was
vetoed by the mayor and that, on its reconsideration, it received the required majority of votes.
(Prior code § 1-4-4)
1.04.130: MAYOR'S REFUSAL OR NEGLECT TO SIGN:
A. Should the mayor refuse or neglect to sign any passed ordinance and return the same with his
objections in writing at the next regular meeting after the same has been presented to him, it shall
become a law without his signature.
B. The city clerk shall annex to such ordinance a certificate to the effect that the mayor has failed to
sign or veto the same, and that it has therefore become a law without his signature. (Prior code
§ 1-4-5)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 18/467
1.04.140: PASSAGE DATE:
An ordinance shall be considered passed on the date of its first approval by the mayor; and, in case of
his vetoing an ordinance, on the date of the passage of such ordinance over such veto; and, in case
of the failure of the mayor to sign or veto an ordinance, on the date of the next regular meeting after
such ordinance is presented to him. (Prior code § 1-4-6)
1.04.150: WHEN EFFECTIVE:
All ordinances shall take effect and be in force from and after their passage, approval and publication.
Publication shall be made by inserting in one issue of some newspaper published in the city or, if no
paper is published within the city, then in some paper having general circulation therein. (Prior code
§ 1-4-7)
1.04.160: CLERK'S RECORDKEEPING DUTIES:
The city clerk shall safely keep the originals and engrossed copies of all ordinances, shall record the
same in a book provided for that purpose, and shall attach to each a certificate over the seal of the city
that the same is a true and correct copy of the original ordinance as passed. (Prior code § 1-4-8)
1.04.170: EFFECT OF REPEAL OR AMENDMENT:
Whenever any ordinance or part thereof is repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, such
ordinance or part thereof thus repealed shall continue in force until due publication of the ordinance
repealing or modifying the same, unless therein expressly provided otherwise; but no proceeding,
right, fine or penalty instituted, created or given, secured or acquired, under any ordinance previous to
its repeal or modification, shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be
prosecuted, enjoined and recovered as fully as if such ordinance had continued in force, unless it is
therein otherwise expressly provided. (Prior code § 1-4-9)
1.04.180: CONFLICTING PENALTIES:
In all cases where the same offense may be punishable or is created by different clauses of the
ordinances of the city, the prosecuting officer of the city may elect under which to proceed but no more
than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense. (Prior code § 1-4-10)
1.04.190: REPEAL SHALL NOT REVIVE ANY ORDINANCES:
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any
ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 871 § 9, 1977)
1.04.200: SPECIAL ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND ORDERS;
PRESENTATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 19/467
All ordinances of a special nature, resolutions in the nature of ordinances, and orders to enter into
contracts shall be presented in writing or printing to the council by one of its number. (Prior code § 1-4-
14)
1.04.210: SPECIAL ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND ORDERS; DISPOSITION:
Such orders, resolutions or ordinances referred to in section 1.04.200 of this chapter may be disposed
of on one reading, or otherwise as the council may determine. (Prior code § 1-4-15)
1.04.220: SPECIAL ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND ORDERS; PASSAGE:
On the final passage of such special ordinances, resolutions or orders, the yeas and nays shall be
called and recorded and the concurrence of a majority of the whole number elected to the council shall
be necessary to pass the same. (Prior code § 1-4-16)
1.04.230: SPECIAL ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND ORDERS; PRESENTATION
FOR SIGNATURE:
Special ordinances, resolutions or orders, if amended, shall be engrossed by city clerk and signed by
him when finally passed by the council, and he shall then present the same to the mayor or president
of the council for his consideration in the same manner and within the same time as in the case of
ordinances of a general nature. (Prior code § 1-4-17)
1.04.240: SPECIAL ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND ORDERS; COURSE
GENERALLY:
After presentation to the mayor or president of the council, special ordinances, resolutions or orders
shall take the same course as ordinances of general or permanent nature, except that the city clerk
shall not be required to publish resolutions or orders unless their publication is required by law. (Prior
code § 1-4-18)
Chapter 1.08
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
1.08.010: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The minimum requirements for direct legislation by the residents of the city through the initiative and
referendum as set forth in Idaho Code section 50-501, as enacted by the state legislature in 1977, is
adopted. (Ord. 864, 1977: prior code § 1-10-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 20/467
Chapter 1.12
GENERAL PENALTY1
1.12.010: DESIGNATED:
A. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory
requirements of any ordinance of the city is guilty of a misdemeanor. Except in cases where a
different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a
misdemeanor under the ordinances of the city shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
B. Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which
any violation of any provision of the ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by
any such person, and he is punishable accordingly. (Ord. 1329, 2010)
Chapter 1.16
BASE, BENCH MARK
1.16.010: BASE DESIGNATED AT SEA LEVEL:
The official city base, or plane of reference for the elevations in the city, is fixed at sea level as
ascertained by the United States geological survey of bench marks. (Prior code § 9-3-1)
1.16.020: BENCH MARK DESIGNATED:
The standard brass disk set on the east side of the south entrance to the post office by the United
States coast and geodetic survey is declared to be the primal bench mark of the city, and the elevation
thereof is two thousand one hundred fifty two and two hundred sixty five thousandths feet (2,152.265')
above the city base. (Prior code § 9-3-2)
Chapter 1.20
OFFICIAL MAP1
1.20.010: DESIGNATED; ADOPTED:
That certain map of the city compiled from the official records of the city by C.P. Lattig, city engineer,
on June 24, 1935, and as revised, is adopted as the official map of the city and the same shall be on
file in the office of the city clerk. (Prior code § 1-6-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 21/467
Chapter 1.24
CORPORATE SEAL1
1.24.010: DESIGN:
The corporate seal of the city shall consist of two (2) concentric circles, having within the
circumference of the outer circle and without the circumference of the inner circle the words "The Seal
of the City of Payette, Idaho"; and within the circumference of the inner circle upon the space within
said inner circle the words "July 16, 1891", and a pastoral scene depicting agricultural and timber
pursuits, and a man standing with a walking staff in hand. An impression of said seal is affixed and is
as follows:
(Ord. 945, 1983: prior code § 1-7-1)
1.24.020: ADOPTION:
The seal described in section 1.24.010 of this chapter is adopted as the seal of the city of Payette.
(Prior code § 1-7-2)
Chapter 1.28
NEWSPAPER1
1.28.010: DESIGNATED:
The Independent Enterprise, a newspaper published weekly in the city, is designated as the official
newspaper for the city. (Prior code § 1-5-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 22/467
Title 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04
MAYOR; CITY COUNCIL1
2.04.010: SALARIES:
Effective January 1, 1988, the mayor shall receive for his services as mayor five hundred dollars
($500.00) per month; and each councilman shall receive for his services three hundred dollars
($300.00) per month. (Ord. 975, 1987: Ord. 863, 1977: prior code § 1-11-1)
2.04.020: REGULAR MEETINGS:
The regular meetings of the council shall be held at the city hall on the first and third Mondays of each
and every month. (Prior code § 1-11-2)
2.04.030: SPECIAL MEETINGS:
The mayor or any three (3) councilmen shall have the power to call special meetings of the council,
the object which shall be submitted to the council in writing, and the call and object, as well as the
disposition thereof, shall be entered in the minutes record by the city clerk. (Prior code § 1-11-3)
2.04.040: SPECIAL COUNSEL:
The mayor, with the consent and advice of the council, shall have the power to employ such special
counsel and assistance as may be necessary for advising the council relative to the legal affairs of the
city, for drafting ordinances therefor, and for the doing of such other legal work as may be considered
necessary by such council, all of which work shall be performed under the direct supervision of the
regular city attorney and shall be paid for out of the general fund. (Prior code § 1-11-4)
2.04.050: STANDING COMMITTEES:
All standing committees of the council that are appointed or may be provided for shall consist of three
(3) members of the council; provided, however, that the committee on health, drainage and cemetery
shall consist of the entire council, and the mayor shall be ex officio chairman of said committee. (Prior
code § 1-11-5)
2.04.060: LEAVE OF ABSENCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 23/467
No council member, unless from illness or other reasonable cause which makes him unable to be in
attendance, shall absent himself from any special or regular meeting of the council without first having
obtained a leave of absence from the mayor or the president of the council. (Prior code § 1-11-6)
2.04.070: ABSENT WITHOUT LEAVE; WARRANT FOR ARREST:
A majority of the council members present at any regular or special meeting of the council may order
the arrest of council members not in attendance and who are absent without leave.
The form of warrant for the arrest of council members who are absent without leave shall be as
follows:
CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PAYETTE, IDAHO
To the Chief of Police or the police officers of the City of Payette, Idaho:
Whereas, the City Council has adopted the following order: That the Chief of Police or the police
officer of the City of Payette, Idaho take into custody and bring to the meeting of the City Council such
council Members as are found absent without leave; and
Whereas, the following named members of the City Council are absent without leave, to-wit:
(Names of Members)
NOW, therefore, I , Mayor of the City of Payette, Idaho (or President of the City Council of the City
of Payette, Idaho), by virtue of the power vested in me by the City Council, hereby command you to
execute the said Order of the City Council, by taking into custody and bringing to the meeting of the
City Council at on the day of , 20 , said above named Council Members who are so absent without
leave; hereof fail not, and make due return in what manner you executed the same.
In Witness Whereof, I have hereunto set my hand this day of , 20 .
Mayor
President of Council.
ATTEST:
Clerk
(Prior code § 1-11-7)
2.04.080: ABSENT WITHOUT LEAVE; FORFEITURE OF SALARY:
Whenever a council member who, without reasonable cause, absents himself from a regular or
special meeting of the council without first having obtained leave of absence from the mayor or
president of the council, although the council member may have been subsequently compelled to
attend by virtue of section 2.04.070 of this chapter, such council member shall forfeit one-half (1/2) of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 24/467
the salary that he receives each month for services performed by him as a council member. (Prior
code § 1-11-8)
2.04.090: PUBLIC HEARING RULES OF PROCEDURE:
The following rules are hereby established, shall be observed in the conduct of any public hearing
before the city council of the city of Payette and shall be known as the "Payette rules of procedure".
PRP 1: No person shall be permitted to testify or speak before the city council at a public hearing
unless such person has signed his name and written his residential address thereafter on signup
sheets to be provided by the city. This rule shall not apply to staff or technical witnesses directed by
the mayor to give evidence or information to the city council.
PRP 2: No person shall be permitted to speak before the city council at a public hearing until such
person has been recognized by the mayor.
PRP 3: All public hearing proceedings shall be recorded electronically or stenographically and all
persons speaking at such public hearings shall speak before a microphone in such a manner as will
assure that the recorded testimony or remarks will be accurate and trustworthy.
PRP 4: At the commencement of the public hearing the city council may establish a time limit to be
observed by all speakers. If a time limit is established, it shall be done on the basis of the number of
speakers who sign up for each public hearing and shall apply only to the speaker's comments.
PRP 5: The speaker shall not be interrupted by members of the city council until his time limit has
been expended or until he has finished his statement.
PRP 6: At the conclusion of a speaker's comments, each city councilman, when recognized by the
mayor, shall be allowed to question the speaker and the speaker shall be limited to answers to the
questions asked. The question and answer period shall not be included in the speaker's time limit, as
established.
PRP 7: When the public hearing is quasi-judicial in nature or one after which the city council is
required by law to make findings of fact, each speaker must swear or affirm that his testimony will be
true and correct.
PRP 8: Any person not conforming to any of the above rules may be prohibited from speaking during
the public hearing. Should any person refuse to comply with such prohibition, he may be removed
from the room by order of the mayor.
PRP 9: The city council may suspend or amend any one or more of these rules by vote of one-half
(1/2) plus one of the full city council.
PRP 10: The mayor shall have the authority to interpret and apply the foregoing rules, subject to an
appeal to the city council, whose decision shall be determined by a majority vote of the council
members present. (Ord. 937 § 1, 1982)
2.04.100: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 25/467
A. Neither the mayor nor any council member may participate in any matter in which they may have a
conflict of interest, either by voting or by discussion, unless they have first disclosed the conflict
and have been requested to participate in the issue by a majority vote of the members of the
council not having a conflict.
B. Nothing herein shall prevent the council from asking questions of any person who has declared a
conflict of interest nor prevent the council from releasing the mayor or a council member from a
conflict by a majority vote of nonconflicted members and allowing them to participate without any
restrictions.
C. Any person who shall violate this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable in
accordance with the general misdemeanor statutes of the state of Idaho. A violation of this section
shall not render a decision made by the council void, voidable or unenforceable, unless a change
in the conflicted member(s) or mayor's vote would alter the outcome of a decision.
D. The definitions of Idaho Code section 59-703 are adopted by reference. This section shall have no
effect upon the rules regarding conflict of interest in zoning matters which are settled by section
67-6506, Idaho Code. (Ord. 1111 § 1, 1995)
Chapter 2.08
APPOINTED OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
2.08.010: APPOINTED OFFICIALS:
Pursuant to section 50-204 of the Idaho Code, the mayor, with the consent of the council, shall appoint
a city clerk, a city treasurer and a city attorney. Their duties shall be as defined by sections 50-207,
50-208 and 5-208A of the Idaho Code. Other duties may be set out in an employee manual or an
employee handbook or such other document as may be adopted by the city. (Ord. 1245 § 2, 2005)
2.08.020: OTHER CITY OFFICIALS:
Notwithstanding the specific appointments as set out in section 2.08.010 of this chapter, the mayor,
with the consent of the council, may appoint such other officials as the city may deem necessary or
appropriate for the efficient operation of the city. Their duties may be set out in an employee manual or
an employee handbook or such other document as may be adopted by the city. (Ord. 1245 § 2, 2005)
2.08.030: CITY EMPLOYEES:
The city may hire such employees as the city may deem necessary or appropriate for the efficient
operation of the city. Their duties may be set out in an employee manual or an employee handbook or
such other document as may be adopted by the city. (Ord. 1245 § 2, 2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 26/467
Chapter 2.12
CITY CLERK
(Rep. by Ord. 1245 § 1, 2005)
Chapter 2.16
CITY TREASURER
(Rep. by Ord. 1245 § 1, 2005)
Chapter 2.20
CITY ATTORNEY
(Rep. by Ord. 1245 § 1, 2005)
Chapter 2.22
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY
(Rep. by Ord. 1250 § 1, 2005)
Chapter 2.24
CHIEF OF POLICE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 27/467
(Rep. by Ord. 1245 § 1, 2005)
Chapter 2.28
FIRE CHIEF
(Rep. by Ord. 1245 § 1, 2005)
Chapter 2.32
CITY ENGINEER
(Rep. by Ord. 1245 § 1, 2005)
Chapter 2.34
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS
(Rep. by Ord. 1245 § 1, 2005)
Chapter 2.36
BUILDING INSPECTOR
(Rep. by Ord. 1245 § 1, 2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 28/467
Chapter 2.40
FIRE DEPARTMENT
(Rep. by Ord. 1245 § 1, 2005)
Chapter 2.44
POLICE DEPARTMENT
(Rep. by Ord. 1245 § 1, 2005)
Chapter 2.48
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES1
2.48.010: LIBRARY AND READING ROOM; ESTABLISHED; FUNDING:
A public library and reading room is established in the city under the provisions of chapter 26 of title 33
of the Idaho Code and, for such purpose, the city council shall annually levy and cause to be
collected, as other taxes are, a tax up to but not exceeding one-tenth percent (0.10%) of market value
of the taxable property of the city to constitute a library fund. All fines, fees, donations, gifts, or
property accepted in accordance with library board policy shall be deposited with the city treasurer
and included as a part of the library fund. Said fund shall be kept by the city treasurer, and shall be
used exclusively for the purchase of books, periodicals, necessary furniture and fixtures and whatever
is required for the maintenance of such library, subject to the city budgeting process. Donations and
gifts offered and accepted for specific purposes shall only be used for those purposes. (Ord. 1109 § 1,
1995: prior code § 2-2-1)
2.48.020: APPOINTMENT; VACANCY FILLING; COMPENSATION:
A. For the government of the public library, there shall be a board of five (5) library trustees appointed
by the mayor and approved by the city council from among the citizens that reside and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 29/467
continuously maintain their residency within the city of Payette. Such trustees shall hold their office
for five (5) years from the date of appointment and until their successors are appointed. The term
of each trustee shall end December 31 of the fifth year after appointment. Each year, the city
council shall appoint one of its members to be a liaison to the board, but he/she will have no voting
rights.
B. Any vacancy on the board shall be reported to the mayor within five (5) days by its trustees, and
shall be filled by appointment in the same manner as appointments are originally made.
Appointments to complete an unexpired term shall be for the remainder of the term only. Vacancies
automatically occur when a board member moves out of the city limits, dies or their term expires.
C. No compensation shall be paid or allowed to any trustee other than being reimbursed for expenses
incurred which were previously approved by the city council for library related activities. (Ord.
1424, 2017)
2.48.030: ORGANIZATION; POWER OF MONETARY EXPENDITURES;
APPOINTMENT OF LIBRARIAN:
A. The library board of trustees shall, immediately after their appointment, meet and organize by
election of one of their number as president and by the election of such other officers as they may
deem necessary. They shall make and adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for their guidance
and for the government of the library and reading room as may be expedient.
B. All funds for the library shall be in the custody of the city treasurer and shall be used only for library
purposes. The library board shall have the exclusive control of the expenditure of all monies
collected and budgeted for the library fund, and the supervision, care, and custody of the room or
building constructed, leased or set apart for that purpose; and such monies shall be drawn from
the city treasury by the proper officers and by properly authenticated vouchers of the board without
otherwise being audited. The board shall not make expenditures or incur indebtedness in any year
in excess of the amount of money appropriated for library purposes. The board may, with the
approval of the mayor and city council, lease and occupy or purchase or erect, on purchased
ground, an appropriate building; provided, that not more than one-half (1/2) of the income in any
one year can be set apart in said year for such purchase or building.
C. They may appoint a librarian and assistants, and prescribe rules for their conduct. (Ord. 1109 § 3,
1995: prior code § 2-2-3)
2.48.040: LIBRARY AND READING ROOM; FREE USE TO RESIDENTS;
EXCLUSION WHEN:
The public library and reading room established under section 2.48.010 of this chapter shall be forever
free for the use of the residents of the city, subject to such reasonable rules and regulations as the
library board may find necessary to adopt and publish in order to render the use of the library and
reading room of the greatest benefit to the greatest number, and they may exclude and cut off from
the use of said library and reading room any and all persons who wilfully violate such rules. (Prior
code § 2-2-4)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 30/467
2.48.050: FILING OF ANNUAL OPERATIONS REPORT:
The library board of trustees shall annually, and no later than January 1 of each year, file with the state
library board, a report of the operations of the library for the fiscal year just ended, stating the
condition of their trust; the various sums of money received from the library fund and from all sources,
and how much has been expended; the number of books and periodicals on hand, and the number
added by purchase, gift or otherwise during the year; the number lost or missing; the number of books
loaned out and the general character of such books, with such other statistics, information and
suggestions as they may deem of general interest and the state library board may require. The report
shall be of such form and contain such information as the state library board may require, but in all
cases must include a complete accounting of all financial transactions for the fiscal year being
reported. The library board of trustees shall present the report to the city council at the second
regularly scheduled city council meeting in January. (Ord. 1109 § 4, 1995: prior code § 2-2-5)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 2.52
PLANNING COMMISSION1
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
2.52.010: CREATED:
There is created a planning commission for the city, which commission shall be known and designated
as the "city of Payette planning and zoning commission". The planning and zoning commission may
from time to time be referred to as simply the planning commission or as the commission. (Ord. 1208,
2002: prior code § 2-1-1)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
2.52.020: COMPOSITION; QUALIFICATIONS; TERM OF OFFICE:
A. The planning and zoning commission shall consist of seven (7) members to be appointed by the
mayor and confirmed by the council.
B. All members shall be residents of the city, except that one member may be a resident of the
Payette city impact area.
C. All appointed members of the planning commission shall be appointed for and shall hold office for a
term of six (6) years. In the event of the death, resignation or any vacancy in said commission,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 31/467
such vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the mayor and confirmation by the council for the
unexpired term of such member or members. (Ord. 1208, 2002: prior code § 2-1-2)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
2.52.030: ORGANIZATION:
The planning commission shall at its first meeting elect a president and a vice president, who shall be
members appointed by the mayor and who shall hold office during the pleasure of the commission.
(Prior code § 2-1-3)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
2.52.040: COMPENSATION; SECRETARY; MEETINGS:
A. Members of the planning commission shall receive a monthly stipend in the amount of thirty five
dollars ($35.00). Members of the planning commission who do not attend the regular monthly
meeting of the planning commission, or if a planning commission meeting is not held in any one
month, will not receive a stipend for that month.
B. The planning commission shall elect a secretary who need not be a member of the commission.
Such secretary shall keep an accurate record of all proceedings of the commission and the
commission shall on the first Monday of May of each year make and file with the council a report of
all transactions of the commission.
C. The commission shall hold meetings at least once each calendar month and at such other times as
may be necessary.
D. The members of the planning and zoning commission shall attend regularly scheduled meetings
unless excused from attendance prior to the meeting. Reasons to be excused include personal
illness, family emergencies or out of town business trips. Members whose unexcused absences
exceed forty percent (40%) in any given calendar year may be removed from the planning and
zoning commission by the mayor with the approval of council. (Ord. 1379, 2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
2.52.050: POWERS AND DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the planning commission to study economic, social and physical conditions of
the city, and to recommend and make suggestions to the council and to all other public authorities
concerning the laying out, widening, extending, parking and locating of streets, sidewalks and
boulevards, the establishment of setback lines, the relief of traffic congestion, the betterment of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 32/467
housing and sanitation conditions, and the establishment of zones and districts limiting the use,
height, area and bulk of buildings and structures; to recommend to the council and all other public
authorities, plans for the regulation of the future growth, development and beautification of the
municipality in respect to its public and private buildings and work, streets, parks, grounds and vacant
lots, and plans consistent with the future growth and development of the city, in order to secure the
city and its inhabitants sanitation, proper service of all public utilities, and transportation facilities; and
in general to study and to propose such measures as may be advisable for the promotion of the public
interest, health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience and welfare of the city, and of the area for five
(5) miles adjacent thereto. (Prior code § 2-1-5)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
2.52.060: COOPERATION FROM CITY DEPARTMENTS REQUIRED; AUTHORITY
TO CALL FOR ASSISTANCE:
All departments and employees of the city are instructed to cooperate with and furnish to the planning
commission maps, reports and all available data necessary for the commission to properly and
adequately carry out its functions. The planning commission is also authorized to appoint such
technical and advisory committees as are necessary to carry out its work, and to call upon the citizens
of the community and the various civic organizations for cooperation and assistance to the end that a
coordinated program of city planning may be promoted. (Prior code § 2-1-6)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
2.52.070: PUBLIC WORKS; SUBMITTAL FOR STUDY AND RECOMMENDATION:
All matters pertaining to the planning, laying out, and the development and construction of public
works shall be submitted to the planning commission for its study and recommendations before being
presented to the council. The various departments of the city government, in submitting plans and
recommendations to the council, are required to furnish copies in full duplicate to the planning
commission. (Prior code § 2-1-7)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
2.52.080: COORDINATION WITH OTHER COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as infringing upon the authority previously granted to any
existing commission or board but provides that such commissions or boards shall coordinate their
efforts with the planning commission to the end that a more comprehensive plan of the city
development may be evolved. (Prior code § 2-1-8)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 33/467
2.52.090: EXPENDITURE OF CITY MONEY; COUNCIL AUTHORIZATION
REQUIRED:
The planning commission shall have no authority to make expenditures on behalf of the city nor to
obligate the city for the payment of any sum of money, unless authorized by the council who shall
specify the administrative method by which such funds shall be expended. (Prior code § 2-1-9)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
2.52.100: STANDING COMMITTEES:
The mayor shall have the power to provide for various standing committees composed of members of
the planning commission, and he shall appoint from the planning commission the members of each
committee. Each standing committee shall have the duty and power to study the problems and
conditions existing within its particular scope and field, and each standing committee shall submit its
recommendations and suggestions relating to the problems and conditions existing within its particular
scope and field to the planning commission. (Prior code § 2-1-10)
Chapter 2.56
TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 1372, 2013)
Chapter 2.60
OFFICERS' OATHS AND BONDS1
2.60.010: OATHS:
The various officers of the city shall take and subscribe, before some person authorized to administer
oaths, such oaths as are required by law of municipal officers, which oath shall be filed with the clerk.
No officer of the city shall enter upon the performance of his duties until he has so subscribed to and
filed such oath as stated in this section. (Prior code § 1-12-2)
2.60.020: BONDS:
All officers and employees before entering upon the duties of their offices shall file with the city clerk a
good and sufficient bond with sufficient sureties, to be approved by the council, for the faithful
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 34/467
performance of the duties of their respective offices, and bonds shall be held by the city in the
following amounts:
A. Public official: Treasurer bond in the amount of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) on the treasurer
in favor of the city;
B. Fidelity depositors: Forgery bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) carried for the
city;
C. Public official: Blanket position honesty form bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) carried on employees in favor of the city. (Prior code § 1-12-1)
Chapter 2.64
VACATIONS AND SICK LEAVE
2.64.010: DESIGNATED:
The appointed officers and employees of the city shall accrue vacation time, sick leave and personal
leave as is set forth in the employee manual, which manual has heretofore been adopted by the city,
and as the same may be changed or amended, from time to time. Each employee shall be given a
copy of the manual when he becomes employed by the city and shall be given an updated copy when
the same shall be amended or changed. (Ord. 1060 § 2, 1993: prior code §§ 1-22-1, 1-22-2, 1-22-3)
2.64.020: EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER:
The city is an equal opportunity employer and does not discriminate in hiring or employment for any
constitutionally or statutorily prohibited reasons. The city clerk shall post a notice which complies with
state or federal rules indicating that the city is an equal opportunity employer. (Ord. 1060 § 3, 1993)
Chapter 2.75
ADOPTION OF PAYETTE MUNICIPAL AIRPORT MINIMUM
STANDARDS FOR FIXED BASE OPERATORS AND
AIRPORT TENANTS AT THE PAYETTE MUNICIPAL
AIRPORT
2.75.010: PURPOSE:
These minimum standards are intended to provide threshold entry requirements for those wishing to
perform commercial aeronautical activities, which provide aeronautical products and services to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 35/467
public, at the Payette municipal airport. The minimum standards for the Payette municipal airport are
made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 1282 § 2, 2007)
2.75.020: STANDARDS ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted the "minimum standards for fixed base operators and airport tenants at the
Payette municipal airport" as adopted by the city council on July 16, 2007, and as may be amended
and approved by the city council. A copy of this document is available at city hall, the Payette
municipal airport, and the Payette city library. (Ord. 1282 § 2, 2007)
2.75.030: VIOLATIONS:
Violators of these rules and regulations are subject to civil and criminal penalties as prescribed by the
authorities of the city. Any violations for which penalties are not prescribed shall be considered
misdemeanor violations and shall be punished by fine and/or imprisonment up to but not exceeding
the maximum penalties set forth in Idaho Code section 50-302, as amended. (Ord. 1282 § 2, 2007)
Chapter 2.78
AIRPORT COMMISSION
2.78.010: CREATED:
There is hereby created an airport commission for the city, which commission shall be known and
designated as the "city of Payette airport commission". The airport commission may from time to time
be referred to simply as the commission. (Ord. 1282 § 1, 2007)
2.78.020: COMPOSITION; QUALIFICATIONS; TERM OF OFFICE:
A. Composition: The airport commission shall consist of five (5) members and one alternate member
to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council. At least one of the five (5) members
shall be experienced in aviation, holding some level of pilot's license or some other aeronautical
rating. In the absence of a regular member during a regular meeting, the alternate member shall
assume the seat of the absent regular member for the duration of that meeting. The alternate
member assuming the regular member's seat shall have all the powers, including, but not limited
to, voting powers, of the regular members. Vacancies of regular members during the term shall be
filled by the alternate member for the unexpired portion of the regular member's term. Vacancies of
the alternate member during the term shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the
council for the unexpired portion of the alternate member's term. A city council member may be
appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council to serve as a nonvoting council liaison. The
city administrator or a designee shall serve as an advisor to the commission.
B. Qualifications: All members shall be residents of the city, except that one member may be a
resident of the Payette city impact area, and one member may be a resident of rural Payette
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 36/467
County as long as there is an agreement in place between the city of Payette and Payette County
for fiscal contributions to the Payette municipal airport.
C. Term Of Office: The first board shall be appointed in a staggered manner. Two (2) members
appointed for a one year term, two (2) for a two (2) year term and one for a three (3) year term.
The alternate member shall be appointed for a two (2) year term. Thereafter, all appointed
members of the airport commission shall be appointed for and shall hold office for a term of three
(3) years. Members' three (3) year terms shall end on June 30 of the third consecutive year. A
member of the board will be appointed or reappointed each year. There will be no limit on the
number of consecutive terms which a member may serve. In the event of the death, resignation or
any vacancy in said commission, such vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the mayor and
confirmation by the council for the unexpired term of such member or members.
D. Removal From Office: Any member can be removed with or without cause. In the event the
removal is recommended by the mayor, the removal shall be by a simple majority vote of the city
council. In the event the removal is not recommended by the mayor it shall take a unanimous vote
of a quorum of the council to effect a removal. (Ord. 1407, 2016: Ord. 1289 § 1, 2008: Ord. 1282
§ 1, 2007)
2.78.030: ORGANIZATION:
The airport commission shall at its first meeting elect a president and a vice president, who shall be
members appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council and who shall hold office during the
pleasure of the commission. (Ord. 1282 § 1, 2007)
2.78.040: COMPENSATION; SECRETARY; MEETINGS:
A. Compensation: Members of the airport commission shall receive no compensation.
B. Secretary: The airport commission shall elect a secretary who need not be a member of the
commission. Such secretary shall keep an accurate record of all proceedings of the commission
and the commission shall provide minutes of its meetings to the city after each regular or special
meeting of the commission. The commission shall maintain such records as are required by law,
provided for by policies of the commission or as the city may from time to time request.
C. Meetings: The commission shall hold meetings at least once each calendar month and at such
other times as may be necessary. (Ord. 1282 § 1, 2007)
2.78.050: POWERS AND DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the airport commission to:
A. Propose to the council rules and regulations governing airport operations, including, without
limitation, the use and maintenance of the city's airport property, operations conducted by the FBO,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 37/467
and the installation, maintenance and/or operation of hangars, repair shops, depots, taxiways,
utilities and other facilities at the airport.
B. Propose to the city plans for future growth and development of the airport, to promote public
interest and welfare and enhance the safe, environmentally sound and efficient operation of the
airport.
C. Propose to the city such other rules and regulations as are necessary or desirable to carry out the
intent and purpose of this chapter.
D. Keep the city advised as to the progress of airport developments, the availability of federal and
state grants, any problems associated with airport operations, rules, regulations and laws
applicable to airport operations, and such other matters relating to airport operations as may be
requested by the city.
E. Propose to the council a fee schedule for airport uses, collect any and all fees, rents and other
sums due the city for use of the airport, remit and account for those funds to the city treasurer.
F. Pursue enforcement of all rules, regulations, ordinances and laws of the city, the state of Idaho and
the United States Of America insofar as the same are applicable to the operation of the airport.
(Ord. 1289 § 2, 2008: Ord. 1282 § 1, 2007)
2.78.055: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The board shall submit to the council for approval such rules and regulations as the board deems
necessary for the airport operation. Any rule or regulation which the city council might approve and
which would have a penalty associated with it in the event of a violation shall be approved in the form
of a city ordinance. (Ord. 1282 § 1, 2007)
2.78.060: COOPERATION FROM CITY DEPARTMENTS REQUIRED; AUTHORITY
TO CALL FOR ASSISTANCE:
Subject to the demands of their own programs and supervisors, all departments and employees of the
city are instructed to cooperate with and furnish to the airport commission maps, reports and all
available data necessary for the commission to properly and adequately carry out its functions. The
airport commission is also authorized, without binding the city to any fiscal liability, to appoint such
technical and advisory committees as are necessary to carry out its work, and to call upon the citizens
of the community and the various civic organizations for cooperation and assistance to the end that a
coordinated program of city airport may be promoted. (Ord. 1282 § 1, 2007)
2.78.070: PUBLIC WORKS SUBMITTAL FOR STUDY AND RECOMMENDATION:
All matters pertaining to the airport, laying out, and the development and construction of public works
shall be submitted to the airport commission for its study and recommendations before being
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 38/467
presented to the council. The various departments of the city government, in submitting plans and
recommendations to the council regarding the airport, are required to furnish copies in full duplicate to
the airport commission. (Ord. 1282 § 1, 2007)
2.78.080: COORDINATION WITH OTHER COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as infringing upon the authority previously granted to any
existing commission or board but provides that such commissions or boards shall coordinate their
efforts with the airport commission to the end that a more comprehensive plan of the city development
may be evolved. (Ord. 1282 § 1, 2007)
2.78.090: EXPENDITURE OF CITY MONEY; COUNCIL AUTHORIZATION
REQUIRED:
The airport commission shall have no authority to make expenditures on behalf of the city nor to
obligate the city for the payment of any sum of money, unless authorized by the council who shall
specify the administrative method by which such funds shall be expended. (Ord. 1282 § 1, 2007)
2.78.100: STANDING COMMITTEES:
The mayor shall have the power to provide for various standing committees composed of members of
the airport commission, and he shall appoint from the airport commission the members of each
committee. Each standing committee shall have the duty and power to study the problems and
conditions existing within its particular scope and field, and each standing committee shall submit its
recommendations and suggestions relating to the problems and conditions existing within its particular
scope and field to the airport commission. (Ord. 1282 § 1, 2007)
Title 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND1
3.04.010: ESTABLISHING A CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND:
The city does hereby elect to establish a capital improvement fund pursuant to the authority conferred
by Idaho Code section 50-236, and there is hereby created a "capital improvement fund" for the city of
Payette to be used for the lease, construction, purchase, improvement or repair of city shops, city
offices, fire station, swimming pool complex, library building, band shell, and park maintenance
buildings. (Ord. 1018 § 1, 1991: Ord. 959, 1985: Ord. 935 § 1, 1982: prior code § 1-26-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 39/467
Chapter 3.07
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION FRANCHISE1
3.07.010: GRANTING OF EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE:
There is hereby granted and authorized by the city of Payette (hereinafter referred to as "city") to
Hardin Sanitation, Inc., an Idaho corporation, whose principal place of business is Payette, Idaho
(hereinafter referred to as "grantee"), the right, privilege and authority to operate and maintain an
exclusive franchise solid waste collection and transfer system, and any services that may be incidental
thereto, within the city, thereby using the streets of the city for the conduct of their business
(hereinafter referred to as "franchise"). The franchise shall include the exclusive right to place garbage
receptacles, dumpsters, garbage cans or other containers to pick up or collect garbage, refuse or solid
waste within appropriate portions of the right of way. This franchise shall also include the exclusive
right to solicit for business to haul, remove or recycle any and all garbage, solid waste or recyclable
material. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.020: GRANTEE RULES:
The grantee shall have the authority to make such rules governing its business as may be reasonably
necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under this franchise
and to assure uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers. Provided, however, such rules
shall not conflict with the laws of the state of Idaho, the city of Payette, nor with the franchise signed
by the grantee and the city. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.030: PROHIBITING OTHERS FROM HAULING SOLID WASTE:
No person, firm, company, employee, or other entity, other than the grantee, shall enter the city and
engage in, or attempt to engage in, the business of solid waste collection, hauling or transfer of solid
waste, removal of garbage, or removal of solid waste from the residents or businesses of the city. No
person, firm, company, employee, or other entity, other than the grantee, shall solicit, offer to haul,
enter into any contract to engage in the business of solid waste collection, hauling or transfer of solid
waste or removal of garbage, removal of solid waste from the residents, or businesses of the city. No
person, firm, company, employee, or other entity other than the grantee, shall place garbage
receptacles, dumpsters, garbage cans or other containers to pick up or collect garbage, refuse or solid
waste. No person, firm, company, employee or entity other than the grantee, shall solicit for business
to haul, transfer, remove or recycle any garbage, solid waste or recyclable materials. Such prohibitions
shall take effect upon the first publication of this chapter in the city's official newspaper. (Ord. 1235,
2004)
3.07.040: DURATION:
This franchise and all rights and privileges and authority hereby granted shall take effect immediately
upon passage and publication as required by law. This franchise shall remain in full force and effect
for a period of fifteen (15) years after the date it shall go into effect. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 40/467
3.07.050: SERVICE FOR RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL CUSTOMERS:
Grantee shall provide weekly pick up service in residential areas and, where required, shall provide
daily service during weekdays to commercial areas within the city. Grantee shall not deposit solid
waste except in solid waste acceptance or disposal facilities approved by the state of Idaho or its
political subdivisions in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, and
regulations. Grantee shall not manage or dispose of any part of the waste stream collected pursuant
to this franchise within the city or in any manner that results in violation of local, state or federal laws.
(Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.060: FRANCHISE FEE:
City shall receive on a monthly basis as a franchise fee, twelve percent (12%) of the gross receipts
from residential collections. The franchise fee shall not include any rental income generated from
residential or commercial carts or containers. Payment of the twelve percent (12%) fee shall extend to
the grantee within the city. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.070: RESERVED:
(Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.080: LIMITATION OF NUMBER OF CANS:
Residential users shall be served by collection of not more than three (3) 32-gallon cans (60 pound
limit per can) per dwelling (hereinafter referred to as the "limitation"). This limitation shall apply even if
a residential dwelling is converted into a multi-unit or multi-family dwelling. Grantee may charge
additional service fees for volumes of solid waste in excess of this limitation. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.090: POINT OF PICK UP:
Cans for pick up shall be placed at the edge of the street or alley by the owner or resident where
grantee shall be required to pick up the same. In the event that a can or refuse disposal device which
is to be picked up and emptied by grantee is not at curbside on the day set for refuse collection,
grantee shall not be required to pick up the same. Garbage or refuse shall not be placed upon the
ground in sacks, garbage bags, boxes or other containers, which containers are not capable of
keeping animals from gaining access to the garbage. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.100: MINIMUM FEES:
The fee charged for the limitation shall be considered a minimum fee. In the event that a resident
chooses to use in excess of the limitation, grantee shall have the right to haul the excess can(s) and
make arrangements with the residential user to charge an additional fee. A copy of the fee schedule is
attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated herein by reference as exhibit A. (Ord.
1235, 2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 41/467
3.07.110: FEES FOR CUSTOMERS:
Fees for residential and commercial customers are hereby established at the rate in effect at the time
of adoption of this chapter. Any subsequent increase in rates shall be subject to city approval. (Ord.
1235, 2004)
3.07.120: RECYCLING:
Grantee shall have the exclusive right for curbside recycling. No person or organization shall salvage
or recycle from any commercial container or residential container, the user of which is a customer of
grantee without the permission of grantee. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.130: AVAILABILITY OF GRANTEE:
Grantee shall be available to the public and shall have an office and telephone open from eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M. Monday through Friday. Grantee's business name and
telephone number shall be painted in legible characters on both sides of all vehicles used to transport
solid waste in the city. Grantee's business name and telephone number shall be printed by use of
paint or decal in legible characters on the front of all commercial containers used by grantee to store
and collect solid waste in the city. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.140: COMPLAINTS:
Grantee shall respond and attempt to rectify any complaints about grantee's service. All work or
collection crews operating solid waste collection systems shall take reasonable care to protect the
property of customers being served. Any damage or spillage of materials, occurring as a result of
grantee's actions shall be grantee's responsibility, provided that the reason for such damage or
spillage is the fault of grantee's employees or agents. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.150: RESPONSIBILITY OF GRANTEE:
Grantee shall be responsible to ensure that its vehicles are watertight, readily emptied, cleaned with
sufficient frequency to prevent insect breeding or odors or other nuisances. The vehicles shall be
maintained in good repair and safe condition. All waste must be secured to the vehicle or container
and enclosed or covered with secured tarpaulins to prevent leakage, spillage, dust or litter. Such
enclosures and tarpaulins must remain in place until arrival at the designated unloading or uncovering
areas. Grantee shall not cause solid waste, except recyclables, to remain or to be stored in any
collection or haulage vehicle. In case of inclement weather, act of God, or emergency such as
equipment breakdown or accident, no solid waste shall be allowed to remain or to be stored in any
collection or haulage vehicle in excess of twenty four (24) hours. If an emergency arises or inclement
weather occurs, grantee is responsible for having the material removed to its intended destination in a
timely manner. All vehicles operated by grantee shall comply with all state and federal safety
standards while operating within the city. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.160: PROHIBITION AGAINST SPILLAGE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 42/467
Grantee shall not cause a vehicle to be used for the collection or haulage of solid waste if the design
of the vehicle is such that any material will be allowed to spill onto any roadway. Grantee shall not
cause a vehicle used for hauling solid waste to be used beyond its capabilities or in such a manner
that littering or spillage of the contents could occur. Grantee shall not collect, transfer, transport or
deliver any solid waste in the city in such a manner as to allow for littering, spillage or the creation of a
nuisance in any other manner. All loads shall be secured and covered. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.170: BURNING OR SMOKING MATERIALS:
Grantee shall not collect, transfer, transport or deliver to any disposal facility any material that is
smoking or showing evidence of smoking, smoldering or burning. In the event grantee must dump
materials in transit in an emergency due to smoking, smoldering or burning, grantee shall be
responsible for immediately notifying the police and fire departments having jurisdiction and shall be
responsible for cleanup of materials dumped during the emergency. Cleanup shall be accomplished
promptly, but in no event later than twenty four (24) hours after dumping and the dumped material
shall then be properly disposed of. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.180: MAINTENANCE OF CANS:
All residential customers shall maintain garbage cans or containers with lids to protect against spillage
or access by animals. Cans or containers that become a health hazard may be disposed of by the
grantee after notice to the customer. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.190: ANNEXATION:
The franchise shall apply to any real property annexed into the city after the first publication of this
chapter, subject to existing contracts for solid waste hauling in effect at the time of annexation. (Ord.
1235, 2004)
3.07.200: APARTMENT COMPLEXES:
All apartment complexes with three (3) or more units shall have a commercial container. (Ord. 1235,
2004)
3.07.210: RESPONSIBILITY OF WASTE GENERATOR:
A residential or commercial generator of solid waste shall bear the responsibility for maintaining waste
cans and containers and shall be responsible for maintaining the area around such cans and
containers in a clean, sanitary and odor free condition. In the event the generator of waste refuses or
neglects to maintain or keep such cans or containers in a clean or sanitary condition, grantee shall
notify the city of the condition. The city shall then notify the generator. The generator of waste shall
clean the cans or containers, or clean the area within ten (10) days, as applicable. If the area, cans or
containers are not cleaned within ten (10) days, grantee may assume responsibility for cleanup and
present its costs and expenses which are incurred in the cleanup to the city clerk. The city clerk shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 43/467
then bill grantee's costs and expenses to the generator. The generator shall be responsible for paying
the city for any cleanup that is necessitated as a result of the producers not complying with the notice
from the city. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.220: INGRESS AND EGRESS:
This franchise grants to grantee the right of ingress and egress, to cross all public streets, alleys, and
rights of way in the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to deny reasonable access to grantee to
collect solid waste or recyclables from a commercial premises or residential unit or to fail to place solid
waste where it can be accessed from an appropriate public right of way. Grantee shall follow the
traveled portion of streets, alleys, and roadways, or the regular walks for pedestrians while on private
property, and shall take care in loading of such waste so that the material to be collected is not left
upon the private property or upon the streets, alleys, or roadways. Grantee shall return the containers
with all properly prepared and legal contents removed and replace the lid thereon. Grantee shall not
place any obstructions to traffic in any street or alley while carrying out this franchise. Collections shall
be made on the streets and rights of way of the city in a manner which creates the least delay and
inconvenience to the public. Grantee will use buckeyes and alleys whenever possible. (Ord. 1235,
2004)
3.07.230: INSURANCE:
Grantee shall obtain and submit certificates of insurance issued by insurers duly licensed by the state
of Idaho providing the following coverage:
A. General liability coverage in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury
and/or property damage, per occurrence, with a two million dollar ($2,000,000.00) aggregate; and
B. Automobile liability coverage in the amounts of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) bodily injury
and/or property damage. The city shall be named as an additional insured and shall be defended
and indemnified regarding all activities carried out pursuant to the franchise. All policies shall be
endorsed to require that the insurer provide at least sixty (60) days' notice to the city prior to the
effective date of policy cancellation, nonrenewal or material adverse change in coverage terms.
Grantee shall maintain insurance in compliance with this subsection throughout the term of the
franchise and provide evidence of such coverage to the city upon request. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.240: HOLD HARMLESS:
Grantee shall take all reasonable precautions necessary to protect the public from injury and shall
defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liability, damages, costs, judgments, expenses,
and claims of damages that may arise by reason of any tort claim for bodily or personal injury,
disease, death or damage to property resulting directly or indirectly from an act or omission of grantee,
its agents, employees, or independent contractors. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.250: CANCELLATION IN THE EVENT OF DEFAULT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 44/467
Either the city or the grantee may cancel or terminate the franchise if the other is in substantial and
material violation or default of the franchise and the defaulting party fails to cure the default within sixty
(60) days of notification. Notification shall be in writing, sent by registered mail, to the city at 700
Center Avenue, Payette, ID 83661, and to the grantee at 141 N. 20th Street, Payette, ID 83661. (Ord.
1235, 2004)
3.07.260: INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR:
Both the city and the grantee acknowledge that grantee is an independent contractor and neither party
shall make any contrary representations to any other person or entity. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.270: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR NUMBER OF VEHICLES:
Prior to the effective date of a change of ownership or a change in the number of vehicles which it
operates, the grantee shall notify the city in writing. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.280: NOT A PARTNERSHIP:
Neither the city nor the grantee shall be responsible for the acts, errors or omissions of the other.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as creating a partnership, joint venture, common
undertaking or joint concern of any sort. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.290: BINDING EFFECT:
This franchise shall be binding upon the heirs, assigns and successors of the city and the grantee
hereto. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
3.07.300: COST OF PUBLICATION:
The grantee shall bear the cost of publication of the ordinance codified herein as such publication is
required by the laws of the state of Idaho. (Ord. 1235, 2004)
Chapter 3.08
LOCAL IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEE FUND1
3.08.010: CREATED; PURPOSE:
The city does elect to operate under the provisions of chapter 182 of the session laws of Idaho of
1947 and pursuant to the authority conferred by chapter 182 of the session laws of Idaho of 1947, and
there is created a local improvement guarantee fund for the city, designated as the "local improvement
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 45/467
guarantee fund" of the city, for the purpose of guaranteeing to the extent of such fund, as provided by
law and by this chapter, the payment of local improvement bonds and warrants with interest thereon,
issued subsequent to January 1, 1961, by the city. (Prior code § 1-24-1)
3.08.020: APPROPRIATIONS:
The council, from time to time, for the purpose of maintaining the local improvement guarantee fund,
may enact a general ordinance of appropriation, or may levy a tax not to exceed one mill in any one
year, and may make appropriation from such other legally available sources as may be determined by
the council for the purpose of guaranteeing to the extent of such fund payment of bonds or warrants,
and interest thereon, issued against any local improvement district in the city for the payment of local
improvements therein. (Prior code § 1-24-2)
3.08.030: LIMITATIONS:
The local improvement guarantee fund so levied or appropriated in any one year shall not be more
than sufficient to pay the outstanding warrants on said fund, and the combined levy and appropriation
in any one year shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the outstanding obligations thereby guaranteed;
provided, that the council shall not levy any tax as provided in section 3.08.020 of this chapter when
the amount of money in the local improvement guarantee fund equals ten percent (10%) of the total
outstanding obligations thereby guaranteed. The tax levies herein authorized and directed shall be in
addition to and, if need be, in excess of any and all statutory limitations. (Prior code § 1-24-3)
3.08.040: PAYMENTS TO HOLDERS OF BONDS, WARRANTS OR COUPONS:
Upon the establishment of the local improvement guarantee fund by the city, when any bond, warrant
or coupon drawn against any local improvement fund is presented to the city for payment and there is
not sufficient amount in said local improvement fund against which to draw to pay the same, unless
otherwise requested by the holder, payment therefor shall be made by warrant drawn against the local
improvement guarantee fund. Such warrants when presented to the city treasurer for payment, if not
paid, shall be registered and shall draw interest at a rate not to exceed six percent (6%) per year, as
may be fixed by the council. Neither the holder nor the owner of any bond or warrant issued under the
provisions of this chapter shall have any claim therefor, except for payment from the special
assessments made for the improvement for which said bond or warrant was issued, and except as
against the local improvement guarantee fund provided for in this chapter; and the city shall not be
liable to any holder or owner of such bond or warrant for any loss to the guarantee fund occurring in
the lawful operation thereof by the city. (Prior code § 1-24-4)
3.08.050: CITY SUBROGATION RIGHTS:
The city, as trustee for the local improvement guarantee fund, shall be subrogated to all the rights of
the holder of such bond or interest coupon or warrant so paid, and the proceeds thereof, and the
assessment underlying the same shall become part of the guarantee fund. There shall be paid into the
guarantee fund any surplus remaining in any local improvement fund after the payment of all
outstanding bonds or warrants payable out of such local improvement fund. Bonds or warrants
guaranteed by such fund shall have no preference except in the order of presentation for payment.
(Prior code § 1-24-5)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 46/467
3.08.060: MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION; USE OF MONEY:
A. The mayor and council shall prescribe rules and regulations for the maintenance and operation of
the guarantee fund not inconsistent with the statutes. Upon the effective date of the ordinance
codified herein, all money derived from the assignment of delinquency certificates, redemptions,
sale of property under foreclosure for delinquent local improvement assessments, or from the rent
or sale of property, title to which has been obtained subsequent to said date, shall be paid into the
local improvement guarantee fund; and all delinquency certificates issued and such property
acquired shall be held by the city for the benefit of such guarantee fund.
B. Money from the guarantee fund may be used to redeem property subject to local improvement
assessments from general tax delinquencies, underlying bonds or warrants guaranteed by the
fund, or to purchase such property at county tax sales or otherwise from the county for the purpose
of protecting the guarantee fund. Upon acquiring title to real property, the city may lease or sell and
convey the same for such price and on such terms as may be determined by the mayor and
council, any provisions of law or ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding, and all proceeds
resulting therefrom shall belong to and be paid into the guarantee fund; provided, however, that in
the event the city purchases such property at a tax sale or otherwise, it shall not be sold for a
lesser sum than the city paid therefor. (Prior code § 1-24-6)
3.08.070: REPLENISHMENT:
Whenever there is not a sufficient amount of cash in the local improvement guarantee fund, at any
time, to pay any and all warrants, together with interest thereon, drawn against said fund, the council
may replenish the local improvement guarantee fund by transferring or appropriating to it monies from
the general fund of the city or other available sources, as may be determined by the council, subject,
however, to the limitations prescribed by statute and by this chapter. Warrants drawing interest, as
provided in section 3.08.040 of this chapter, may be issued against the local improvement guarantee
fund to meet any financial liability against it but, at the time of making its next annual levy, the city shall
provide for the levy of a sum sufficient with other resources of the guarantee fund to pay warrants so
issued and outstanding, the tax for this purpose not to exceed one mill in any one year. (Prior code
§ 1-24-7)
3.08.080: CLAIMS LIMITATIONS:
The holder or owner of any local improvement bond or warrant shall have no claim thereon against the
municipality by which the same is issued, except to the extent of the funds created and received by
assessments against the property within the local improvement district and to the extent of the pro rata
share of any local improvement guarantee fund authorized and created under the provisions of this
chapter. (Prior code § 1-24-8)
3.08.090: BOND PAYMENTS TO BE FROM AUTHORIZED FUND:
After the effective date of the ordinance codified herein creating a local improvement guarantee fund,
any local improvement district bonds issued thereafter shall provide that the principal sum of such
bonds and the interest thereon shall be payable out of the local improvement fund created for the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 47/467
payment of cost and expenses of the improvement, or out of any local improvement guarantee fund
duly authorized and created, and not otherwise. (Prior code § 1-24-9)
3.08.100: POWERS AND DUTIES; CITY; TREASURER:
A. The city shall have all the rights, duties and powers with reference to the maintenance and
operation of the local improvement guarantee fund as permitted or enjoined by law, and the
officials of the city are required and enjoined to do any and all things necessary for the
establishment, maintenance, conduct and operation of said guarantee fund for the purposes
specified in this chapter and as required by law.
B. The city treasurer is authorized, directed and required to establish and maintain in his office as
treasurer the local improvement guarantee fund, and to pay therein and thereout and to maintain
and to conduct said guarantee fund strictly in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and as
required by law. The city treasurer is further authorized, directed and required to maintain and keep
in his office true and accurate accounts and records of all funds in and all funds paid into or out of
said guarantee fund, together with true and correct statements and records of the sources and
origin of all monies in said guarantee fund, and true and exact accounts and records of all bonds,
warrants or interest redeemed, paid or purchased, or purchased tax certificates or lands purchased
or leased or sold in the conduct of such guarantee fund; and of the specific local improvement
district funds paid into said guarantee fund, and the bonds and warrants and interest thereon for
the security, payment or solution of which, in whole or in part, the monies of such guarantee fund
may be maintained and used. (Prior code § 1-24-10)
3.08.110: INTERPRETATION:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as in any way changing the time or manner of calling and
paying local improvement bonds, nor the method of levying and collecting assessments and
reassessments for the purpose of paying for local improvements; but the provisions of this chapter are
cumulative and intended to supplement the existing ordinances of the city in relating to the making of
local improvements and the levying and collection of assessments and reassessments to pay therefor.
(Prior code § 1-24-11)
Chapter 3.12
UTILITY FUNDS
3.12.010: WATER FUND; ESTABLISHED AND CREATED; PLACEMENT OR
DEPOSIT:
There is created in the office of the treasurer a fund which shall be known and described as the "water
fund". Revenues shall be placed or deposited into said fund, as may from time to time be directed by
the council, from which shall be paid into other funds of the city the revenues so placed, according to
source, as directed by the council. (Ord. 1299 § 1, 2008: prior code § 1-23-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 48/467
3.12.020: SEWER FUND; ESTABLISHED AND CREATED; PLACEMENT OR
DEPOSIT:
There is created in the office of the treasurer a special fund, which shall be known and described as
the "sewer fund", into which fund shall be placed or deposited such revenues as may from time to time
be directed by the council and from which shall be paid such charges as may be directed by the
council. (Ord. 1299 § 1, 2008: prior code § 1-23-2)
3.12.030: ACCOUNTS; ESTABLISHMENT FOR ALL PREMISES:
The city clerk shall establish an account for all premises consisting of each individual lot, piece or
parcel of property, dwelling, flat, rooming house, eating place, shop, place of business, manufacturing
or business establishment in the city. (Prior code § 1-23-3)
3.12.040: ACCOUNTS; BILLING GENERALLY:
All water, sewer, refuse collection and similar monthly charges shall be billed to the individual account
for the premises to which such service is rendered. (Prior code § 1-23-4)
3.12.050: ACCOUNTS; BILLING; CHARGES NOT SEVERABLE:
The total monthly billing to each account shall be considered as one bill and the city clerk shall have
authority to refuse payment for any one service, but any payment shall be credited to the entire
account. (Prior code § 1-23-5)
3.12.060: ACCOUNTS; BILLING; PARTIAL PAYMENTS AND PREPAYMENTS:
The city clerk shall have authority to accept partial payments to apply upon the balance due in the
entire account and shall have authority to accept prepayments to apply against all future billing to the
account. (Prior code § 1-23-6)
3.12.070: ACCOUNTS; BILLING; SERVICE DISCONTINUANCE FOR
DELINQUENCY:
Delinquency in the account shall be considered as delinquency in payment for each of the services
rendered, and all services shall be discontinued as directed by the council. (Prior code § 1-23-7)
3.12.080: DISPOSITION OF WATER CHARGES:
All water charges provided for in title 13, chapter 13.04 of this code shall be placed in the utility fund.
(Ord. 1378, 2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 49/467
3.12.090: FIRE PROTECTION; HOUSEHOLD CHARGE ESTABLISHED:
All residents of the city shall pay and discharge their share of city fire protection and bonded
indebtedness. The amount shall be computed upon a per household basis and shall be paid at the
rate of a fee set by resolution per household per month. Those residents who are receiving city water
services shall continue to pay their share through their monthly water bills and those residents who
are paying for sewer services only, shall have that amount added to their monthly sewer bill. Any
resident who is not receiving either sewer or water services shall be billed monthly by the city clerk.
(Ord. 1378, 2013)
Chapter 3.13
BID REQUIREMENTS
3.13.010: BID REQUIREMENTS; STATEMENT:
In any bid proposal let by the city, there may be included therein the following statement:
As a part of the bid specifications, you are required to submit a list of all similar sales, installations,
materials or jobs of equivalent magnitude, which you have performed or provided in the past five (5)
years. In addition to considering all other bid items, your bid will be evaluated in light of past
experience. Past experience will be used to aid the city in determining the qualifications of "lowest
responsible bidder" as that phrase is used in Idaho Code section 50-342.
(Ord. 1196 § 1, 2000)
Title 4
RESERVED
Title 5
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04
BEER AND WINE
5.04.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
BEER: Means and shall be construed to mean and embrace all spirituous, malt, vinous, fermented or
other beverages and all mixtures or preparations reasonably likely or intended to be used as a
beverage which shall contain no more than four percent (4%) of alcohol by weight.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 50/467
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than fourteen percent (14%) alcohol by volume
obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar content of fruits or other agricultural products
containing sugar whether or not other ingredients are added. (Ord. 1324, 2010)
5.04.020: LICENSE; REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to sell, trade, barter or dispose of "beer" or "wine", as defined in section
5.04.010 of this chapter, at retail within the corporate limits for a consideration without first having
obtained a license as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1439, 2018)
5.04.030: LICENSE; APPLICATION; REQUIRED INFORMATION:
Every person desiring to obtain a license or a transfer of license for the sale, barter, trade or
distribution of beer at retail within the corporate limits shall make a written application to the City Clerk
or designee, and said application shall contain the following information:
A. Name and residence of applicant;
B. Description of the room or building in which said business shall be conducted;
C. That the applicant is of good moral character and over the age of twenty one (21) years;
D. That the applicant has not been convicted of any felony or any crime involving moral turpitude;
E. The name and address of four (4) references as to the good moral character of the applicant;
F. 1. A site plan for the premises for which the license is sought, which plan shall contain the same
information that the applicant is required to provide to the State of Idaho, Department of Law
Enforcement. In addition to any information provided to the Department of Law Enforcement, the
site plan shall include the location of fire extinguishers, emergency lighting, exits and exit signs.
The plan shall be submitted only one time unless there is a change which would render the
information inaccurate or obsolete.
2. No license shall be issued or renewed until the information contained herein is provided by the
applicant to the City Clerk.
G. A statement by the applicant that the applicant agrees to abide by the terms and conditions of this
chapter and any amendments thereto, and any rules or regulations promulgated by the City
relative to the sale, trade, barter or disposal of beer at retail within the corporate City limits. (Ord.
1426, 2017)
5.04.040: LICENSE; FEE; PERIOD:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 51/467
All licenses which are issued shall be granted by the City Clerk or designee for a period of one year
beginning February 1 and ending January 31. A full year's license fee shall be collected for the entire
year or any portion thereof. The City Clerk or designee shall grant or deny the application within thirty
(30) days of the time it is filed with the City Clerk. Whenever the City Clerk or designee denies an
application, they shall specify in writing:
A. The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application;
B. The reason for the denial; and
C. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer or renewal thereof.
(Ord. 1432, 2017)
5.04.045: LICENSE; INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANTS:
No license shall be granted or transferred until there has been an investigation by the Police
Department of all applicants hereunder. If the Chief of Police recommended that an application be
denied, he/she shall state in writing:
A. The statutes or ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application;
B. The reason for the denial; and
C. The action, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer or renewal thereof.
(Ord. 1419, 2016)
5.04.050: LICENSE; GRANTED FOR CERTAIN PLACE ONLY:
No retailer's license should be granted to any person to sell, trade, barter and/or dispose of beer or
wine, except in a certain room or building designated in said license which shall be well lighted, and
the place of business shall not be changed or moved without the consent of a majority of the Council
in regular session. (Ord. 1324, 2010)
5.04.060: RETAILER; SALES RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any retailer to suffer or permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to
consume any "beer" or "wine", as defined in section 5.04.010 of this chapter, in or upon his premises;
or for any retailer to sell, give away or in anywise dispose of any such beer to any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years; or for any retailer to sell, give away or dispose of any such beer or to
permit any such beer to be consumed by any person in or upon his premises at any time between the
hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 1324, 2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 52/467
5.04.070: LICENSEE; CONDUCT OF BUSINESS; POSTING AND TRANSFER OF
LICENSE; BANKRUPTCY OR INCOMPETENCY:
A. Every person to whom a license is granted under the provisions of this chapter shall at all times
conduct a quiet and orderly place of business which shall be open at all times to the inspection of
any police officer or officer of the United States Treasury Department, who shall have the right at
any and all times to make an examination of any licensed premises to ascertain if the licensee of
such premises is conforming to the provisions of this chapter and/or the laws of the United States
applicable thereto, and to check the alcoholic content of any such beer or wine, being kept for the
purpose of sale and distribution on said premises.
B. All permits or licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises and shall be kept so
posted during the full period of time for which issued, and said licenses or permits shall not be
sold, transferred or assigned without the written consent of a majority vote of the Council at a
regular session thereof.
C. In case of a receivership, assignment, bankruptcy or incompetency of the licensee, the licensee's
business may be carried on under the permit by the duly appointed, qualified and acting receiver,
assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, guardian, executor or administrator of the licensee; provided, that
such receiver, assignee, trustee, guardian, executor or administrator shall file with the City Clerk a
duly certified copy of his appointment and secure the written consent of the Council. (Ord. 1324,
2010)
5.04.080: LICENSE; FEES:
A. The annual license fees for the retail sale of "beer" or "wine", as defined in section 5.04.010 of this
chapter, are fixed as follows:
1. Where such retailer sells bottled, canned or draft beer and such bottled, canned or draft beer is
consumed on the premises where sold, the license fee shall be set by resolution;
2. Where such retailer sells bottled, boxed, packaged, or by the drink wine and such bottled,
boxed, packaged, or by the drink wine is consumed on the premises where sold, the license fee
shall be set by resolution;
3. Where such retailer sells only bottled or canned beer, none of which is consumed on the
premises where sold, the license fee shall be set by resolution;
4. Where such retailer sells only bottled, packaged or boxed wine, none of which is consumed on
the premises where sold, the license fee shall be set by resolution. (Ord. 1439, 2018)
5.04.090: LICENSE; ISSUANCE PROHIBITED TO WHOLESALERS AND
MANUFACTURERS:
No retailer's license to sell, trade, barter and/or dispose of "beer" or "wine", as defined in section
5.04.010 of this chapter, shall be issued to any person holding a wholesale or manufacturer's license.
(Ord. 1324, 2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 53/467
5.04.100: LICENSE; CANCELLATION OR REVOCATION:
The right shall be and at all times remain vested in the Council to revoke or cancel any license for any
violation of this chapter or any other law of the City, and, upon a complaint being filed with the Council,
the Council shall notify the offender and shall call a hearing in a summary manner. If at said hearing it
appears to the Council that cause exists for the cancellation or revocation of the license, they may do
so without further process of law. (Ord. 1426, 2017)
5.04.110: LICENSE; TRANSFER PROCEDURE:
If the City Clerk or designee determines that all of the conditions required of a licensee under the
provisions of this chapter have been met by the proposed transferee of said license, then the license
shall be endorsed over to the proposed transferee by said licensee for the remainder of the period for
which the license has been issued, and the City Clerk or designee shall note its approval thereof upon
such license. Such transferee shall accompany each application for transfer with, and shall pay a fee
set by resolution. Nothing in this action shall be construed to permit the transfer of a license to
premises other than the premises originally designated in the license. (Ord. 1419, 2016)
5.04.115: APPEAL OF ACTION:
Any person whose license is revoked, suspended or denied may file an appeal to the City Council
within five (5) days of the adverse action. The City Council may uphold the action, reverse the action,
modify the action or remand the action for further investigation. (Ord. 1419, 2016)
Chapter 5.08
LIQUOR1
5.08.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall be given the following interpretations. All
other words and phrases used in this chapter, the definition of which is not given in this section, shall
be given an ordinary and commonly understood and accepted meaning.
BARTENDER: Any person, whether agent, servant, employee, licensee or in any other capacity, who
pours, mixes, prepares, serves or delivers any liquor by the drink upon any licensed premises.
GAMING: Any and all gambling or games of chance.
INTERDICTED PERSON: A person to whom the sale of liquor is prohibited under the laws of the
State.
LICENSE: A license issued by the City Clerk or designee to a qualified person, under which it is lawful
for the licensee to sell and dispense liquor by the drink at retail, as provided by this chapter.
LICENSEE: The person to whom a license is issued.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 54/467
LIQUOR: All kinds of liquor sold by and in a State liquor store.
PREMISES: The building in which the sale of liquor by the drink at retail is authorized. (Ord. 1426,
2017)
5.08.020: LICENSE; AUTHORITY TO ISSUE:
The City Clerk or designee may issue licenses to qualified applicants, as provided in this chapter,
whereby the licensee shall be authorized and permitted in the City to sell liquor by the drink at retail.
Upon the issuance of such license, the licensee therein named shall be authorized to sell liquor at
retail by the drink in the City, but only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and title 23 of
the Idaho Code, as each may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1432, 2017)
5.08.030: LICENSE; FEE; EXPIRATION; WAIVER OF OTHER FEES:
A. Each licensee licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall pay an annual license fee in
advance to the City not to exceed the maximum amount allowed by State Statute per year,
regardless of when during the calendar year such license is issued.
B. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire at two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on
February 1, or the first business day following thereafter, of the license year for which issued.
C. Upon payment of said license fee, fees for a beer license for said licensee, as provided for under
section 5.04.080 of this title, and fees for a permit to operate an eating and drinking establishment
for said licensee, as provided for under section 5.12.020 of this title, shall all be waived and
deemed to have been paid upon payment of the fee for a license to sell and dispense liquor by
drink at retail. (Ord. 1432, 2017)
5.08.040: LICENSE; REQUIRED APPLICATION INFORMATION:
A. Each applicant for a license shall file with the City Clerk an application in writing, verified by an
affidavit, setting forth the following facts:
1. That he is the lawful holder of a license issued by the Commissioner of Law Enforcement of the
State;
2. A detailed description of the premises for which a license is sought and its location, and the
name of the owner of said premises;
a. A site plan for the premises for which the license is sought, which plan shall contain the same
information that the applicant is required to provide to the State of Idaho, Department of Law
Enforcement. In addition to any information provided to the Department of Law Enforcement,
the site plan shall include the location of fire extinguishers, emergency lighting, exits and exit
signs. The plan shall be submitted only one time unless there is a change which would render
the information inaccurate or obsolete;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 55/467
b. Address of the premises and the name of the owner;
c. No license shall be issued or renewed until the information contained herein is provided by the
applicant to the City Clerk;
3. The names and addresses of all persons who will have any financial interest in any business to
be carried on in and/or upon the licensed premises, whether such interest results from open
loans, mortgages, conditional sales contracts, silent partnerships, trusts or any other basis than
open trade accounts incurred in the ordinary course of business, and the amounts of such
interests;
4. If the premises to be licensed are not owned by the applicant, then a certified copy of the lease
by which he will occupy the premises, showing that the owner consents to the sale of liquor by
the drink on such premises, shall be filed with such application;
5. The name and address of the applicant, which shall include all members of a partnership or
association and the officers, members of the governing board and ten (10) principal stockholders
of a corporation;
6. A copy of the articles of incorporation and bylaws of any corporation, the articles of association
and bylaws of any association, or the articles of partnership of any partnership.
B. If, during the period of any license issued under the provisions of this chapter, any change takes
place in any of the requirements of subsection A3, A4, A5 or A6 of this section, the licensee shall
forthwith make a verified report of such change to the City Clerk. (Ord. 1151 § 3, 1997: Prior Code
§ 5-5-4)
5.08.050: LICENSE; APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION:
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this chapter, accompanied by the necessary license
fee, the City Clerk or designee may make such investigation of all matters pertaining thereto as it
deems proper. If the City Clerk or designee determines that the contents of the application are true,
that such applicant is qualified to receive a license, that his premises are suitable for the carrying on of
the intended business, and that the requirements of this chapter have been met and complied with, a
license shall be issued; otherwise, the application shall be denied and the license fee returned. (Ord.
1419, 2016)
5.08.060: LICENSE; FORM; NUMBER RESTRICTION:
A. Every license issued under this chapter shall set forth the name of the person to whom issued; the
location by street and number, or other definite designation, of the premises; if issued to a
partnership, the names of the persons constituting the partnership shall be therein set forth; if
issued to a corporation or association, the names of the principal officers and the governing board
shall be therein set forth. Such license shall be signed by the licensee and shall be
nontransferable. Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter is separate and distinct,
no person except the licensee therein named shall exercise any of the privileges granted
thereunder, and all licenses are applicable only to the premises in respect to which they have been
issued. Such licenses shall at all times be kept posted by the licensees in a conspicuous place in
the licensed premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 56/467
B. No person shall be granted more than one license in any one year. No partnership, association or
corporation holding a license under this chapter shall have as a member, officer or stockholder any
person who has any financial interest of any kind in, or is a member of, another partnership or
association, or is an officer of another corporation holding a license in the city for the same year.
(Prior code § 5-5-6)
5.08.070: PROHIBITED LICENSEES:
A. No license shall be issued to any of the following:
1. An individual who is not a citizen of the United States or who has not been a bona fide resident
of the state for at least thirty (30) days next preceding the granting of such license; or to a
partnership unless all members thereof are citizens of the United States and have been
residents of the state for at least thirty (30) days; or to a corporation or association, unless the
same is organized under the laws of the state or is qualified under the laws of the state to do
business in the state, and unless the principal officers and members of the governing board are
citizens of the United States and residents of the state for at least thirty (30) days;
2. Any person, or any one of its members, officers or governing board, who has been convicted of
any violation of the laws of the United States, this state, or any other state of the United States,
relating to the importation, transportation, manufacture or sale of liquor; or any person who has
been convicted of any felony or has paid any fine or completed any sentence of confinement for
any felony within five (5) years prior to the date of making application for a license;
3. A person who is engaged in the operation, or interested therein, of any house or place for the
purpose of prostitution, or who has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor opposed to
decency and morality;
4. A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked; an individual who was a
member of a partnership or association which was a licensee under this chapter and whose
license has been revoked; an individual who was an officer, member of the governing board or
one of the ten (10) principal stockholders of a corporation which was a licensee under this
chapter and whose license has been revoked; a partnership or association, one of whose
members was a licensee under this chapter and whose license was revoked; a corporation, one
of whose officers, members of the governing board or ten (10) principal stockholders was a
licensee under the provisions of this chapter and whose license has been revoked; an
association or partnership, one of whose members was a member of a partnership or
association licensed under the provisions of this chapter and whose license has been revoked; a
partnership or association, one of whose members was an officer, a member of the governing
board or one of the ten (10) principal stockholders of a corporation licensed under the provisions
of this chapter and whose license has been revoked; a corporation, one of whose officers,
members of the governing board or ten (10) principal stockholders was a member of a
partnership or association licensed under the provisions of this chapter and whose license was
revoked; a corporation, one of whose officers, members of the governing board or ten (10)
principal stockholders was an officer, member of the governing board or one of the ten (10)
principal stockholders of a corporation licensed under the provisions of this chapter and whose
license was revoked;
5. Any officer, agent or employee of any distillery, winery, brewery or any wholesaler or jobber of
liquor or malt beverages;
6. A person who does not hold a retail beer license issued under the laws of the state;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 57/467
7. Any person licensed under this chapter as a bartender and whose permit as bartender has been
revoked.
B. Any license held by any licensee disqualified under the provisions of this section from being issued
a license shall forthwith be revoked by the council.
C. A license shall not be issued to a person not of good moral character. (Ord. 1333, 2011: prior code
§ 5-5-7)
5.08.080: PREMISES; SANITARY REQUIREMENTS:
All licensed premises shall be maintained in a sanitary condition according to the requirements of the
provisions of title 8 of this code. (Prior code § 5-5-8)
5.08.090: PREMISES; LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued for any premises in any neighborhood which is predominantly residential, or
is within three hundred feet (300') of any public school, church or any other place of worship,
measured in a straight line to the nearest entrance to the licensed premises, except with the
permission of the council; provided, that this limitation shall not apply to any duly licensed premises
that at the time of licensing did not come within the restricted area. (Prior code § 5-5-9)
5.08.110: PREMISES; EXAMINATION BY POLICE OFFICER:
Any duly authorized police officer of the city shall have the right at any time to make an examination of
the premises of any licensee to ascertain whether the laws of the state and the provisions of this
chapter are being complied with, and it is unlawful to refuse such officer the right of admittance or
access to such premises. It is unlawful to lock the door or doors of such premises at any time when
there are any persons present therein or thereon except those persons authorized by section 5.08.130
of this chapter to be in or upon the premises during the hours therein stated. (Prior code § 5-5-11)
5.08.120: PREMISES; PROHIBITED HOURS OF OPERATION:
No liquor shall be sold, offered for sale, given away or consumed upon any licensed premises during
the following hours:
A. Christmas Day from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. the following day;
B. On any other day between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. (Ord. 1328, 2010:
Ord. 1120 § 2, 1996: Ord. 998 § 1, 1990: Ord. 965 § 1, 1986: prior code § 5-5-12)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 58/467
5.08.130: PREMISES; PRESENCE OF PERSONS PROHIBITED WHEN;
NONAPPLICABILITY:
A. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, it is unlawful for any person to be present upon
any licensed premises for any purpose whatsoever during the following hours:
1. Christmas Day from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. the following day;
2. On any other day between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
B. This section shall not apply to the owner of the business if an individual; to members of a
partnership, association or officers or members of the governing board of a corporation, when
actually engaged in work which must be performed upon the premises, if the licensee is a
partnership, association or corporation; to bartenders as defined under section 5.08.010 of this
chapter regularly employed in or upon the licensed premises; or to laborers or craftsmen employed
for work upon the licensed premises between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) P.M. of any day. (Ord. 1370, 2012: Ord. 1120 § 3, 1996: Ord. 998 § 2, 1990: prior code § 5-
5-13)
5.08.140: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It is unlawful for any licensee to sell, give away, dispense, vend or deliver any liquor in any fashion or
manner or by any means or device except in the licensed premises. (Prior code § 5-5-14)
5.08.150: PERSONS TO WHOM SALE PROHIBITED:
No licensee or his employed agents, servants or bartenders shall sell, deliver or give away, or cause
or permit to be sold, delivered or given away, any liquor to the following:
A. Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years;
B. Any person actually, apparently or obviously intoxicated;
C. A habitual drunkard;
D. An interdicted person. (Prior code § 5-5-15)
5.08.160: PURCHASE BY UNQUALIFIED PERSON; DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, or any other person, who knowingly
misrepresents his qualifications for the purpose of obtaining liquor from a liquor licensee shall be
equally guilty with such licensee and shall upon conviction thereof be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord.
1120 § 4, 1996: prior code § 5-5-16)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 59/467
5.08.170: LICENSE; SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR CANCELLATION:
The right shall be, and at all times shall remain, vested in the council to suspend, revoke or cancel the
license of any person licensed under this chapter, including licenses of bartenders, for any violation of
this chapter and, upon verified complaint filed with the council, the council shall, by written notice,
cause such alleged offender to appear before the council and be heard upon said complaint; a copy of
such complaint shall be served with such notice, and the day and hour of the hearing, which shall be
at least five (5) days thence, shall be specified in such notice, and such hearing shall be had in the
council chambers unless a different place is specified in such notice. If at said hearing, upon the
taking of evidence on behalf of the city and such alleged offender, it appears to the council that cause
exists for the suspension, cancellation or revocation of such license, the same may be suspended,
canceled or revoked without further processes of law and, upon such suspension, cancellation or
revocation, no refund of any unexpired portion of the license fee shall be made to the licensee; and a
certified copy of such suspension, cancellation or revocation shall immediately be forwarded to the
state commissioner of law enforcement by the city clerk. (Prior code § 5-5-17)
5.08.180: LICENSE; TRANSFER PROCEDURE:
Application to transfer any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be made in writing to the city
clerk or designee. Upon receipt of such an application, the city clerk or designee shall make the same
investigation and determination with respect to the transferee as are required by sections 5.08.040
and 5.08.050 of this chapter. If the city clerk or designee determines that all of the conditions required
of a licensee under the provisions of this chapter have been met by the proposed transferee, then the
license shall be endorsed over to the proposed transferee by said licensee for the remainder of the
period for which the license has been issued, and the city clerk or designee shall note its approval
thereof upon such license. Such transferee shall accompany each application for transfer with, and
shall pay a fee as set by resolution. Nothing in this action shall be construed to permit the transfer of a
license to premises other than the premises originally designated in the license. (Ord. 1419, 2016)
5.08.190: CATERED EVENTS:
A. Any person who holds a beer, wine or liquor license may apply to the city for a permit to cater
special events outside their licensed establishment in accordance with Idaho Code title 23. The
catering permit is designed for special occasions; applicants will not be allowed to request catering
permits on a continuous basis such as social gatherings week after week at one establishment.
B. All persons who serve and sell liquor by the drink, beer and wine, or beer, or wine, at a party,
convention or similar event to take place within the city, shall obtain an alcohol beverage catering
permit issued pursuant to this chapter. An alcohol beverage catering permit shall be limited to
authorization to sell liquor, beer or wine, or any combination thereof, for a period not to exceed five
(5) consecutive days and a party is limited to two (2) consecutive days. Further, the permit shall be
limited to authorization to sell liquor, beer or wine, or any combination thereof, based upon the type
of license which the applicant possesses. Applications for such permit shall be made to the city, on
such form as prescribed by the city, which shall contain at a minimum, but not be limited to, the
following information:
1. The name and address of the applicant and the number of his/her state liquor, beer or wine
license;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 60/467
2. The dates and hours during which the permit is to be effective, not to exceed five (5)
consecutive days or two (2) consecutive days for a party;
3. The names of the organizations, groups, or persons sponsoring the event; and the name of the
applicant's designee who will be present at the event;
4. The address at which the liquor, beer or wine is to be served, and if a public building, the rooms
in which the liquor, beer or wine is to be served. If the location or premises upon which the liquor,
beer or wine is to be served is not owned by the applicant, a certified copy of the lease or
consent to occupy the premises and a showing of proof that the owner consents to the service
and sale of alcoholic beverages on such premises must be included with the application.
C. The application shall be verified by the applicant and filed with the city clerk not less than three (3)
working days prior to the catering date(s) requested. Failure to complete the required portions of
the application may result in a denial of the application.
D. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set by resolution for each day the permit is
to be in effect and such fee shall be paid to the city and shall not be refunded in any event.
E. Any alcohol catering permit issued by the city, shall be valid only under the conditions and terms
approved by the city and be valid only within the city limits.
F. A catering permit issued pursuant to this chapter is nontransferable.
G. The applicant or the applicant's designee is required to carry, display, or post the original catering
permit issued and one or both must be personally present at the approved catering premises at all
times during the life of the catering permit.
H. The right shall be, and at all times shall remain vested in the chief of police and/or the fire chief or
their designee to suspend, revoke or cancel any permit issued to any person pursuant to
subsection A of this section at any time, without notice, if the chief of police and/or the fire chief or
their designee has cause to believe that:
1. The licensee has violated or failed to comply with any law, ordinance or regulation relating to
beer, wine or liquor; or
2. The catered event presents a threat to the health or welfare of the citizens of the city. The
decision of the chief of police and/or the fire chief or their designee to suspend, revoke or cancel
a permit may be appealed to the city council by the permit holder.
3. The chief of police and/or the fire chief or their designee may, upon good cause shown, require
different conditions, terms, or a reduction in the number of requested dates or times for a
catering permit as determined reasonable to carry out the policies of the city, which include
protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public, or to prevent an unlawful disturbance or
nuisance. Such conditions may include execution of an indemnification agreement; posting of
appropriate signs; and hiring at the applicant's expense of additional bonded security personnel.
(Ord. 1419, 2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 61/467
5.08.200: APPEAL OF ACTION:
Any person whose license is revoked, suspended or denied may file an appeal to the city council
within five (5) days of the adverse action. The city council may uphold the action, reverse the action,
modify the action or remand the action for further investigation. (Ord. 1419, 2016)
Chapter 5.10
OPEN CONTAINERS OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR ON
PUBLIC WAYS
5.10.010: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, the following term has the following meaning:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more than one-half of one
percent (0.50%) of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage purposes or intended for beverage
purposes. (Ord. 1413, 2016)
5.10.020: CONSUMPTION:
Except as permitted in chapter 5.12 of this title, no person shall consume any alcoholic liquor while in
or upon public streets, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots, or other public ways. (Ord. 1413, 2016)
5.10.030: OPEN CONTAINER:
Except as permitted in chapter 5.12 of this title, no person shall be in possession of any glass, can or
open container containing alcoholic liquor on any thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot or
any other public way. (Ord. 1413, 2016)
5.10.040: LICENSEE NOT TO PERMIT REMOVAL OF OPEN CONTAINER:
Except as permitted in chapter 5.12 of this title, no person, firm or corporation licensed to sell alcoholic
liquor, or his employees or agents, shall permit any person to remove from such premises, any
alcoholic liquor in any open container. (Ord. 1413, 2016)
5.10.050: OPEN CONTAINER IN MOTOR VEHICLES:
No person shall have in his or her possession an open container containing alcoholic liquor within or
on a motor vehicle, including motorcycles, while parked or standing on a public street or public parking
lot in the city, or while such vehicle is in motion. (Ord. 1413, 2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 62/467
5.10.060: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1413, 2016)
Chapter 5.12
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS
5.12.010: ADOPTION OF IDAHO FOOD CODE:
The definitions, the inspection of food service establishments, the issuance, suspension and
revocation of permits to operate food service establishments, the prohibiting of the sale of adulterated
or misbranded food or drink, the enforcement of this chapter shall, except where provisions in this
chapter conflict, be regulated in accordance with the most recent version of the "Idaho food code" as
adopted by the state of Idaho. (Ord. 1413, 2016)
5.12.020: SIDEWALK CAFES AND OUTDOOR DINING AREAS IN THE C-1
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT - DOWNTOWN:
A. Purpose: Sidewalk cafes and outdoor dining areas are designed to allow uses on public property in
locations where they are determined to be appropriate by the city of Payette, and promote and
protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community. These general goals
include, among others, the following specific purposes:
1. To attract residents and nonresidents to downtown Payette;
2. To provide an additional way for restaurants or food establishments to expand their operations;
3. To promote sidewalk cafes and outdoor dining areas as useful and properly planned visual
amenities;
4. To provide adequate space for pedestrians on the sidewalk adjacent to sidewalk cafes and
outdoor dining areas and to ensure access to adjacent commercial and retail uses;
5. To provide for penalties for violations of this chapter.
B. Permits: Upon an application being made to administration, and in compliance with the other
requirements of this code, the city of Payette may issue a temporary use permit providing for the
placement thereon of tables, chairs, umbrellas, fencing, outdoor receptacles, or other related
articles. Applications for permits shall be reviewed and approved by city staff in accordance with all
city ordinances, city of Payette sidewalk cafe and outdoor dining design guidelines, building and
fire codes, and all other applicable laws and ordinances. All fees if any shall be payable in advance
of any permits being issued.
C. Expiration; Application: In the event a permit is issued, the permit shall expire on the expiration date
set out on the permit whether issued by the city or by the state department of health or the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 63/467
Southwest health district. A permit application available from the city of Payette, shall include, but
shall not necessarily be limited to, the following information:
1. Name of applicant and business;
2. Address of the business;
3. Address of the applicant;
4. Telephone number of the applicant and business;
5. Name of the property owner if other than applicant;
6. Address of the property owner if other than applicant;
7. Telephone number of the property owner if other than applicant;
8. Proposed start and end date;
9. Proposed hours of operation;
10. Proposed area of occupancy including square feet and dimensions;
11. Whether alcohol will be served;
12. Copy of certificate of insurance;
13. Whether permit application is a new application or renewal; if renewal, applicant shall describe
any changes from the previous application;
14. Written authorization from the owner of the property shall be required where the applicant is
not the owner of the affected property.
D. Standards: Cafes and outdoor seating shall only be permitted where it is determined that the use
will not create a hazard, a sight distance obstruction for motor vehicle operators, nor unduly
impede pedestrian traffic. Conditions, specific to the operation of a business may be incorporated
into the permit as required by City staff. All sidewalk cafes and outdoor seating are subject to the
requirements as listed within the City of Payette sidewalk cafe and outdoor dining design
guidelines.
1. An applicant may not use the permitted space for any purpose other than the authorized
purpose stated on the application. The City of Payette may issue such regulations as it may
deem necessary to limit the impact of the proposed use on the general public, unrelated
businesses and others who may require access into the impacted areas.
E. Revocation: The Payette Police Department or its designee shall have the authority to revoke the
permit for unauthorized use or a violation of any of the provisions of this Code. Upon revocation,
the applicant shall not be entitled to any refund for fees assessed under this chapter. After the
revocation of a permit, in the event a permit holder desires to continue the use allowed herein, a
permit holder must submit an application for a new permit under the same requirements for the
original permit. (Ord. 1413, 2016)
5.12.030: PERMIT; REQUIRED; FEE; EXPIRATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 64/467
The City Clerk shall verify that all permits have been obtained and, before a permit is issued to an
applicant desiring to operate a food service establishment, a fee as set by resolution shall be paid and
the applicant shall have already secured a permit to operate a food service establishment from the
State Department of Health. The permit issued shall expire the last day of the month following the date
of the expiration of the permit issued by the State Department of Health. (Ord. 1432, 2017)
5.12.040: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by fine and/or imprisonment up to,
but not exceeding, the maximum penalties set forth in Idaho Code sections 18-113 and 50-302. In
addition thereto, such persons may be enjoined from continuing such violations. Each day upon which
such a violation occurs constitutes a separate violation. (Ord. 1413, 2016)
Chapter 5.15
FOOD SERVICE VENDORS
5.15.010: GRANTING OF CONCESSION:
No mobile or temporary food service vendor shall dispense any food or any drink within the city limits
unless he shall be granted a concession therefor by the city clerk. (Ord. 1365, 2012)
5.15.020: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this chapter, a "mobile or temporary food service vendor" is defined as any person,
firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or
not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering food or drink within said city, and
who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor
vehicle, tent, or boat, public room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or any place within the city, for the
exhibition and sale of such wares, either privately or publicly. The person, firm, or corporation so
engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by reason of
associating temporarily with any local merchant, or by conducting such transient business in
connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local merchant. (Ord. 1103 § 1, 1995)
5.15.030: APPLICATION:
Applications for license under this chapter, whether signed by the applicant, if an individual, by all
partners if a partnership, and by the president if a corporation, shall be filed with the city clerk,
showing:
A. The name or names of the person or persons having the management or supervision of applicant's
business during the time that it is proposed it will be carried on in the city; the local address or
addresses of such person or persons while engaged in such business; the permanent address or
addresses of such person or persons; the capacity in which such person or persons will act (that
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 65/467
is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise); the name and address of the person, firm or
corporation for whose account the business will be carried on, if any; and if a corporation, under
the laws of what state the same is incorporated;
B. The place or places in the city where it is proposed to carry on applicant's business, and the length
of time during which it is proposed that said business shall be conducted;
C. The place or places, other than the permanent place of business of the applicant where applicant
within the six (6) months next preceding the date of said application conducted a mobile or
temporary food service business, stating the nature thereof and giving the post office and street
address of any building or office in which such business was conducted;
D. A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or proposed to be done in
order to attract customers, and, if required by the city clerk, copies of all said advertising whether
by handbills, circular, newspaper advertising, or otherwise, shall be attached to said application as
exhibits thereto;
E. Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the applicant proposes to do business,
authorizing the applicant to act as such representative;
F. Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of the person or persons having
the management or supervision of applicant's business or the method or plan of doing such
business as the City Clerk may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this chapter in the protection of
the public good. (Ord. 1316 § 1, 2010)
5.15.040: INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE:
The City Clerk shall refer the application to the Chief of Police or his/her representative, who shall
make a criminal history background investigation of the applicant. Upon completion, the Chief of
Police, or his/her representative, shall forward the results of the investigation to the City Clerk. If, as a
result of the investigation, the applicant is not found to have committed any of the acts requiring denial
as listed below, the City Clerk shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, issue the license to the
applicant. The City Clerk shall deny the applicant the license if the applicant has:
A. Committed any act consisting of fraud or misrepresentation;
B. Committed any act which, if committed by a licensee, would be grounds for suspension or
revocation of a license;
C. Within the previous ten (10) years, been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony directly relating
to his or her fitness to engage in the occupation of peddler, solicitor or street vendor and
including, but not limited to, those misdemeanors and felonies involving moral turpitude, fraud or
misrepresentation;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 66/467
D. Been charged with a misdemeanor or felony of the type defined in subsection C of this section,
and disposition of that charge is still pending;
E. Ever been charged of any crime involving sexual abuse against a child;
F. Been refused a license under the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that any
applicant denied a license under the provisions of this chapter may reapply if and when the
reasons for denial no longer exist; and
G. Made any false or misleading statements in the application.
Where application for renewal of a license is involved, and the City Clerk has received no complaint or
allegation of any violation of this chapter or other laws by the applicant, the City Clerk or his/her
designee may waive payment of the investigation fee and issue the renewal license. (Ord. 1455,
2018)
5.15.050: FOOD AND DRINK CONCESSIONS:
The proprietor of any mobile or temporary food service concession stand or operation shall be
required to receive permission from the City Clerk prior to receiving a concession license from the
Clerk's Office, furnish proof of public liability insurance coverage in the minimum amount of five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined single limit, and to pay a concession license fee as
set by resolution for each location at which the concession will be operated. Additional requirements
may be imposed by the Clerk and shall be subscribed on the permit.
A. During any period of time designated by the Mayor or by the City Council as a ceremonial, festival,
cultural or special event period, the City may designate any committee as the organization which
issues temporary mobile vendor permits. As a part of that authority, in accordance with a plan
approved by the Council, the committee may designate the public areas of the City in which
temporary mobile vendors may set up, display, promote and sell their products. The designated
committee will require that any vendor comply with the requirements of the Idaho Code and this
Code.
B. In the event any applicant for a mobile vendor license is denied a permit or is placed in a location
which the applicant finds to be objectionable or if any other action is taken which the applicant
feels is adverse, the applicant may appeal that action or denial to the City Council. The Council
shall have ultimate authority to issue, deny or modify any permit.
C. Whenever any person shall apply for a food vendor license or permit to establish an outlet in a
mobile, movable, temporary or portable building where the only service provided shall be a drivethrough
service, they shall file an application with the City Clerk. The information contained in the
application shall be the same as that information set out in section 5.15.030 of this chapter. The
terms and conditions of this chapter shall apply, except that the City Clerk may permit the mobile
vendor to operate in a building which is smaller than twenty feet by twenty feet (20' x 20'), may
allow or deny sandwich board advertising, shall be allowed to prohibit any kind of noise or sound
emanating from a vendor's location which would be intended to attract attention to the vendor's
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 67/467
location or product or prohibit any kind of condition which would constitute a nuisance or create a
condition which would constitute a detriment to public safety. Any permit issued for a mobile
vendor under this subsection shall be for a specific licensee, for a specific location, for a specified
period of time and for a specified product.
D. Any mobile or temporary food service concession stand or operation on City owned property will
have Mayor and City Council approval. (Ord. 1371, 2012: Ord. 1365, 2012: Ord. 1241 § 1, 2005:
Ord. 1103 § 1, 1995)
5.15.060: EXHIBITION OF LICENSE:
A. The license issued under this chapter shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business
named therein. In the event that such person or persons applying for said license shall desire to do
business in more than one place within the City, separate licenses may be issued for each place of
business, and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business.
B. Every licensee shall be required to carry the license and display it along with photo identification
upon request by a prospective customer or law enforcement officer. (Ord. 1316 § 1, 2010: Ord.
1103 § 1, 1995)
5.15.070: PUBLIC HEALTH PERMIT:
The concessionaire must obtain a valid public health permit for the mobile food concession to be used
prior to issuance of the City permit. (Ord. 1365, 2012)
5.15.080: TRASH DISPOSAL:
Each mobile food concession unit must have attached thereto or to a part thereof a trash and garbage
disposal container capable of holding all trash and garbage generated by the operation of the
concession. The container shall be emptied periodically as necessary in order to ensure, at all times,
public access and use of the container. Each concessionaire or their employees shall at all times keep
their cart and the immediate area (within 10 feet) free of litter, grease, and other debris which result
from their operation. (Ord. 1103 § 1, 1995)
5.15.090: FIRE EXTINGUISHER:
All mobile food concessions shall contain at least one functional fire extinguisher approved by the
Payette Fire Department. (Ord. 1365, 2012)
5.15.100: LOUD NOISES OR SPEAKING DEVICES:
No licensee under this chapter, nor anyone in his behalf shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn,
ring a bell or use any other sound device, including any loudspeaking radio or amplifying system upon
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 68/467
any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places in the said City or upon any private premises in
the said City where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom capable of being
plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys or parks or other public places, for the purpose of
attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposed to sell. (Ord.
1103 § 1, 1995)
5.15.110: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Clerk in regard to the denial of an application for
license as provided for in section 5.15.040 of this chapter or in connection with the revocation of a
license as provided for in section 5.15.160 of this chapter, shall have the right to appeal to the Council
of the City. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Council within fourteen (14) days after notice
of the decision by the City Clerk has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written
statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The Council shall set the time and place for a
hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to such person in the same manner
as provided in section 5.15.160 of this chapter for notice of hearing on revocation. The order of this
Council on such appeal shall be final. (Ord. 1103 § 1, 1995)
5.15.120: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire one year after the date of issuance
thereof unless a prior date is fixed therein. (Ord. 1455, 2018)
5.15.130: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1103 § 1, 1995)
5.15.140: SEVERANCE CLAUSE:
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses or phrases of
this chapter, or the chapter as an entirety, it being the legislative intent that this chapter shall stand
notwithstanding the invalidity of such section, sentence, clause or phrase. (Ord. 1103 § 1, 1995)
5.15.150: NONLIABILITY:
By accepting a fee and issuing a license, the City does not assume any liability for any actions or any
conduct engaged in by the licensee. Neither the City, nor any of its employees, shall endorse any
products or services sold by any licensees and the City, employees of the City and any licensees shall
not represent to any person that the City has any interest in any business carried on by the licensee.
(Ord. 1103 § 1, 1995)
5.15.160: VIOLATION, LICENSE, SEIZURE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 69/467
In the event that the licensee shall violate any of the terms or conditions of the license, or in the event
that any product offered by the licensee is a stolen item, or in the event that the licensee violates any
Municipal ordinance in reference to the business, the Payette Police Department shall be authorized
to seize and confiscate the license and hold the same pending a hearing before the City Council. No
business shall be conducted without a license. If the licensee requests a hearing, a revocation hearing
shall be held by the City Council. Fourteen (14) days' notice shall be given by mailing to the licensee
at the address provided by the licensee on the application or any amendments thereto. The notice
shall set out the time and place of hearing, the reasons for the revocation and that the licensee may
be represented by counsel. (Ord. 1365, 2012)
Chapter 5.16
ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND PEDDLERS
5.16.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
ITINERANT MERCHANT: Means and includes any transient who engages temporarily in the selling or
offering for sale of any goods, wares or merchandise within the city, regardless of whether such
goods, wares or merchandise are peddled from house to house or store to store, or sold upon the
streets or other public places, or sold from rooms, buildings, structures or lots rented or leased for the
purpose of carrying on such business; and also means and includes any person who brings goods,
wares or merchandise into the city and opens a temporary place of business for the exhibition or sale
thereof and who has not paid a tax thereon within the county.
PEDDLER: Means and includes any person who goes from house to house or from place to place in
the city selling or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take orders for, goods, wares or merchandise.
(Prior code § 5-7-2)
5.16.020: LICENSE; REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of "itinerant merchant" or in the business of a
"peddler" within the city as defined in section 5.16.010 of this chapter, except in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, without having first procured a license as provided in this chapter. (Prior
code § 5-7-1)
5.16.030: LICENSE; NONAPPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to commercial agents selling to merchants in the usual
course of business; nor to the sale of farm produce by the grower or producer thereof; nor to any other
person coming within the terms or provisions of any special licensing regulations of the city; nor to any
person who by state statutes is expressly permitted to operate as a peddler without meeting the
requirements of this chapter. (Prior code § 5-7-3)
5.16.040: LICENSE; APPLICATION; REQUIRED INFORMATION; BOND:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 70/467
A. Any person desiring to engage in the business of an itinerant merchant or peddler shall apply in
writing to the city clerk at least ten (10) days prior to the time that he desires to commence such
business. Such application shall state the name and residence of the applicant; the nature of the
business, kind of goods to be sold and where the sales are to be made, the length of time for
which the license is desired, the place where the goods are grown, manufactured or produced, and
the firm or corporation, and its address, represented by the applicant.
B. Such application shall be accompanied by a bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), executed by a surety company or by two (2) freeholders of real estate within the city
whose financial responsibility to the amount of the bond is approved by the city clerk, or that sum
may be deposited with the clerk. Upon filing such bond and payment of the license fee provided for
in section 5.16.050 of this chapter, the city clerk shall give a license to the applicant for the period
and purpose requested. The bond shall be required to be effective for a period of at least one year
from the date of license, or the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall remain on deposit for
a period of one year from the date of license.
C. Every licensee shall be required to carry the license and display it along with photo identification
upon request by a prospective customer or law enforcement officer. (Ord. 1316 § 2, 2010)
5.16.050: LICENSE; FEE; EXPIRATION:
The license fee to be paid to the city by the applicant for an itinerant merchant or peddler's license
shall be as set by resolution. The license shall expire ninety (90) days after issuance. (Ord. 1371,
2012)
5.16.060: PERMANENT BUSINESS; BOND EXEMPTION:
Where any person establishes a business within the city for a period of one year, the bond mentioned
in section 5.16.040 of this chapter shall no longer be required. (Prior code § 5-7-6)
5.16.070: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
The city clerk shall refer the application to the chief of police, who shall make a criminal history
background investigation of the applicant. Upon completion, the chief of police, or his representative,
shall forward the results of the investigation to the city clerk. If, as a result of the investigation, the
applicant is not found to have committed any of the acts requiring denial as listed below, the city clerk
shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, and approval of the city council, issue the license to the
applicant. The city clerk shall deny the applicant the license if the applicant has:
A. Committed any act consisting of fraud or misrepresentation;
B. Committed any act which, if committed by a licensee, would be grounds for suspension or
revocation of a license;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 71/467
C. Within the previous ten (10) years, been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony directly relating to
his or her fitness to engage in the occupation of peddler, solicitor or street vendor and including,
but not limited to, those misdemeanors and felonies involving moral turpitude, fraud or
misrepresentation;
D. Been charged with a misdemeanor or felony of the type defined in subsection C of this section, and
disposition of that charge is still pending;
E. Ever been charged of any crime involving sexual abuse against a child;
F. Been refused a license under the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that any applicant
denied a license under the provisions of this chapter may reapply if and when the reasons for
denial no longer exist; and
G. Made any false or misleading statements in the application. (Ord. 1316 § 2, 2010)
5.16.080: UNLAWFUL CONDUCT:
No licensee shall:
A. Misrepresent the purpose of solicitation;
B. Misrepresent affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation;
C. Continue efforts to solicit from a person once that person informed the solicitor that he does not
wish to give anything or to buy anything from that solicitor;
D. Represent the issuance of any license under this chapter as an endorsement or recommendation
of the solicitation;
E. Enter upon any premises when the same is posted with a sign stating "No Peddlers Allowed" or
"No Solicitation Allowed" or other words to such effect;
F. Knowingly make any false statement on an application for a license;
G. Employ a person who may, in the course of a solicitation, be allowed or required to enter the home
of a resident of the city of Payette when that employee has been convicted of a felony or a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 2010)
5.16.090: DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 72/467
The city shall have the authority to deny, revoke or temporarily suspend any license requested or
issued in accordance with this chapter for any of the following reasons:
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the application;
B. Fraud or misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of conducting the business or
trade;
C. Any violation of this chapter;
D. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
E. Conducting business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the
peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. (Ord. 1312
§ 1, 2010)
5.16.100: APPEAL OF ACTION:
Any person whose license is revoked, suspended or denied may file an appeal to the city council
within five (5) days of the adverse action. The city council may uphold the action, reverse the action,
modify the action or remand the action for further investigation. (Ord. 1312 § 1, 2010)
5.16.110: VIOLATION:
Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by not more than one year in the
Payette County jail and a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 1312 § 6, 2010)
Chapter 5.17
CARNIVALS, PARADES AND OTHER ASSEMBLIES
5.17.010: LICENSE; REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in or carry on any business or activity within the city, for which a license is
required by this chapter, until such license shall have been obtained. (Ord. 899, 1979)
5.17.020: LICENSE; APPLICATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 73/467
A. All applications for a license shall be made to the clerk. All licenses issued shall be signed by the
mayor and attested by the clerk under the seal of the city. All licenses shall be numbered
consecutively beginning with each fiscal year of the city. Every license shall specify the name of
the person to whom it is issued, the amount paid for the same and the conditions upon which it is
issued. The clerk shall keep a list of the licenses issued, stating the number, name, time, kind of
business or activity, and the amount paid with such remarks as he may consider necessary.
B. Provided, however, that the mayor and the council under the provisions of this chapter shall have
the right and it shall be their duty to deny and/or revoke any license or permit when in their
judgment it is to the good of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 899, 1979)
5.17.030: LICENSE; NONTRANSFERABLE:
No license issued or granted under the provisions of this chapter shall in any manner be assignable or
transferable. (Ord. 899, 1979)
5.17.040: PERMIT FEES:
To engage in the following set out activities, a sponsor shall first obtain a special events permit and
shall pay the applicable fee as set by resolution:
A. Circuses, carnivals, sideshows, and other similar exhibitions and shows;
B. Musical exhibitions and other exhibitions of art when a fee is charged;
C. Sports exhibitions when a fee is charged;
D. Parades;
E. Any activity, entertainment, business, exhibition, show or assembly where an assembly of one
hundred (100) or more people is attracted;
F. Unless a permit to extend an activity is obtained in advance from the city council, any sports
exhibition, musical exhibition, parade or other activity, entertainment, business, exhibition, show or
assembly, the activity shall terminate on or before eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. if that activity is
located in a district which is zoned residential or which is across any street or alley from property
which is in a residentially zoned district. (Ord. 1371, 2012: Ord. 1361, 2012)
Chapter 5.18
DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 74/467
5.18.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows:
ADVERTISE: Promotional signs on the premises, off premises signs and any written, live, videotaped,
audiotaped or internet based promotional presentations for the business establishment which feature
or promote the attendance of patrons.
CLASS A DANCE HALL: Any place where dancing or entertainment is permitted three (3) days or
more a week.
CLASS B DANCE HALL: Any place where dancing or entertainment is permitted less than three (3)
days a week.
CLASS C DANCE HALL: Any place where dancing or entertainment is scheduled one day at a time.
CLASS D DANCE HALL: Any place where dancing or entertainment is scheduled at any time and
provides entertainment or social activities primarily to teenagers of the ages of fourteen (14) years old
through twenty (20) years old.
DANCE HALL: A. A place where dancing patrons or customers are permitted; or
B. A place where dance or any similar live performance is presented to the public.
C. A place, location, building, a part of a building, room or premises, located in an area where
recreational or club use is allowed, wherein consideration for payment of an admission fee or for
other monetary or financial gain, persons are admitted for the purposes of a social gathering or
some form of recreation, and music, whether live or recorded, vocal or instrumental, is played.
D. A dance hall is not considered a licensed establishment under chapter 5.04 or 5.08 of this title.
LICENSED PREMISES: Shall include the building or facility in which the dance hall is located and any
parking area provided by the establishment for its patrons.
TEEN SOCIAL CLUB: Considered a class D dance hall and shall mean any business establishment
which advertises itself, holds itself out to the public as, or is operated primarily as a "teen club", "teen
dance club", "all ages club" and/or any business establishment which provides entertainment or social
activities primarily to teenagers of the ages of fourteen (14) years old through twenty (20) years old,
regardless of whether such establishment is conducted, operated or maintained for a profit; "teen
social club" does not include movie theaters, amusement parks or a sporting event or facility. (Ord.
1361, 2012)
5.18.020: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; DISPLAY:
A. No person shall open, conduct, stage, sponsor or operate a dance hall without first applying for and
receiving an annual license from the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 75/467
B. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee established by resolution
of the city council.
C. Such license shall be prominently displayed at all times upon the premises for which the license
was issued. (Ord. 1361, 2012)
5.18.030: APPLICATION:
A. Any person desiring to secure a license for the operation of a dance hall shall submit an application
executed under penalty of perjury to the city. The application shall include the following:
1. If the applicant is:
a. An individual, the individual shall state his legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory
proof that he is eighteen (18) years of age or older; if a foreign national, the individual shall
submit satisfactory proof of legal status;
b. A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name and the names of all partners,
whether the partnership is general or limited, and provide a copy of the partnership
agreement, if any;
c. A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation,
evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the statutes of the state of Idaho, or in
the case of a foreign company, evidence that it is currently qualified to do business in the state
of Idaho, the names and capacities of all officers, directors, and the name of the registered
corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process;
d. A limited liability company, the company shall state its complete name, the date of its
formation, evidence that the company is in good standing with the state of Idaho, or in the
case of a foreign company, evidence that it is currently qualified to do business in the state of
Idaho, and the name of the manager and registered agent and the address of the registered
office for service of process;
2. Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed in the application or any manager has
been arrested or convicted of any felony, any criminal act involving alcohol, narcotics, dangerous
drugs or illegal drugs or any crime of moral turpitude and, if so, the nature of the criminal act
involved, the date and place of the arrest or the indictment and the disposition;
3. Whether the applicant or any individual listed in the application, any manager, agent or
employee are sex offenders required to register as a sex offender in any state in the United
States;
4. Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed in the application or any manager,
agent or employee has previously operated or is currently operating or has been or is currently
an officer, director, manager, partner, member, principal owner and/or employee of a legal entity
which is operating or has operated an unlicensed dance hall and, if so, the name and location of
the dance hall and whether such dance hall has ever been declared a public nuisance, as well
as the date and jurisdiction wherein such declaration of a public nuisance was made;
5. Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed in the application or any manager,
agent, employee, director or officer has previously operated or is currently operating or has been
or is currently an officer, director, manager, partner, member, principal owner and/or employee of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 76/467
any legal entity which has had a previous license under this title or any other similar dance hall
ordinance from another city or county denied, suspended, revoked, or declared a public
nuisance, and, if so, the name and location of the dance hall for which such license was denied,
suspended, revoked, or declared a public nuisance, as well as the date of such denial,
suspension, revocation, or declaration of public nuisance. The suspension or cancellation of a
liquor license shall be considered a similar business for the purposes of this section;
6. Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals required to be listed in the application or
any manager holds any other licenses under this chapter or other similar dance hall licenses
from another city or county, and, if so, the names and locations of such other businesses;
7. The location of the proposed dance hall, including a legal description of the property, street
address, and telephone number(s), if any;
8. Satisfactory proof of the applicant's ownership or right to possession of the premises wherein
the dance hall will be operated. A written lease or a notarized letter written by the property owner
setting out the applicant's legal right to possession and the owner's approval of the use of the
property as a dance hall;
9. If the building wherein the dance hall will be operated is in existence, complete plans and
specifications for the interior of the building;
10. Provide evidence from the city planning and zoning administrator that the proposed location of
such business complies with the location requirements of the city zoning ordinance;
11. The applicant's mailing address and residential address;
12. The applicant's social security number, federally issued tax identification number and date of
birth;
13. The name, residence and business address and telephone number of the owner of the
premises;
14. The address and particular room or rooms for which the permit is required, the square foot
area thereof to be used for dancing, the seating capacity, and a floor plan of seating areas and
dance floor;
15. An illustration of all fire exits, crash hardware on fire doors, fire or emergency evacuation plan;
16. An illustration of the location of all fire extinguishers and any potential sources of fire ignition;
17. The hours of operation; and
18. Such other information as the city may require.
B. Each application for a dance hall shall be verified by the oath or affirmation of the applicant or the
applicant's authorized agent. (Ord. 1361, 2012)
5.18.040: DETERMINATION OF COMPLETED APPLICATION:
A. Not more than ten (10) days following submission of an application, the city clerk shall review the
application for completeness and conformance with the application requirements of section
5.18.030 of this chapter. The city clerk shall not accept for filing any application that is not complete
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 77/467
in every detail. If an omission or error is discovered by the city clerk, the application shall be
rejected and returned to the applicant together with a written explanation of the omission or error
without further action by the city. Any application rejected by the city due to an omission or error
may be resubmitted to the city when the omission or error has been remedied. For the purposes of
this chapter, the date the city clerk determines that an application is complete and in conformance
with the application requirements of section 5.18.030 of this chapter in every detail, shall be the
date the application is deemed filed with the city clerk.
B. All applicants shall promptly notify the city in writing in the event that any information contained in
an application has changed or any information is discovered by the applicant to be incorrect in any
way from what is stated on the application, and every applicant shall have the continuing duty to
promptly update and supplement such information during the term of any license issued to the
applicant under this chapter. The failure to notify the city clerk in accordance with this section
within thirty (30) days from the date of such change or discovery, by supplementing or updating the
application on file with the city clerk, shall be grounds for revocation of any application approval or,
where a license has been issued, for the suspension or revocation of an issued dance club license.
(Ord. 1361, 2012)
5.18.050: LICENSE; EXEMPTIONS:
Section 5.18.030 of this chapter shall not apply to the following organizations or facilities:
A. The school district, schools, academies and other educational organizations, including the student
body organizations thereof;
B. Events organized and operated by a charitable, civic, political, religious, fraternal, or other
organization which is tax exempt pursuant to section 501(c) of the internal revenue code of 1986,
as amended, which conduct dances on a nonprofit basis and limit attendance to members of such
organizations, families or members, and bona fide guests, and which organizations have for their
principal purpose of the betterment and advancement of their members otherwise than by the
conducting of dances, and conducts such dances as merely incidental to its principal purpose and
does not solicit or permit attendance by the general public;
C. Any liquor licensed premises;
D. The city and nonprofit civic organizations. (Ord. 1361, 2012)
5.18.060: LICENSE; PROCESS; ISSUANCE; DENIAL:
Upon the filing of an application for a dance hall license, the city shall cause an investigation to be
made in order to ascertain what effect, if any, the issuance of such permit will have on the public
peace, health, safety and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants.
The permit shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied within thirty (30) days after
receiving such application. The application shall be denied for any of the following reasons:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 78/467
A. The applicant or person to be in charge of the dance or the dance premises is found to be a person
of bad moral character or reputation;
B. The applicant or person to be in charge of the dance or the dance premises has been convicted in
a court of competent jurisdiction of:
1. An offense involving the presentation, exhibition, or performance of an obscene production,
motion picture, play or act, or
2. An offense involving lewd conduct, or
3. An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another, or
4. An offense involving misconduct with any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, or
5. Use, sale or possession of narcotics or any controlled substance;
C. The premises are not suitable or proper for use as a public teenage dance hall;
D. There is a reason to believe that the location of the dance hall will create a public nuisance or
disorder in the neighborhood, or the premises is not sufficiently soundproof so that nearby
residents or patrons of nearby hotels or lodging houses will not be disturbed, or the floor area in
which the dance will be conducted is not adequately lighted;
E. The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, incorrect, or fraudulent statement of facts
in the license application, or any other document required by the city in conjunction with the
application;
Any applicant person aggrieved by the act of the city in granting or denying a license under this
chapter may appeal to the city council. (Ord. 1361, 2012)
5.18.070: LICENSE; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A. Upon investigation and evidence provided by city officials including: chief of police, fire chief, code
enforcement officer, building official, state agency or other authorized employee, which determines
that a violation of the provisions of this chapter has occurred, the city clerk may, in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, either suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter.
B. Additionally should the city clerk find any of the following to have occurred, the city clerk may
suspend or revoke any license which has been issued pursuant to this chapter:
1. The licensed premises has been inactive for at least three (3) months;
2. In the case of a dance hall license approved for a facility which had, at the time of such
approval, not been completed, such licensed premises has not been placed in operation within
six (6) months of the license approval;
3. A criminal activity or incident has occurred upon the licensed premises;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 79/467
4. That repeated disturbances of the public peace have occurred within the licensed establishment
or upon any parking areas, sidewalks, alleyways or grounds adjacent to, or used by patrons of
the licensed premises involving patrons, employees, or the holder of the license. For purposes of
this subsection B4, "repeated disturbances of public peace" shall mean more than one
disturbance requiring a response by the city police department in the preceding twelve (12)
months.
5. The licensee, manager, or employee knowingly violated or knowingly allowed or permitted any
violation of state, federal or local law, or any provision of this chapter, within the licensed
premises or upon any parking areas, sidewalks, alleyways or grounds immediately adjacent to
the licensed premises. (Ord. 1361, 2012)
5.18.080: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
A. The filing of an application for a dance hall license shall constitute consent by the licensee, his
agents or employees, to permit the city police department, fire department or any other agent of
the city to conduct routine inspections of the licensed premises during regular business hours.
B. It shall be unlawful to hinder, prevent or refuse to permit any lawful inspection or investigation
authorized under the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 1361, 2012)
5.18.090: HOURS OF OPERATION:
A. Hours of operation for class A, B and C dance halls shall be from twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to two
o'clock (2:00) A.M.
B. Hours of operation for class D dance halls shall be from twelve o'clock (12:00) noon to eleven thirty
o'clock (11:30) P.M.
C. At closing time for a dance hall, the patrons shall be removed from the premises and shall not be
allowed to congregate, assemble or gather on the property, sidewalk or alley adjacent to or in the
vicinity of the dance hall. (Ord. 1361, 2012)
5.18.100: REASONABLE LIGHTING REQUIRED:
Whenever a dance hall is open or whenever a dance or any other function is in progress at any dance
hall, all areas of the dance hall shall be lighted in such a manner as required by the building official.
(Ord. 1361, 2012)
5.18.110: PARKING LOTS; LIGHTING AND SUPERVISION:
All off street parking facilities made available for the participants of a licensed dance hall shall be
lighted and supervised as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 80/467
A. Lighting: Parking facilities shall be lighted in such a manner as to provide illumination to all vehicles
sufficient to ensure the safety of those persons using such facility and to permit supervision of the
parking area.
B. Supervision: Parking facilities shall be supervised and inspected at reasonable intervals. (Ord.
1361, 2012)
5.18.120: READMITTANCE:
No minor admitted to a class D dance hall shall be permitted to leave and thereafter reenter the
dancing premises during the duration of the dance, and no pass out checks shall be issued. Nothing in
this section shall prohibit participants in the dance from passing to and from a refreshment facility
provided by the sponsoring organization where such facility is not located in the dancing area. (Ord.
1361, 2012)
5.18.130: USE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES OR ILLEGAL USE OF DRUGS
PROHIBITED:
A. Admission to a class D dance shall be denied to any person showing evidence, signs or symptoms
of having consumed any alcoholic beverage, of being under the influence of or possessing any
alcoholic beverage or possessing, having consumed or being under the influence of any illegal or
nonprescribed controlled substance, or who has any alcoholic beverage or any illegal controlled
substance on his or her person.
B. Catering permits to serve alcoholic beverages will not be issued to any establishment licensed as a
class D dance hall at any time. (Ord. 1361, 2012)
5.18.140: PARTICIPATION OF ADULTS PROHIBITED:
A person twenty one (21) years of age or over shall not attend any class D dance hall as a participant.
This section does not prohibit the attendance of authorized chaperons or sponsors. (Ord. 1361, 2012)
5.18.150: LOITERING PROHIBITED:
No person, having first been requested to leave by a chaperon or other person in charge shall remain
or loiter in, around or about the premises at an establishment licensed as a class D dance hall. (Ord.
1361, 2012)
5.18.160: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. No part of a class D dance hall under this chapter shall be located within three hundred feet (300')
of the nearest property line of any property on which alcoholic beverages are served or sold.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 81/467
B. No part of a premises licensed under this chapter shall be located within three hundred feet (300')
of the parcel boundary of any church, public or private school grounds, or parcel zoned as
residential. Said distance shall be computed by direct measurement from the nearest portion of the
building in which the licensed premises is to be located to the nearest portion of the property
boundary which the church, school or residential zone is located. (Ord. 1361, 2012)
Chapter 5.20
POOL, BOWLING, BILLIARD HALLS AND CARD ROOMS
(Rep. by Ord. 1432, 2017)
Chapter 5.24
TAXICABS
5.24.010: DEFINED:
"Taxicab", as used in this chapter, means and includes each vehicle which receives, carries or
discharges passengers for hire on, from or to any of the streets of the city, for transportation to points
within or without the city, but which is subject to the call of its patrons, and the destination of which is
determined by its patrons at the time of the hiring the same. (Prior code § 5-3-1)
5.24.020: LICENSE; REQUIRED:
No person shall carry on, engage in or prosecute the business of operating a taxicab within the
corporate limits until such person has first obtained a license therefor as provided in this chapter.
(Prior code § 5-3-2)
5.24.030: LICENSE; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE; NONAPPLICABILITY:
A. Every person, before engaging in the business of operating a taxicab, shall apply to the city clerk
for a license to engage in and carry on such business; and the clerk, upon the payment of the
license fee as provided for in section 5.24.040 of this chapter, shall issue a license to carry on such
business, and in such license shall specify the number and kinds of vehicles licensed and how
propelled.
B. This section is not intended to apply to stages or railroads carrying passengers. (Prior code § 5-3-3)
5.24.040: LICENSE; FEES; DURATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 82/467
A. The annual license fees for operating taxicabs in the city shall be as follows:
1. For one vehicle, fee set by resolution;
2. For each vehicle exceeding one, all owned and operated by the same party, fee set by
resolution per vehicle.
B. No license shall be granted for less than six (6) months and all licenses shall be dated as of
January 1 or July 1. Any license granted shall expire at one or the other of said dates and, if the
license is issued between such dates, no deductions shall be made, but a full six (6) month fee
shall be paid. (Ord. 1371, 2012: Prior code § 5-3-4)
5.24.050: LIABILITY INSURANCE; REQUIRED:
No person shall operate any taxicab within the city without first having obtained public liability and
property damage insurance from some good and reliable insurance company, with limits of not less
than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for damage to the property of others, not less than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for injuries to one person, and not less than twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) for personal injuries caused by any one accident. (Prior code § 5-3-5)
5.24.060: LIABILITY INSURANCE; SUBMITTAL OF POLICY FOR INSPECTION:
Any person operating a taxicab within the city shall submit his public liability and property damage
insurance policies to any official of the city for examination upon request. (Prior code § 5-3-6)
5.24.070: LICENSE; PROOF OF LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED:
The city clerk shall decline to issue a license to any applicant for a taxicab license under the
provisions of this chapter until the applicant has furnished proof satisfactory to the city clerk that such
insurance has been purchased. (Prior code § 5-3-7)
5.24.080: TAXISTAND LOCATIONS:
The police department shall designate places where taxistands may be located, not to exceed ten feet
(10') along the curb for each vehicle, and such places shall be properly marked; and it is unlawful for
any operator of a taxicab to park any taxicab in any other place except to load or unload passengers.
(Prior code § 5-3-8)
Chapter 5.28
MOBILE HOME PARKS1
5.28.010: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 83/467
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in this section:
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The legally designated building inspector of the city of Payette, Payette
County, Idaho, or his authorized representative, or the city council.
DEPENDENT TRAILER COACH OR MOBILE HOME: A trailer coach or mobile home which does not
have a toilet and a bathtub or shower.
DRIVEWAY: A private way used by vehicles and pedestrians on a mobile home lot or used for
common access to a small group of lots or facilities.
INDEPENDENT TRAILER COACH OR MOBILE HOME: A trailer coach or mobile home that has a
toilet and a bathtub or shower.
MOBILE HOME: A manufactured transportable, single-family dwelling unit suitable for year round
occupancy and containing water supply, waste disposal and electrical conveniences, and so
designated that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways or city
streets, propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power.
MOBILE HOME LOTS OR TRAILER COACH SPACE: A plot of ground within a trailer court or mobile
home park designated for accommodation of one single trailer coach or mobile home, and for the
exclusive use of its occupants.
MOBILE HOME STAND PAD: That part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the placement
of one mobile home unit.
PARK MANAGEMENT: The person or persons who owns or has charge, care or control of the mobile
home park and trailer court.
PARK STREET: A private way which affords principal means of access to individual mobile home lots
or auxiliary buildings.
PERMIT OR LICENSE: A written permit issued by the city council permitting the trailer court to
operate under this chapter, and shall include extensions, alterations and constructions within the
mobile home park.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private association, or corporation.
PRIVATE STREETS: A street or roadway that is on private property, but allows access to the park and
areas within the park. Private streets shall be maintained by the owner.
SERVICE BUILDING: A building housing toilet facilities for men and women, with slop water closet
and laundry facilities, and with separate bath or shower accommodations and such other facilities as
may be required under this chapter.
SEWER CONNECTION: The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the
drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewerage
system serving the mobile home park.
SEWER RISER PIPE: That portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically to the ground
elevation and terminates at each mobile home lot.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 84/467
TRAILER: See definition of Mobile Home.
TRAILER COURT OR MOBILE HOME PARK: Any plot of ground upon which two (2) or more trailer
coaches, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located and is owned by an individual, a firm,
trust, partnership, public or private association or corporation.
TRAILER PARK: See definition of Trailer Court Or Mobile Home Park.
WATER CONNECTION: The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the
water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within the mobile home.
WATER RISER PIPE: That portion of the water supply system serving the mobile home park which
extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at each mobile home
lot. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.020: PERMITS; REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY:
For permit regulations, see sections 5.28.021 through 5.28.024 of this chapter. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.021: PERMITS; PREREQUISITES; PARK BOUNDARIES:
It is unlawful for any person to construct, alter, extend or operate any mobile home park within the
limits of the city unless he holds a valid permit issued by the city clerk, issued annually, in the name of
such person for the specific construction, alteration or extension proposed.
A. 1. Trailer courts may be allowed in residential zone A or residential zone B, as designated in the
city, by special permit of the planning commission and the city council after public hearing and
showing to the satisfaction of the planning commission that such action will be compatible to the
overall development of the area where the trailer court is proposed to be constructed, and will be in
accordance with the general purposes of the zoning ordinances of the city, and providing that
before a permit is issued by the commission there shall be on file in the office of the clerk the
written consent of the owners of seventy five percent (75%) of the area of all the property within
the boundary line of an area determined by the intersection of lines drawn three hundred feet
(300') at right angles out from and parallel to all sides of the tract whereupon such trailer court is to
be erected or occupied, or property zoned for this specific purpose after a public hearing.
2. Where dedicated street rights of way are encountered, they shall be included in establishing the
three hundred foot (300') boundary line around the tract, but, further, they shall not be included
in any area calculation.
3. For a property that is partially within the boundary and partially outside the boundary, only that
area within the prescribed three hundred foot (300') boundary is to be included in the percentage
of area analysis.
4. The method as outlined in this section for establishing the three hundred foot (300') boundary
line applies for all the tracts of land, whether they be rectangular, curvilinear and irregular, and
furthermore the exterior boundary line may be rectangular, curvilinear and irregular, and will not
necessarily be in conformity with any surrounding lot, block and/or property lines.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 85/467
B. In any area of the city, regardless of the zoning designation, each boundary of any trailer court as
defined in this chapter must be at least two hundred feet (200') from the foundation of any
permanent residential building located outside the trailer court unless the trailer court is separated
from such permanent residential building by a natural or artificial barrier that meets the approval of
the city council, or unless seventy five percent (75%) or more of the property owners of the
residential buildings in the area within the said two hundred feet (200') from such trailer court gave
consent thereto by a formal petition filed with the planning commission and city council. (Ord. 907,
1980)
5.28.022: PERMITS; ANNUAL RENEWAL; PLAN FILING NOT REQUIRED WHEN:
It is not necessary to file a complete plan when applying for an annual renewal permit provided there
are not to be any remodeling or alterations done. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.023: PERMITS; NEW APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
All applications for new permits shall contain the following:
A. Name and address of applicant;
B. Location and legal description of the mobile home park;
C. Complete engineering plans and specifications of the proposed park showing, but not limited to, the
following:
1. The area and dimensions of the tract of land,
2. The number, location and size of all mobile home lots,
3. The location, and width of roadways and walkways,
4. The location of water and sewer lines, riser pipes, electric cable and service, and irrigation lines
and conduits,
5. Plans and specifications of the water supply and refuse and sewer disposal facilities,
6. Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home
park,
7. The location and details of lighting and electrical systems,
8. All plans and specifications to indicate distances, depths, setbacks and separations,
9. Double frontage lots backing on streets shall be prohibited from using exterior roadway as
entrance or exit purposes,
10. All lot dimensions are to be shown on all lot lines,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 86/467
11. Radii at curbs, at street intersections, at lot corners should be rounded with minimum twenty
foot (20') radius,
12. Exterior boundaries of plat drawings must be tied to at least two (2) county or city monuments,
13. All lots are to be numbered by progressive numbers in each block separately. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.024: PERMITS; ISSUANCE CONDITIONS:
When upon review of the application by the city planning commission and the city council is satisfied
that the proposed plan meets the requirements of this chapter, a permit shall be issued. Said permit
can be transferred only upon the approval of the city council. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.030: MOBILE HOME PERMITS; REGULATIONS GENERALLY:
For mobile home permits, see sections 5.28.031 through 5.28.035 of this chapter. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.031: MOBILE HOME PERMITS; REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate any mobile home park within the limits of the city unless he
holds a valid permit by the city clerk in the name of such person for the specific mobile home park. All
applications for permits shall be made to the city council, who shall issue a permit upon compliance by
the applicant with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.032: MOBILE HOME PERMITS; CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP; NOTICE TO CITY
WHEN:
Every person holding a permit shall give notice in writing to the city council within twenty four (24)
hours after having sold, transferred, given away, leased or otherwise disposed of interest in or control
of any mobile home park. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding
to the ownership or control of such mobile home park. Upon application in writing for transfer of the
permit, the permit shall be transferred if the mobile home park is in compliance with all applicable
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.033: MOBILE HOME PERMITS; APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS; RENEWALS:
A. Application for original permit shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, accompanied by an
affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application, and by a fee set by resolution and shall
contain: the name and address of the applicant; the location and legal description of the mobile
home park; and a site plan of the mobile home park showing all mobile home lots, structures,
roads, walkways and other facilities. One tentative plat shall be drawn to a scale of one inch to fifty
feet (1" = 50'), or larger, to accompany application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 87/467
B. Applications for renewals of permits shall be made in writing by the holders of the permit, shall be
accompanied by a fee set by resolution and shall contain any change in the information submitted
since the original permit was issued or the latest renewal granted. (Ord. 1371, 2012)
5.28.034: MOBILE HOME PERMITS; DENIAL; REQUEST FOR HEARING:
Any person whose application for a permit under this chapter has been denied may request and shall
be granted a hearing on the matter before the city council under the procedure provided by section
5.28.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.035: MOBILE HOME PERMITS; GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION:
Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, the building inspector finds that conditions or
practices exist which are in violation of any provisions of this chapter, the building inspector shall give
notice in writing, in accordance with section 5.28.050 of this chapter, to the person to whom the permit
was issued that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time
specified in the notice by the building inspector, the permit shall be suspended. At the end of such
period, the building inspector shall reinspect such mobile home park and, if such conditions or
practices have not been corrected, he shall suspend the permit and give notice in writing of such
suspension to the person to whom the permit is issued. Upon receipt of notice of such suspension,
such person shall cease operation of such mobile home park except as provided in section 5.28.050
of this chapter. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.040: INSPECTION; REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY:
For inspection of mobile home parks, see sections 5.28.041 through 5.28.045 of this chapter. (Ord.
907, 1980)
5.28.041: INSPECTION; BUILDING INSPECTOR AUTHORITY:
The building inspector is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary
to determine satisfactory compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.042: INSPECTION; RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The building inspector shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public
property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this
chapter. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.043: INSPECTION; REGISTER AND RECORD OF RESIDENTS:
The building inspector shall have the power to inspect the register containing a record of all residents
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 88/467
of the mobile home park. The management shall maintain an up to date daily register of all occupants.
(Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.044: INSPECTION; ACCESS TO ALL LOTS; PARK MANAGEMENT
RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be the duty of the park management to give the building inspector free access to all lots at
reasonable times for the purpose of inspection. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.045: INSPECTION; PARK OCCUPANTS TO PERMIT ACCESS:
It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give the owner thereof or his agent or
employee access to any part of such mobile home park at reasonable times for the purpose of making
such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.050: NOTICES, HEARINGS AND ORDERS:
For procedures on notices, hearings and orders, see sections 5.28.051 through 5.28.055 of this
chapter. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.051: NOTICE OF ALLEGED VIOLATION; CONTENTS AND SERVICE:
Whenever the city council determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has
been a violation of any provision of this chapter, they shall give notice of such alleged violation to the
person to whom the permit was issued, as provided in this section. Such notice shall:
A. Be put in writing;
B. Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
C. Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require; provided, that such notice or order
shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has
been sent by registered mail to his last known address, or when a copy thereof has been posted in
a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice, or when he has been served
with such notice by any method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
D. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
E. Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and with regulations adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 907, 1980)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 89/467
5.28.052: HEARING ON NOTICE OF ALLEGED VIOLATION; PROCEDURES:
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any
provision of this chapter may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city
council; provided, that such person shall file in the office of the city clerk a written petition requesting
such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within ten (10) days after the
day the notice was served. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice
and the suspension except in the case of an order issued under section 5.28.055 of this chapter. Upon
receipt of such petition, the city council shall set a time and place for such hearing, and shall give the
petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be
heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be
commenced not later than ten (10) days after the day on which the petition was filed; provided, that
upon application of the petitioner, the city council may postpone the date of the hearing for a
reasonable time beyond such ten (10) day period when in its judgment the petitioner has submitted
good and sufficient reasons for such postponement. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.053: HEARING ON NOTICE OF ALLEGED VIOLATION; DEEMED ORDER
WHEN; CITY COUNCIL ACTION:
After such hearing, the city council shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon its
findings as to compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter and of regulations
adopted pursuant thereto. If the city council should sustain or modify such notice, it shall be deemed
to be an order. Any notice served pursuant to subsection 5.28.051C of this chapter shall automatically
become an order if a written petition for a hearing shall not have been filed in the office of the city clerk
within ten (10) days after such notice was served. After a hearing in the case of any notice suspending
any permit required by this chapter, or by any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, when such notice
shall have been sustained by the city council, the permit shall be deemed to have been revoked. Any
such permit which shall have been suspended by a notice shall be deemed to be automatically
revoked if a petition for hearing shall not have been filed in the office of the city clerk within ten (10)
days after such notice was served. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.054: HEARING ON NOTICE OF ALLEGED VIOLATION; PROCEEDINGS A
PUBLIC RECORD:
The proceedings at such a hearing, including the findings and decision of the city council, and
together with a copy of every notice and order related thereto, shall be entered as a matter of public
record in the office of the city clerk, but the transcript of the proceedings need not be transcribed
unless judicial review of the decision is sought as provided by this section. Any person aggrieved by
the decision of the city council may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as
provided by the laws of this state. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.055: EMERGENCY ORDERS AUTHORIZED WHEN:
Whenever the building inspector finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to
protect the public health, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of
such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he may deem necessary to meet the
emergency, including the suspension of the permit or license. Notwithstanding any other provisions of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 90/467
this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed
shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the city council shall be afforded a hearing as
soon as possible. The provisions of sections 5.28.053 and 5.28.054 of this chapter shall be applicable
to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.060: PARKING HOUSE TRAILERS; PROHIBITED WHERE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any house trailer on any street, alley or highway or other
public place or any tract of land owned by any person, firm or corporation occupied or unoccupied,
except as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.061: PARKING HOUSE TRAILERS; EXEMPTIONS TO CHAPTER
APPLICABILITY:
Where the city council finds that compliance with provisions of this chapter would result in undue
hardship, an exemption may be granted by the city council without impairing the intent and purpose of
this chapter. Deviations from design, construction and installation provisions shall be brought into
compliance with this chapter within a reasonable period of time based on economic feasibility of
improvement, the nature, significance and extent of deviation, depreciation of material, improvement
and layout in use and other similar factors, within a minimum period not exceeding six (6) months and
a maximum period not exceeding one year.
A. Any change of ownership or discontinuance of residential use of any lot now used for residential
purposes by a mobile home for a period of thirty (30) days shall result in a voidance of any
permitted use of trailer houses outside of a trailer park according to section 5.28.170 of this
chapter.
B. Emergency or temporary stopping or parking shall be permitted for not more than three (3) hours
and subject to any other limitations imposed by any other ordinance of the city.
C. Unoccupied mobile homes for demonstration and sales purposes, temporary construction field
offices in specified areas, and unoccupied campers shall be permitted.
D. The storage of any unoccupied and uninhabited mobile home shall be permitted in the side or rear
yard of any premises; provided, that it does not extend into any setback area; nor shall it be
connected to sewer, water, electricity or gas, and provided that such storage is not in conflict with
any other section of this chapter or any other regulation of Payette County or the city of Payette.
(Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.062: PARKING HOUSE TRAILERS; TIME LIMIT FOR EXEMPTIONS:
Such period shall begin after the building inspector has given notice of a certain and specific deviation
from this chapter to the person to whom the permit or certification was issued. (Ord. 907, 1980)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 91/467
5.28.063: EXEMPTIONS; GRADUAL IMPROVEMENT TO CONFORMITY:
Gradual improvements to a higher degree of conformity shall be permissive, provided that there shall
be complete conformity at the end of a period prescribed by the city council. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.064: PARKING OR CAMPING PERMISSIBLE WHEN:
It is unlawful within the city limits, for any person to park outside of a licensed trailer court any trailer,
trailer coach, automobile trailer or mobile home on any street, alley or highway or other public place,
or on any tract of land owned by any person occupied or unoccupied within the city, except as
provided in this section as follows:
A. No person shall park, place or locate and use any house trailer or tent for human habitation or for
any other purpose on any lot, tract or parcel of land in the city for a period longer than three (3)
hours except in a licensed trailer court, and except that the parking of only an unoccupied trailer in
any accessory private garage building or other suitable enclosure, or in the side or rear yard in any
district, is permitted on the condition that the same is not occupied or used in any manner upon
said premises, except as otherwise provided in this section.
B. Any person who is constructing a dwelling house upon his own lot, tract or parcel of land may, for a
period not exceeding one hundred twenty (120) days, park and occupy a trailer house upon said
lot, tract or parcel of land which may be occupied by the owners of said property and his family
during the period of construction, but in no event shall such occupancy exceed a total of one
hundred twenty (120) days.
C. An independent trailer coach or an independent mobile home may be parked for permanent use in
a T trailer district on the condition that the same is skirted with a fireproof skirting and that there is
complete compliance with the subdivision regulations and ordinances of the city, or standard
A119.1-1968 of "USA Standards Committee On Mobile Homes And Travel Trailers" and bulletin no.
501B-1968 of the national fire protection association, with other applicable regulations and
ordinances of the city not in conflict with said standard and bulletin; provided, that the person
owning and parking said independent trailer coach or independent mobile home shall own or be
purchasing under contract of sale the real property upon which the trailer coach is to be parked.
D. A temporary license or permit may be issued to any person found to be a tourist or visitor, which
will permit such person to park his house trailer upon a lot, tract or parcel of land for a period not to
exceed thirty (30) days; provided, however, that such temporary permit shall be issued only upon
satisfactory evidence that proper sanitary facilities are available. Such temporary permit shall carry
a fee set by resolution to be paid at the time the permit is issued.
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect new or used trailer houses or mobile
homes for sale, stored or placed on trailer sales lots, that have been established under proper
permit and license from the city and are otherwise subject to the regular building and zoning
provisions of the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 92/467
F. The restrictions contained in this section shall not apply to mobile homes that have a minimum
width of twenty feet (20'), have a gable roof and comply with the building code adopted by the city.
(Ord. 1371, 2012: Ord. 933, 1982: Ord. 913, 1980)
5.28.070: ENVIRONMENTAL, OPEN SPACE AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS:
For environmental, open space and access requirements see sections 5.28.071 to 5.28.079 of this
chapter. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.071: SITE; REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY:
General requirements shall be that the condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography
shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be
exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences, and no portion subject to
unpredictable and/or sudden flooding, subsidence or erosion shall be used for any purpose which
would expose persons or property to hazards. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.072: SITE; SOIL AND GROUND COVER:
Soil and ground cover requirements shall be that the exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every
mobile home park shall be paved, or covered with stone screenings or other solid material, or
protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating
objectionable dust. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.073: SITE; GRADING AND DRAINAGE:
Site drainage requirements shall be that the ground surface in all parts of every mobile home park
shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner, together with
controlling grades and dimensions of all tile lines, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, turf and masonry
gutters and curbs, and final drainage disposal, including any existing facilities to be used. (Ord. 907,
1980)
5.28.074: PARK AREAS FOR NONRESIDENT USES:
A. No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except such uses that are required
for the direct service and well being of park residents, and for the management and maintenance
of the park.
B. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting the sale of a mobile home located
on a mobile home stand and connected to the pertinent utilities. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.075: DISTANCE BETWEEN MOBILE HOMES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 93/467
A. Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at
least fifteen feet (15'), provided that mobile homes placed end to end shall have a clearance of
fifteen feet (15') where opposing rear walls are staggered.
B. An accessory structure, such as an awning, cabana, storage cabinet, carport, windbreak and porch,
which has a floor area exceeding twenty five (25) square feet shall, for purposes of all separation
requirements be considered to be part of the mobile home. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.076: RECREATION AREA REQUIREMENTS:
A. In all parks accommodating or designed to accommodate twenty five (25) or more mobile homes,
there shall be one or more recreation areas which shall be easily accessible to all park residents.
B. The size of such recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum of one hundred (100) square
feet for each lot. No outdoor recreation area shall contain less than two thousand five hundred
(2,500) square feet.
C. Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and should, where the
topography permits, be centrally located. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.077: SETBACKS, BUFFER STRIPS AND SCREENING REQUIRED:
A. All mobile homes shall be located at least twenty five feet (25') in back of curb from any park
property boundary line abutting upon a public street or highway.
B. There shall be a minimum distance of five feet (5') between the mobile home stand and abutting
public street.
C. All mobile home parks shall be provided with screening, such as fences or natural growth, along
the property boundary line separating the park and such adjacent nonresidential uses. (Ord. 907,
1980)
5.28.078: PARK STREET SYSTEM AND CAR PARKING:
A. General Requirements: All mobile home parks shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular
access from abutting public streets or roads to each mobile home lot. Such access shall be
provided by streets or private streets.
B. Park Entrance: Entrances to mobile home parks shall be designed to minimize congestion and
hazards and allow free movement of traffic on adjacent streets. No parking shall be permitted on
the park entrance street for a distance of one hundred feet (100') from its point of beginning,
unless approved by the city council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 94/467
C. Internal Streets: Surfaced roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic,
and in any case shall meet the following minimum requirements:
1. All streets except minor streets; thirty six feet (36'), curb face to curb face;
2. Minor streets; thirty two feet (32'), curb face to curb face;
3. Dead end streets shall be limited in length to four hundred fifty feet (450'), and shall be provided
at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least eighty feet
(80'), curb face to curb face, and a street property line diameter of at least ninety feet (90');
4. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street
shall intersect any other street at an angle of less than eighty degrees (80o).
D. Trailer Parking:
1. It is illegal to park a trailer coach less than fifteen feet (15') from any street or highway right of
way, or so that any part of such trailer will obstruct any roadway or walkway.
2. It is illegal to allow any trailer coach to remain in a trailer court unless a trailer coach space is
available.
3. Each trailer coach space shall contain a minimum of either of the following: single unit, two
thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet; double unit, three thousand six hundred (3,600)
square feet; shall be at least thirty feet (30') in width; and shall be at least eighty feet (80') in
length, or large enough to accommodate the size trailer coach so placed that no part of the
trailer coach will extend beyond the limits set forth in this chapter. Each trailer coach shall be
placed as to provide the necessary clearance as provided in this chapter.
4. Each trailer coach space in any trailer court shall be provided with an asphalt or concrete paved
area of at least one hundred eighty (180) square feet at the entranceway into the trailer coach
itself.
5. No trailer shall be placed on too small a lot.
6. No trailer shall be placed on any lot in such a manner as to encroach beyond the setback
provisions of this chapter.
E. Car Parking: Off street parking areas or on street parking lanes shall be provided for the use of park
occupants and guests.
1. Off street parking shall be provided at the rate of two (2) car spaces for each mobile home lot.
On street parking shall be provided at the rate of two (2) car spaces for each mobile home lot.
2. Off street parking shall be located within a distance of thirty feet (30') from the mobile home to
be served, unless other vehicular access is provided.
F. Required Illumination Of Park Street Systems: All parks shall be furnished with lighting units so
spaced, and equipped with luminaries placed at such mounting heights, as will provide adequate
levels of illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night at:
1. All parts of the park street systems;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 95/467
2. Potentially hazardous locations, such as major street intersections and steps or stepped ramps.
G. Street Construction; Design Standards: Street construction and design standards shall conform to
minimum standards of city codes, in addition to the following standards:
1. Pavements: All streets shall be provided with a smooth, hard and dense surface which shall be
durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. Pavement edges shall be
protected to prevent raveling of the wearing surface and shifting of the pavement base. Street
surfaces shall be maintained free of cracks, holes, and other hazards set forth in this code.
2. Grades: Grades shall conform to the minimum standards of this code. Grades of all streets shall
be sufficient to ensure adequate surface drainage, but shall be more than minimum street grade
of 0.3 percent with a maximum grade being 7.0 percent for secondary and major streets and
10.0 percent for local or minor streets. Where the observance of these standards is impossible,
the city council shall review the situation before an exception may be granted.
3. Intersections: Within one hundred feet (100') of an intersection, streets shall be at approximately
right angles; a distance of at least one hundred twenty five feet (125') shall be maintained
between centerlines of offset intersecting streets; intersections of more than two (2) streets at
one point shall be avoided.
H. Fences; Location, Height And Density: In any yard adjacent to a street and within ten feet (10') from
the curb line to such street, fences, walls and hedges may be up to forty eight inches (48") in
height, when that portion of the fence above twenty four inches (24") is at least seventy five
percent (75%) open when measured at ninety degrees (90o) to the fence. Fences located in a yard
area other than above described may be up to seven feet (7') in height.
I. Measurements Of Height Of Fences: All fences along a roadway will be measured from and along
the sidewalk, or if no sidewalk exists, from and along the curb. All other fences will be measured
from and along the finished grade of the property along the fence.
J. Fences; Use Of Hazardous Materials: Fences shall not be constructed of or contain any material
which will do bodily harm, such as barbed wire, electric wires, broken glass, spikes, and any other
hazardous or dangerous material. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.079: WALKS:
A. General Requirements: All parks shall be provided with safe, convenient, all season pedestrian
access of adequate width for intended use, durable and convenient to maintain. Sudden changes
in alignment and gradients shall be avoided.
B. Common Walk System: A common walk system shall be provided and maintained between
locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated. Such common walk shall have a minimum width
of three feet (3'), and shall be constructed of concrete.
C. Individual Walks: All mobile home stands shall be connected to common walks, to paved streets, to
paved driveways, or to parking spaces connecting to a paved street. Such individual walks shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 96/467
have a minimum width of three feet (3'). (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.080: MOBILE HOME STANDS:
A. The area of the mobile home stand shall be improved to provide adequate support for the
placement and tie down of the mobile home, thereby securing the superstructure against uplift,
sliding, rotation and overturning.
B. The mobile home stand shall not heave, shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the mobile
home due to frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting on the structure.
(Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.090: WATER SUPPLY; REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY:
For water supply requirements, see sections 5.28.091 through 5.28.094 of this chapter. (Ord. 907,
1980)
5.28.091: WATER SUPPLY; REQUIRED; CONNECTION AND USE:
An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water of satisfactory quantity, quality, and
pressure shall be available at the site or at the boundary of the site; connection shall be made thereto
and its supply used exclusively. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.092: WATER SUPPLY; SOURCE; METERS:
A. The park shall be connected to the city water system.
B. Each trailer shall have a water meter to meter the water supplied to it. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.093: WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
A. The water supply system of the mobile home park shall be connected by pipes to all mobile homes,
buildings and other facilities requiring water.
B. All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed and maintained in accordance
with state and local regulations, approved by the city council, and shall be of a type and in
locations approved by the city engineer.
C. The water piping system shall not be connected with nonpotable or questionable water supplies
and shall be protected against the hazards of backflow or back siphonage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 97/467
D. The system shall be so designed and maintained as to provide a pressure of not less than twenty
(20) pounds per square inch, under normal operating conditions at service buildings and other
locations requiring potable water supply, and be of the size required by the city.
E. Fire hydrants shall be required to maintain safe standards of fire protection and shall not be more
than five hundred feet (500') from any trailer stand. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.094: INDIVIDUAL WATER RISER PIPES AND CONNECTIONS:
A. Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the confined area of the mobile home stand at a
point where the water connection will approximate a vertical position.
B. Water riser pipes shall extend at least four inches (4") above ground elevation. The pipe shall be at
least three-fourths inch (3/4"). The water outlet shall be capped when a mobile home does not
occupy the lot.
C. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines, valves and riser pipes, and
to protect risers from heaving and thawing actions of ground during freezing weather. Surface
drainage shall be diverted from the location of the riser pipe.
D. A shutoff valve below the frost line shall be provided near the water riser pipe on each mobile home
lot.
E. Underground stop and waste valves shall not be installed on any water service. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.100: SEWAGE DISPOSAL; REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY:
For sewage disposal requirements, see sections 5.28.101 through 5.28.105 of this chapter. (Ord. 907,
1980)
5.28.101: SEWAGE DISPOSAL; COMPLIANCE:
All plumbing in the trailer court shall comply with state and local plumbing laws and regulations and
must connect to the public sewer of the city and shall conform to all rules and regulations of the city.
(Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.102: SEWER LINE LOCATION AND CONSTRUCTION:
All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of sufficient depth to be free of breakage from traffic or
other movements, and shall be separated from the park water supply system at a safe distance.
Sewers shall be at a grade which will ensure a velocity of two feet (2') per second when flowing full. All
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 98/467
sewer lines shall be constructed of materials approved by the city, shall be adequately vented and
shall have watertight joints. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.103: INDIVIDUAL SEWER CONNECTIONS:
A. Each mobile home stand shall be provided with at least a three inch (3") diameter sewer riser pipe;
the sewer riser pipe shall be so located on each stand that the sewer connection to the mobile
home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position.
B. The "sewer connection" (see definition in section 5.28.010 of this chapter), shall have a minimum
fall of one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot. The sewer connection shall consist of one pipe line only,
without any branch fittings. All joints shall be watertight.
C. All materials used for sewer connections shall be semirigid, corrosive resistant, nonabsorbent and
durable. The inner surface shall be smooth.
D. Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a mobile home does not occupy the
lot. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall extend at
least four inches (4") above ground elevation. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.104: SEWAGE TREATMENT AND/OR DISCHARGE:
Effluents from sewage or sewage treatment shall not be discharged into any waters of the state
except with prior approval of the city including the county and state health departments. (Ord. 907,
1980)
5.28.105: PLUMBING; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
All plumbing within each trailer or mobile home shall conform to the minimum standards of the state
and local regulations and laws. All plumbing within the trailer park shall comply with state and local
plumbing standards of the state and local regulations and laws, as well as those of the city of Payette.
(Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.110: ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM GENERALLY:
For electrical distribution system requirements, see sections 5.28.111 through 5.28.114 of this chapter.
(Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.111: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL SYSTEM:
Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 99/467
appurtenances, which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and
regulations governing such systems. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.112: ELECTRICAL POWER DISTRIBUTION LINES:
A. Main power lines shall be installed underground and must comply with all local and state
requirements.
B. All direct burial conductors or cable shall comply with all state and local regulations, with a
minimum buried distance of eighteen inches (18") below the ground surface, and specially
designed for the purpose. Such conductors shall be located not less than a three foot (3') radial
distance from water, sewer, gas or communication lines. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.113: INDIVIDUAL ELECTRICAL CONNECTIONS:
Individual electrical connections shall conform to the requirements of the electrical codes of the city of
Payette and the state of Idaho. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.114: GROUNDING REQUIREMENTS:
All exposed noncurrent carrying metal parts of mobile homes and all other equipment shall be
grounded by means of an approved grounding conductor with branch circuit conductors or other
approved method of grounded metallic wiring. The neutral conductor shall not be used as an
equipment ground for mobile homes or other equipment. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.120: SERVICE BUILDING AND OTHER COMMUNITY SERVICE FACILITIES:
For service building and other community service facilities, see sections 5.28.121 through 5.28.124 of
this chapter. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.121: SERVICE BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES; DESIGNATED; REGULATIONS
APPLICABLE:
The requirements of section 5.28.120 of this chapter shall apply to service buildings, recreation
buildings and other community service facilities such as:
A. Management offices, repair shops and storage areas;
B. Sanitary facilities;
C. Laundry facilities;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 100/467
D. Indoor recreation areas;
E. Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for the exclusive use of park occupants.
(Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.122: SERVICE BUILDINGS; NUMBER AND TYPE OF FACILITIES REQUIRED:
Every trailer court that accepts or accommodates dependent trailer coaches shall provide adequate
flush type toilet fixtures and laundry facilities. In no instance shall there be less than one water closet,
one lavatory and one shower or bathtub for men; one water closet, one lavatory and one shower or
bathtub for women, and one laundry unit. The foregoing listed facilities shall be provided for every ten
(10) additional dependent trailer coaches. Dependent trailer coaches shall be parked not more than
two hundred feet (200') from the service buildings. There shall be one laundry tray for every twenty
(20) dependent trailer coach spaces. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.123: STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS:
A. Structures shall conform to all rules and regulations of the state codes and codes of the city of
Payette. All portions of the structure shall be properly protected from destructive elements. Exterior
portions shall be of such materials and be so constructed and protected as to prevent entrance or
penetration of moisture and weather.
B. All rooms containing sanitary or laundry facilities shall have:
1. Sound resistant walls extending to the ceiling between male and female sanitary facilities; walls
and partitions around showers, bathtubs, lavatories and other plumbing fixtures shall be
constructed of dense, nonabsorbent, waterproof material, or covered with moisture resistant
material;
2. At least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors; the minimum aggregate gross
area of windows for each required room shall be not less than ten percent (10%) of floor space
served by them; such openings shall be adequately screened;
3. At least one window which can be easily opened, or a mechanical device which will adequately
ventilate the room; such opening or openings shall be adequately screened to prevent access by
insects.
C. Toilets shall be located in separate compartments equipped with self-closing doors. Shower stalls
shall be of the individual type. The rooms shall be screened, to prevent direct view of the interior
when the exterior doors are open.
D. Illumination levels shall be maintained as follows:
1. General seeing tasks, five (5) foot-candles;
2. Laundry room work area, forty (40) foot-candles;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 101/467
3. Toilet room, in front of mirrors, forty (40) foot-candles.
E. Hot and cold water shall be furnished to every lavatory, sink and bathtub, and shower and laundry
fixtures, and cold water shall be furnished to every water closet and urinal.
F. Sanitary and laundry facilities shall have adequate heating facilities to maintain a temperature of
seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70oF) during cold weather, and shall have the ability to supply a
minimum of three (3) gallons of hot water per hour per coach space during time of peak demand.
(Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.124: BARBECUE PITS, FIREPLACES, STOVES AND INCINERATORS:
Cooking shelters, stoves, barbecue pits, fireplaces and incinerators shall be so located, constructed,
maintained and used as to minimize fire hazards and smoke nuisance, both on the property on which
used and on neighboring property. No open fire shall be permitted except in facilities provided. No
open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be used, and no material burned which emits dense
smoke or objectionable odors. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.130: REFUSE HANDLING REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY:
For refuse handling requirements see sections 5.28.131 through 5.28.135 of this chapter. (Ord. 907,
1980)
5.28.131: REFUSE; STORAGE, COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL:
The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park shall be so conducted as to
create none of the following: health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accidents, fire
hazards, or air pollution. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.132: REFUSE; CONTAINERS:
All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodentproof containers, which shall be located not more
than one hundred fifty feet (150') from any mobile home lot. Containers shall be provided in sufficient
number and capacity to properly store all refuse, and shall conform to the state and local minimum
standards, under the health authority. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.133: REFUSE; COLLECTION STANDS:
Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such container stands shall be so
designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration,
and to facilitate cleaning around them or as set forth by state and local trash collection regulations.
(Ord. 907, 1980)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 102/467
5.28.134: GARBAGE COLLECTION:
All refuse containing garbage shall be collected in accordance with this code. All refuse shall be
collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered containers, according to this code. (Ord. 907,
1980)
5.28.135: TRASH INCINERATORS:
Trash incinerators shall not be used for the disposal of garbage and trash. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.140: INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY:
For insect and rodent control requirements, see sections 5.28.141 through 5.28.145 of this chapter.
(Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.141: EXTERMINATION:
Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and
infestation. Extermination methods and measures to control insects and rodents shall conform with
requirements of the health authority. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.142: ACCUMULATION OF DEBRIS PROHIBITED:
Parks shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may provide rodent harborage or
breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.143: STORAGE AREAS; RODENT HARBORAGE PREVENTION:
Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage; lumber, pipe and other building
material shall be stored at least one foot (1') above the ground. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.144: SCREENING OF OPENINGS REQUIRED WHEN:
Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all exterior openings in or beneath any
structure shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.145: CONTROL OF WEEDS AND OTHER UNDERGROWTH:
The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage of noxious insects.
Parks shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of noxious and unsightly weeds, or those which
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 103/467
could be injurious to health. Open areas as well as areas about and under the trailer home shall be
maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.150: FUEL SUPPLY AND STORAGE REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY:
For fuel supply and storage requirements, see sections 5.28.151 through 5.28.153 of this chapter.
(Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.151: NATURAL GAS SYSTEM:
A. Natural gas piping systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes
and regulations governing such systems.
B. Each mobile home lot provided with piped gas shall have an approved manual shutoff valve
installed upstream of the gas outlet. The outlet shall be equipped with an approved cap to prevent
accidental discharge of gas when the outlet is not in use. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.152: LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS SYSTEMS:
A. In the event of the use of liquefied petroleum gas systems, they shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems.
B. The systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive pressures, and shall be
arranged so that the discharge terminates at a safe location.
C. The systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off gas. Such means shall be
located outside the mobile homes and shall be maintained in effective operating condition.
D. All LPG piping outside of the mobile homes shall be well supported and protected against
mechanical injury. Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be conveyed through
piping equipment and systems in mobile homes.
E. Liquefied petroleum gas containers installed on a mobile home lot shall be securely, but not
permanently, fastened to prevent accidental overturning. Such containers shall not be less than
five (5), nor more than two hundred (200) U.S. gallons' gross capacity.
F. No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located inside or beneath any storage cabinet,
carport, mobile home or any other structure, unless such installations are approved by the city
council and placed fifteen feet (15') or more from any adjacent lot line. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.153: FUEL OIL SUPPLY SYSTEMS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 104/467
A. In the event of the use of fuel oil supply systems, they shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems.
B. All piping from outside fuel storage tanks, or cylinders, to mobile homes shall be permanently
installed and securely fastened in place.
C. All fuel oil storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely fastened in place and shall not be located
inside or beneath any mobile home or less than five feet (5') from any mobile home exit.
D. Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be protected against physical damage. (Ord.
907, 1980)
5.28.160: FIRE PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY:
For fire protection requirements, see sections 5.28.161 through 5.28.164 of this chapter. (Ord. 907,
1980)
5.28.161: FLAMMABLE LITTER AND RUBBISH REMOVAL:
Mobile home parks shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.162: FIRE EXTINGUISHERS:
Portable fire extinguishers rated for class B and C fires shall be kept in service buildings. Their
capacity shall not be less than two and one-half (21/2) pounds. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.163: PERMITTED FIRES; RESTRICTIONS:
Fires shall be made only in stoves, and other equipment intended for such purposes. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.164: FIRE HYDRANTS:
Fire hydrants shall be located within five hundred feet (500') of any mobile home, service building or
other structure in the park, measured along the centerline of street. The park area shall be subject to
the city fire prevention codes and authority. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.170: MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS:
For miscellaneous requirements, see sections 5.28.171 through 5.28.172 of this chapter. (Ord. 907,
1980)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 105/467
5.28.171: PARK MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. The person to whom a permit for a mobile home park is issued shall operate the park in compliance
with this chapter and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and
equipment in good repair, and in a clean and sanitary condition.
B. The park management shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this chapter and
inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this chapter.
C. The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile home on its mobile home
stand.
D. The park management shall maintain a register containing the names of all park occupants,
identified by lot number or street address; such register shall be available to any authorized person
inspecting the park.
E. The park management shall notify the city clerk immediately of any suspected communicable or
contagious disease within the park.
F. The owner or operator of a trailer court may construct an individual auxiliary storage building on
each trailer coach space in the trailer park, provided the building has a minimum setback of five
feet (5') from adjacent trailer coach spaces, and has a minimum setback of fifteen feet (15') from
any public street or highway right of way. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.172: PARK OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. The park occupant shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter, and shall maintain
his mobile home lot, its facilities and equipment in good repair, and in a clean and sanitary
condition.
B. The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of his mobile home on its mobile
home stand, and proper installation of all utility connections in accordance with the instructions of
the park management, and ordinances and regulations of the city.
C. Pets, if permitted in the park, shall be prohibited to run at large or to commit any nuisance within
the limits of any mobile home lot. Ordinances of the city shall be complied with.
D. Skirting, porches, awnings and other additions may be installed only if permitted and approved by
the park management. When installed, they shall be maintained in good repair. The space
immediately underneath a mobile home shall be used for storage only if permitted by the park
management. If permitted, the following conditions shall be satisfied:
1. The storage area shall be provided with a base of impervious material.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 106/467
2. Stored items shall be located so as not to interfere with the underneath inspection of the mobile
home.
3. The storage area shall be enclosed by skirting.
E. The park occupant shall store and dispose of all his rubbish and garbage in a clean, sanitary and
safe manner. The garbage container shall be rodentproof, insectproof and watertight, in
conformance with city codes.
F. First aid fire extinguishers for class B and C fires shall be kept at the premises and maintained in
working condition.
G. Prefabricated structures intended for habitation, or mobile homes or trailers from which the wheels
have been removed, and placed on any lot or parcel of land shall be subject to all the building
codes, electrical codes, plumbing codes and sewer code requirements. Any deficiencies shall
prohibit the placement on any lot, parcel or mobile home court within the limits of the city. (Ord.
907, 1980)
5.28.180: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of
not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and each day's
failure to comply with any such provision shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.190: CONFLICT OF ORDINANCES; GENERALLY:
For conflict of ordinances or effect of partial invalidity, see section 1.01.100 of this code and section
5.28.191 of this chapter. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.191: CONFLICT OF ORDINANCES; HIGHER STANDARDS TO PREVAIL:
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other
ordinance or code of the city existing on the effective date of this chapter, the provision which, in the
judgment of the city council, establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to
be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of the city existing on the effective date of
this chapter which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the people, the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail, and such other
ordinances or codes are declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict with
this chapter. (Ord. 907, 1980)
5.28.192: INSPECTION CRITERIA FOR HOUSING WITHIN CITY LIMITS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 107/467
A. All manufactured housing, modular housing, or mobile homes, being placed within the city limits of
Payette, whether in a mobile home park or on any lot, shall have any and all approval stickers as
required by the state of Idaho and shall have either a date of manufacture after June 15, 1976, or a
certificate of rehabilitation as described by section 44-2503, Idaho Code.
B. All previously owned, used, significantly altered, moved or rebuilt homes, modular homes and
mobile homes moved into and placed within the city limits of Payette, shall meet all international
building codes adopted by the city, all state electrical codes and all state plumbing codes.
C. No structures shall be occupied without the approvals outlined in subsections A and B of this
section and without a certificate of occupancy first being issued by the building inspector, building
official or a designee.
D. Manufactured housing, mobile homes or modular homes with a manufacture date after June 15,
1976, may be brought into the city without first having the certificate of rehabilitation under the
following conditions:
1. Any mobile or manufactured home built before June 15, 1976, which is being brought into the
city without the certificate of rehabilitation, shall not be placed on a permanent foundation, shall
not have the tongue nor the wheels removed until the unit is rehabilitated and the certificate of
rehabilitation has been issued.
2. The rehabilitation of any unit brought into the city shall be done at the site where the unit will be
permanently located and shall be completed within sixty (60) days of the unit's move into the city.
3. If rehabilitation is not completed within sixty (60) days, the unit shall be removed forthwith. If
such unit is not removed immediately, the city, or its designee, without any liability to the city,
may remove or have the unit removed from the city. The unit shall not be returned to the city until
rehabilitation is complete, a certificate of rehabilitation is issued by the state of Idaho, and the
unit has been inspected by the city building inspector or building official. Pressure testing of the
gas system shall be done after the unit has been placed. Before moving any pre-1976 mobile or
manufactured unit into the city, the person seeking to move the unit into the city shall pay to the
city a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fee to guarantee that rehabilitation shall occur within the
sixty (60) day time limit. In the event the rehabilitation occurs within the sixty (60) day time limit,
the one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be refunded. In the event the unit has not been
rehabilitated within the sixty (60) day period, the city shall use the fee to defray the cost of
removing the unit. In the event the owner moves the unit within the sixty (60) day period and the
city incurs no cost to remove the unit, the one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fee shall be refunded.
(Ord. 1243 § 1, 2005: Ord. 1236, 2004)
Chapter 5.29
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL OCCUPATIONS AND
BUSINESSES
5.29.010: STATUTORY AUTHORITY; PURPOSE:
The licensing of all wholesale and retail occupations and businesses within the city and the levying of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 108/467
a license fee, uniform to all classes imposed, pursuant to the statutory authority vested in the city by
Idaho Code section 50-307, is hereby declared to be justified and necessary for the purpose of
protecting and providing services to the citizens of the city and the businesses and occupations doing
business therein. (Ord. 984, 1988)
5.29.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings indicated unless the
context clearly requires otherwise:
BUSINESS OR OCCUPATION: All activities, occupations, callings, trades, pursuits, or professions
located or engaged in, within the city with the object of gain, profit, benefit, or advantage. Each
business location shall be deemed a separate business unless it is a specific annex to the main
location of the business.
EMPLOYEE: Any person employed at any business location within the city, and any person furnishing
or performing services within the city. It shall include all persons who are self-employed, and shall
include part time employees; however, for the purpose of determining the license fee, two (2) part time
employees shall count as one employee.
ENGAGING IN BUSINESS: Commencing, conducting, or continuing in any business or occupation,
the exercise of corporate and franchise powers, and the liquidating of a business, where the
liquidators hold themselves out to the public as conducting such business when he does one act of:
A. Selling any goods or performing any services;
B. Soliciting business or offering or holding out goods or services for sale or hire;
C. Acquiring or using any vehicle or any premises in the city for business purposes;
D. Delivery of any goods, either at wholesale or retail, unless licensed under another section of this
code.
PERSON: Any person doing business in the city.
PREMISES: All lands, structures, places, and equipment, and appurtenances connected or used
therewith in any business, and also any personal property, including any vehicle, which is either
affixed to or is otherwise used in connection with any such business conducted on said premises.
YEAR: The calendar year. (Ord. 984, 1988)
5.29.030: FEE LEVIED; AMOUNT; EFFECT UPON OTHER LICENSE FEE
PROVISIONS:
A. There is hereby levied upon and shall be collected from every person engaged in any business or
occupation within the city a license fee for the privilege of engaging in business in an amount to be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 109/467
determined by the application of the rates hereinafter set forth. Such license fee shall be a onetime
fee as set by resolution for the application.
B. The license fee levied hereunder is not intended to repeal any other license fee or license
requirements provision of this code or any ordinance of the city. (Ord. 1371, 2012: Ord. 992 § 1,
1989: Ord. 984, 1988)
5.29.040: RESERVED:
(Ord. 992 § 1, 1989)
5.29.050: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
A. Persons qualifying as nonprofit businesses or occupations, including charitable activities, within the
meaning of section 503 of the United States internal revenue code. Possession of a certificate of
tax exempt status from the internal revenue service shall be required to qualify for this exemption,
except that the mayor and council may waive the license fee for bona fide charitable or civic
groups within the city, including, but not necessarily limited to, private schools, churches, fraternal
organizations and lodges, with respect to their educational, religious, or fraternal activities, but this
exemption shall not apply to any business activity for profit engaged in by such organization.
B. Any agency of the United States government, any state of the United States, any political
subdivision of the state of Idaho, including, but not necessarily limited to, counties, school districts,
irrigation or sewer districts, or fire districts.
C. Repealed.
D. Domestic servants, newsboys, blind persons, or casual labor not included as temporary employees
of a regularly conducted business. (Ord. 992 § 2, 1989: Ord. 984, 1988)
5.29.060: ENGAGING IN BUSINESS WITHOUT OBTAINING LICENSE PROHIBITED;
EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
No person shall engage in any business or activity in the city for which a license fee is imposed by this
chapter, without first having obtained and being a holder of a valid and subsisting license to do so, to
be known as a business and occupation license, issued under the provisions of this chapter, and
without paying the license fee imposed by this chapter, which license fee shall accompany the
application for the license. (Ord. 992 § 3, 1989: Ord. 984, 1988)
5.29.070: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; CONTENTS; LICENSE FEE TO
ACCOMPANY APPLICATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 110/467
The application for a license shall be made to the city clerk on a form provided by the city clerk. The
application shall set forth the name of the applicant, his residence, place of business, the nature of the
business, and the amount of the license fee prescribed by this chapter, and shall be accompanied by
a deposit of the license fee by the applicant. Every application shall be personally signed by the
applicant or his agent. (Ord. 984, 1988)
5.29.080: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATIONS; RECOMMENDATIONS:
The city clerk shall cause any applicant for a new business license or the transfer of an existing
business license to a new business premises to be investigated for compliance with the laws of the
state and of the city.
The aforesaid investigation shall be conducted as it is appropriate or required by the fire marshal, the
building official, the zoning officer and the city sanitarian or their designee. If the inspectors and the
city clerk are satisfied that all conditions requisite to the issuance of a license have been met, the city
clerk shall issue such license. If the inspectors and the city clerk determine that the applicant is not in
compliance with applicable laws, the city clerk shall not issue such license, and shall notify the
applicant of such decision and cause the license fee to be refunded. All required inspections shall be
conducted within ten (10) working days of the receipt of the license application. (Ord. 984, 1988)
5.29.090: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Any applicant aggrieved by any decision of the city clerk may appeal such decision to the city council
by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days of such decision by the city
clerk. However, any applicant, if denied a license by reason of the fire marshal, the building official, the
zoning officer or the city sanitarian shall first exhaust all rights of appeal of such decisions as
otherwise provided by this code. The city clerk shall transmit said notice of appeal to the council,
which shall schedule a public hearing on said appeal, to be held at any regular meeting or special
meeting of the council, not later than fifteen (15) days after the filing of such notice of appeal with the
city clerk. At such hearing, the applicant may appear and speak on his own behalf, be represented by
counsel, call witnesses, and cross examine any witnesses of the city. The council shall proceed to
determine said appeal, and, if it decides in favor of the applicant, it shall pass a motion to that effect,
and the city clerk shall, on the next business day thereafter, and upon receipt of the proper fee, issue
such license. The council may defer action upon said appeal for not longer than three (3) weeks from
the date of the public hearing. (Ord. 984, 1988)
5.29.100: CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
Each license issued hereunder shall state upon its face the following:
A. The name of the licensee and any other name under which business is to be conducted;
B. The name and address of each business so licensed;
C. The amount of license fee therefor;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 111/467
D. The dates of issuance and expiration thereof;
E. Such other information as the city clerk shall determine to be necessary. (Ord. 984, 1988)
5.29.110: DISPLAY OF LICENSE; OPERATION OF BUSINESS AFTER EXPIRATION
OF LICENSE PROHIBITED; TRANSFER OF LICENSES:
Every licensee, under this chapter, shall display such license in a prominent location upon the licensed
premises, and shall refrain from operating the licensed business on such premises after expiration of
his license. No licensee shall allow any license to remain posted, displayed, or used after the period
for which it was issued has expired, or when it has been suspended or revoked or for any other
reason become ineffective. No licensee shall loan, sell, give, or assign to any other person or allow
any other person to use or display, or to destroy, damage, or remove, or to have in his possession any
license which has been issued to said licensee. (Ord. 984, 1988)
5.29.120: CHANGE IN LOCATION OR OWNER OF LICENSED BUSINESS:
Any change of owner or owners or location shall automatically void an existing license granted under
this chapter and shall necessitate application and issuance of a new license. (Ord. 984, 1988)
5.29.130: MAILING OF APPLICATION FORMS; EFFECT OF FAILURE TO FILE
LICENSE APPLICATION:
The city clerk is authorized, but not required, to mail to persons forms for applications for licenses, but
failure of any person to receive any such forms shall not excuse the person from making application
for and securing the license required and payment of the license fee when and as due hereunder. If
any person fails, neglects, or refuses to file his application and to pay the fee as and when required
herein, the city clerk is authorized to determine the amount fee payable and by mail to notify such
person of the amount so determined. The amount so fixed shall thereupon be immediately due and
payable subject to the person's right to appear before the council and show cause why his fee should
not be altered or reduced. (Ord. 984, 1988)
5.29.140: WHEN FEES DUE AND PAYABLE; PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT:
(Rep. by Ord. 992 § 5, 1989)
5.29.150: LICENSE FEES, PENALTIES THEREON TO CONSTITUTE DEBT TO CITY:
Any license fee, including penalties thereon, shall constitute a debt to the city and may be collected by
court proceedings in the same manner as any other debt in like amount. No civil action or judgment
shall bar or prevent a criminal prosecution for each and every violation of this chapter. (Ord. 984,
1988)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 112/467
5.29.160: USE OF FUNDS:
All funds received by the city under the terms of this chapter shall be paid into the general fund of the
city. (Ord. 992 § 4, 1989: Ord. 984, 1988)
5.29.170: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A person who violates any provision of this chapter or operates any business or occupation for which
a license is required by this chapter without having first obtained a license as herein provided shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation of this chapter occurs shall be deemed a separate
offense. (Ord. 984, 1988)
5.29.180: REVOCATION:
A. Violation, Revocation, License Seizure: In the event that any licensee shall violate any of the terms
or conditions of any license, or in the event that a licensee violates any state, federal, or municipal
law or ordinance, the director of the department of public safety or his designee, shall be
authorized to seize, confiscate and hold the license. A seizure of the license shall be a revocation
of the license. In the event the licensee shall desire to continue in business, the licensee shall have
the right to file an appeal before the city council seeking to reverse the action of the director.
Pending a hearing before the city council, no business shall be conducted. At the time of seizure,
the director shall provide the licensee with a written statement of reasons why the license is being
revoked, that the licensee has the right to appeal the action to the city council and that the licensee
may be represented by counsel. If the licensee requests a hearing, a hearing shall be held by the
city council no later than at its next regularly scheduled council meeting. Upon request of the
licensee, the reasons for the revocation shall be provided in writing. The licensee may be
represented by counsel.
B. Revocation By City Council: The city council or any other citizen of the city of Payette may seek to
have any license revoked if the holder or any employee of the licensee violates any law of the city,
of the state, or of the United States. In the event a revocation is not commenced by the director as
set out in subsection A of this section, such revocation must be preceded by notice in writing to the
licensee from the clerk, informing the licensee that the council has ordered the holding of a public
hearing at a date and time certain, not less than ten (10) days from the date of such notice, at
which hearing the licensee will be required to appear personally and show cause why the license
should not be revoked. At such hearing the licensee may be represented by counsel, may testify
personally, may call witnesses, and may cross examine any witnesses called by the city. Should
the council determine that such license should be revoked, it shall pass a motion to that effect, and
such license shall thereupon be revoked; provided, however, that no such motion shall be deemed
passed without the affirmative vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the full council.
(Ord. 1220 § 2, 2003)
5.29.190: OPERATION WITHOUT LICENSE DECLARED A NUISANCE;
INJUNCTION:
The operating or conducting of any business or occupation for which a license is required by this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 113/467
chapter without having a valid license as provided herein is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
In addition to any other remedy provided by this chapter, the city may bring an action in any court of
competent jurisdiction to obtain an order enjoining any person from operating or conducting any
business or occupation in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 984, 1988)
5.29.200: SEVERABILITY:
If any portion of this chapter is found to be unenforceable or unconstitutional for any reason, the
remaining portion of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 984, 1988)
5.29.210: REPEALER:
Any portions of any existing ordinances which are in direct conflict with this chapter are hereby
repealed insofar as the conflict exists. (Ord. 984, 1988)
5.29.220: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect on August 15, 1988. (Ord. 984, 1988)
Chapter 5.31
PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTOR'S LICENSES
5.31.010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any general contractor, subcontractor or any person who engages in any public works as defined by
Idaho Code section 54-901, whether as a result of a direct contract with the city or simply undertaking
any construction, repair or reconstruction of any work which is constructed with the intention of being
transferred to the city, shall have a public works license as defined by Idaho Code title 54. (Ord. 1140
§ 1, 1997)
5.31.020: PENALTY:
Any person who is found to have violated this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished
in accordance with the misdemeanor statutes of the state of Idaho. (Ord. 1140 § 1, 1997)
Chapter 5.32
PAWNBROKERS OR PAWNSHOPS
5.32.010: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 114/467
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions will apply:
CHIEF OF POLICE: Chief of the Payette police department or his/her designee.
PAWNBROKER/LICENSEE: Any person, firm, association, partners, copartnership or corporation
within the city who loans money on deposit of personal property or deals in the purchase or
possession of personal property or secondhand property on condition of selling the same back again
to the pledger or depositor, or who loans or advances money on personal property or secondhand
property by taking any security interest therein, and takes or receives such personal property or
secondhand property into his/her possession is declared to be a pawnbroker. (Ord. 1364, 2012)
5.32.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or transact a pawnbroker business or pawnshop in the
city without first having applied and procured a city license therefor as provided in this chapter. Annual
license fee shall be set by resolution. (Ord. 1371, 2012)
5.32.030: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The application shall state the name of the person, and in case of a partnership, firm, association,
copartnership or corporation, the names of all of the partners in such partnership; corporation; or of
the directors, officers or stockholders of such firm, association, copartnership or corporation; also the
place, street and number where such business is to be carried on, and it shall specify the amount of
capital proposed to be used by the applicant in such business. (Ord. 1364, 2012)
5.32.040: ISSUANCE OF LICENSES:
A. No license issued under this chapter shall be issued to any person, corporation, copartnership, firm,
partnership or association other than the real and actual proprietor and owner of the business for
which it is issued.
B. No license shall be issued to nor shall any renewal of a license be approved until the applicant has
installed and can demonstrate that it has a functioning electronic reporting program which is
approved by the chief of police or his/her designee, is compatible with city technology systems,
and can store and electronically transmit to the city the information which is required by this
chapter. (Ord. 1364, 2012)
5.32.050: INVESTIGATION BY CHIEF OF POLICE OR HIS/HER DESIGNEE:
All applications for a license issued under this chapter or renewals thereof shall be presented to the
city council at a regular meeting thereof. No application shall be acted upon until the expiration of ten
(10) days after a solicitation for a recommendation for or against the application from the chief of
police or his/her designee; provided, however, that the city council shall not be bound by the chief's or
his/her designee's recommendation. (Ord. 1364, 2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 115/467
5.32.060: BOND:
The applicant shall file with the application, and in the event the license is granted, shall maintain
throughout the period of time the license is in existence or valid, a bond running to the city,
conditioned for the faithful observance of all provisions of this chapter respecting pawnbrokers, during
the continuance of such license, and any renewal thereof. This bond shall be in the sum of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with a qualified surety company. (Ord. 1364, 2012)
5.32.070: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
The license issued under this chapter shall state the name of the person to whom issued the place of
business and street number where such business is located and the amount of capital employed.
Such license shall entitle the person receiving it only to do business at the place designated in such
license. (Ord. 1364, 2012)
5.32.080: NONUSE AND TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
If a licensee does not conduct said business for a period of ninety (90) days, the license shall be null
and void. Licenses shall not be transferable to any other person, except by a majority vote of the city
council, and the filing of an application and a new bond by the person to whom such license is, or may
be, transferred or assigned. It shall be unlawful for any person to do business, or to attempt to do
business, under a license transferred to him/her without such approval of the city council. (Ord. 1364,
2012)
5.32.090: POSTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or transact a business in the city, as related to this
chapter, unless he shall keep posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business the license
certificate therefor, and a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter relating to the licensee. (Ord.
1364, 2012)
5.32.100: FORFEITURE OF PAWN:
No items acquired or purchased by any licensee shall be sold or otherwise disposed of for a period of
five (5) working days after the same is so purchased. The licensee shall retain in his/her possession
every pledge or pawn for thirty (30) days after the sum loaned thereon becomes due, or for thirty (30)
days after the last payment of interest, or part of the principal, whichever time period is greater. After a
loan is in default the licensee may refuse to accept any payment less than the entire principal and
interest due. (Ord. 1364, 2012)
5.32.110: PAWN TICKET TO BE FURNISHED:
A. Each licensee shall furnish to the pledger a printed receipt clearly showing the amount loaned with
a specific, detailed description of the pledged property pawned or received, date of receipt thereof,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 116/467
time for redemption, and the name of the pledgee. The reverse side of said receipt shall be marked
in such a manner that the amounts of principal and interest and any other charges paid by the
person securing the loan can be clearly designated thereon. Each payment shall be entered upon
the reverse side of said receipt and shall designate how much of the payment is being credited to
principal, how much to interest, and how much to any other charges, with the date of said
payments shown thereon. The licensee shall affix to each item a tag upon which shall be inscribed
a number, of legible characters which shall correspond to the number on the pawn ticket and be
entered in the records required to be kept by the provisions of this chapter. The licensee shall
furnish all information required to be given to borrowers by state and federal law. The following
information shall appear in bold print on the front of each pawn ticket required to be given the
pledger:
WARNING
If you have borrowed money from the pawnbroker/licensee, and if you fail to make any payment
when it is due, the pawnbroker/licensee, 30 days after default in making any payment may keep or
sell any property you have deposited, and you will lose your rights to the property.
B. Every licensee shall prepare and deliver to the pledger at the time of the pledge a separate pawn
ticket for each and every item pledged. (Ord. 1364, 2012)
5.32.120: LICENSEE TO KEEP DETAILED RECORDS AND PROVIDE CHIEF OF
POLICE WITH COPY:
A. Every licensee shall maintain in his/her place of business a permanent electronic record, through
software compatible with the city's technology systems, a permanent accurate record in both
electronic form and legibly printed in ink in the English language at the time of taking any personal
property or secondhand property of any kind into custody or possession, whether as security for a
loan or received or purchased for resale, which shall provide an accurate description of the
property and the person from whom it was received. The licensee shall be responsible for ensuring
that each person entering into a transaction provides a current driver's license or other
identification card issued by any state, federal, or local government which includes a photograph in
order to verify the person's identity. All such descriptions of property shall include:
1. The nature and date of the transaction, and number identifying it.
2. The name and/or employee identification number of the person conducting the transaction on
behalf of the licensee.
3. Type and identifying number of the personal identification used by the person with whom the
transaction was made.
4. Complete description of the property pledged, bought, or consigned, including as applicable,
brand name; serial number; model number by name; any initials or engravings or other
identifying marks; size, pattern, and type of jewelry, including color and cut information of any
stones; type of firearm, its caliber, barrel length, and type of action.
5. All such descriptions of persons with whom the transaction is made shall include the last, first,
and middle name, the current address, the date of birth, the height, the gender, the weight,
social security number, driver's license number and motor vehicle license plate number of the
person described.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 117/467
B. All paper and computer records of property received and transactions made shall be open to, and
made available for, inspection by the city's law enforcement personnel during the licensee's normal
business hours. Any property described in the records shall be open to inspection by any city law
enforcement personnel during regular business hours. Any property which is determined to have
been stolen shall be returned to city law enforcement personnel for return to the lawful owners.
No entry on such records shall be altered, erased, obliterated, or defaced. (Ord. 1364, 2012)
5.32.125: TRANSMITTAL OF DAILY REPORTS REQUIRED:
Every licensee doing business in the city shall maintain in his/her place of business a complete paper
and electronic record as described in this chapter of all transactions conducted either by him/herself or
by his/her employees or other staff. A record of each day's transactions shall be transmitted by five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. the following business day to the Payette police department via electronic transfer
or through such other method as approved by the chief of police or his/her designee. (Ord. 1364,
2012)
5.32.130: RECEIPT FOR PAYMENT TO BE FURNISHED:
Upon redemption of any pledge, the licensee shall furnish to the pledger at the time of redemption a
written signed receipt indicating the exact amount paid on principal and interest. (Ord. 1364, 2012)
5.32.140: SEPARATE PAWN TICKET FOR EACH ITEM:
(Rep. by Ord. 1364, 2012)
5.32.150: REPORT FURNISHED CHIEF OF POLICE:
(Rep. by Ord. 1364, 2012)
5.32.160: PERSONS FROM WHOM MERCHANDISE MAY NOT BE TAKEN:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or his/her employee knowingly or without reasonable inquiry to
receive any items in pawn, pledge or for resale from a person who is intoxicated, under the influence
of drugs, insane or under age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 1364, 2012)
5.32.170: NO EMPLOYEES UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to
receive any pledge or make any loan. (Ord. 1364, 2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 118/467
5.32.180: ACTS OF EMPLOYEES:
The holder of a license issued under this chapter shall be responsible for any and all acts of his/her
agents or employees, and for any violation by them of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1364, 2012)
5.32.190: SAFEKEEPING OF PLEDGES:
Every licensee licensed under the provisions hereof shall provide a safe place for the keeping of all
items received in pawn, pledge or for resale, and shall have sufficient insurance on the property held
on such items for the benefit of pledgers, in case of destruction by fire or other hazard.
Each licensee shall maintain his/her business premises in an orderly fashion; all personal property or
secondhand property received shall be kept or stored inside a building or behind a sight obscuring
fenced area. (Ord. 1364, 2012)
5.32.200: EMPLOYEE REGISTRATION:
Every owner/employee of a pawnshop/licensee shall register his/her name and address with the
police department of the city and shall have had his/her thumbprints, fingerprints, and photograph
taken and filed with the police department of the city and receive a certificate showing compliance
therewith. For the purpose of this section, an employee of a pawnshop/licensee shall include all
persons working in the licensed place of business and all owners, all stockholders, if the owner is a
corporation, all partners, firms, associations and any other person who receives income in any manner
from the operation of said business. (Ord. 1364, 2012)
5.32.210: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The city council, upon notice and opportunity for hearing, may revoke any licensee's license for
violation(s) of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1364, 2012)
5.32.220: LOCATION:
No license issued under this chapter shall be issued for any location in which such business is not
permitted by the ordinances of the city. (Ord. 1364, 2012)
5.32.230: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by fine and/or imprisonment up to but
not exceeding the maximum penalties set forth in Idaho Code section 50-302, as amended. Each day
that such violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 1364, 2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 119/467
Chapter 5.33
GARAGE SALES
5.33.010: DEFINITION:
"Garage sale" shall mean and include all general sales open to the public, conducted from or on any
residential premises in any residential zone, as defined in title 17, chapters 17.08, 17.24 and 17.28 of
this Code, for the purpose of disposing of personal property including, but not limited to, all sales
entitled "garage", "lawn", "yard", "attic", "porch", "room", "back yard", "patio", or "moving". This
definition shall not include a sale where no more than five (5) specific items are held out for sale and
all advertisement for such sale specifically names those items to be sold. For purposes of this
definition of "garage sale", "personal property" shall mean property which is utilized, owned and
maintained by an individual or by members of his residence and acquired in the normal course of
living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which was purchased for resale
or obtained on consignment. (Ord. 1113 § 1, 1995)
5.33.020: PERMITS REQUIRED:
No garage sale shall be conducted unless and until the individual desiring to conduct said sale shall
obtain a permit therefor from the City. Multiple resident garage sales shall be allowed under one
permit, but shall be limited to or conducted at the residence of one resident named in the permit.
Sales of personal property owned by the occupant, limited to three (3) sale periods each year, each
period not to exceed forty eight (48) hours. Written notice of the sale and sale permit shall be obtained
at the Public Safety Department prior to the sale of property. No signs are to be placed upon utility
poles or other public property. (Ord. 1442, 2018)
5.33.030: WRITTEN PERMIT:
Permits shall include the following information:
A. Full name and address of applicant.
B. The location/address at which the proposed garage sale is to be held.
C. The date, or dates upon which the sale is to be held.
D. An affirmative statement that the property to be sold was owned by the applicant, was owned as
applicant's personal property and was neither acquired nor consigned for the purpose of resale.
E. A statement that all off yard advertising shall be cleaned up or removed. (Ord. 1113 § 1, 1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 120/467
5.33.040: PERMIT FEES:
No permit fee shall be charged. (Ord. 1113 § 1, 1995)
5.33.050: PERMIT CONDITIONS:
A. The permit shall set forth and restrict the time and location of such sale. No more than three (3)
such permits may be issued to one residence and/or family household during any calendar year. If
members of more than one residence join in requesting a permit, then such permit shall be
considered as having been issued for each and all of such residences.
B. No permit issued under this section may be used by a person other than the one to whom the
license is issued or a person named in the permit. (Ord. 1113 § 1, 1995)
5.33.060: DISPLAY OF PERMIT:
Any permit issued pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be posted on the
premises of the garage sale in a conspicuous place so as to be seen by the public and officers of the
Payette Department of Public Safety. (Ord. 1113 § 1, 1995)
5.33.070: REVOCATION AND REFUSAL OF PERMIT:
Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or any application for issuance of a permit may
be refused or revoked for any of the following causes:
A. The application submitted by the applicant or permit holder contains any false, fraudulent or
misleading information;
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the course of carrying on the licensed
activity;
C. Any violation of this chapter;
D. Conducting the licensed activity in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a
menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. (Ord. 1113 § 1, 1995)
5.33.080: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Garage sales shall be limited in time to no more than three (3) consecutive days of the dates specified
on the permit. (Ord. 1113 § 1, 1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 121/467
5.33.090: DISPLAY OF SALE PROPERTY:
Personal property offered for sale may be displayed within the residence, in a garage, carport and/or
in the yard of the residence, but only in such areas. No property offered for sale shall be displayed on
any public right-of-way. (Ord. 1113 § 1, 1995)
5.33.100: ADVERTISING SIGNS:
Only the following specified signs may be displayed in relation to a pending garage sale:
A. Signs At Residence: Two (2) signs of not more than four (4) square feet shall be permitted to be
displayed on the property of the residence of the garage sale.
B. Directional Signs: Two (2) directional signs of not more than two (2) square feet each are permitted;
provided, that permission to erect or post said sign prior to posting any directional sign is received
from the property owners upon whose property such signs are to be placed.
C. Placement Of Signs: Signs shall not be attached to any utility pole, telephone pole, street sign or be
placed in or on public rights-of-way.
D. Time Limitations: No sign or other form of advertisement shall be exhibited for more than two (2)
days prior to the day such sale is to commence. Yard sales should be limited to daylight hours
only.
E. Removal Of Signs: All signs must be removed within twenty four (24) hours of the termination of the
garage sale. (Ord. 1113 § 1, 1995)
5.33.110: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
A member of the Department of Public Safety or any other official designated by the City to make
inspections under the licensing or regulating provisions of the City shall have the right of entry upon
any premises showing evidence of a garage sale for the purpose of enforcement or inspection and
may close the premises from such a sale or arrest any individual who violates the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 1113 § 1, 1995)
5.33.120: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by the actions of the Director of Public Safety in the denial of a license or in the
revocation of a license shall have the right of appeal to the City Council of the City. Any such appeal
shall be taken by filing with the City Council, within ten (10) days after notice of the action complained
of, a written notice setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The applicant shall be advised of the
time and place set for the hearing of the appeal by letter mailed to the applicant at his last known
address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing, or it shall be delivered by a member of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 122/467
the Department of Public Safety in the same manner as a summons at least three (3) days prior to the
date set for hearing. The City Council shall act upon the appeal within thirty (30) days after receipt of
said notice of appeal, and its action shall be final. (Ord. 1113 § 1, 1995)
5.33.130: PENALTY:
Any person conducting any such yard sale without having the proper permit therefor or who shall
violate any of the terms or conditions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to
penalties of the general misdemeanor statutes of the State of Idaho. Provided, however, there shall be
a minimum mandatory fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense and a minimum
mandatory fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second offense. (Ord. 1113 § 1, 1995)
Chapter 5.34
PRIVATE INVESTIGATORS AND PRIVATE PATROL
SERVICE
5.34.010: DEFINITIONS:
PRIVATE INVESTIGATIVE SERVICE OR PATROL SERVICE: Any service which furnishes any
watchman, guard, security officer or investigative service, either uniformed or otherwise, to patrol any
area of the city, or to guard or watch any property, or which employs any person to perform any type of
guard duty, protect or maintain peace and order at any private or public function.
PRIVATE INVESTIGATOR: Any person singularly employed or employed by a private investigative
service to investigate persons or property or who performs the functions of a private investigator.
PRIVATE PATROLMAN: Any person employed by a private patrol service or who performs individually
the functions of a private patrol service.
Private investigators, private investigative services or private patrols who are hired or retained by
other governmental agencies to provide services are exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 1108 § 1, 1995)
5.34.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. It is unlawful for any person to conduct a private patrol service or private investigative service in the
city unless that person has first applied for and been issued a license and paid an annual fee as
set by resolution for that purpose.
B. It is unlawful for any person to act or to offer to act as a private investigator or private patrolman
unless that person has first applied for and been issued a license and paid an annual fee as set by
resolution for that purpose.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 123/467
C. It is unlawful for any private patrol service to employ the services of a private patrolman unless said
private patrolman has been licensed and paid an annual fee as set by resolution. (Ord. 1371,
2012)
5.34.030: UNIFORMS AND EMBLEMS:
It is unlawful for any private patrol service or private patrolman to use or authorize the use of:
A. Any uniform, clothing, uniform emblems or shoulder patches having a color design and/or shape
such as makes any of them individually, or some or all of them in the aggregate appear
indistinguishable from any uniform, uniform emblems and/or shoulder patches of the police
department.
B. It is unlawful for any private patrol service to omit the use of a nameplate which has the words such
as "private patrol service", "private patrol system", "bonded police" to be affixed to the left breast of
the uniform or clothing worn by a private patrolman. This requirement shall not be applicable to
persons posing as private investigators who are not in uniform.
C. Every private patrol service, private investigator or private patrolman, prior to being licensed, shall
obtain approval and authorization to use any color or uniform design, uniform emblems, badges or
shoulder patches to be utilized by such licensee. The application for such approval shall be made
to the department of public safety and approval, if any, shall be given in writing by the department
head. The approval shall be attached to the license and application and shall describe the color,
design and shape of the uniform, patches, badges and/or emblems. (Ord. 1108 § 1, 1995)
5.34.040: FINGERPRINTS AND PHOTOGRAPH:
At or before the time of making application, each applicant shall have his fingerprints and photograph
taken by the department of public safety. (Ord. 1108 § 1, 1995)
5.34.050: QUALIFICATIONS:
No person shall be issued a license as a private investigator or private patrolman who:
A. Is under eighteen (18) years of age.
B. Has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within three (3) years
of making application. (Ord. 1108 § 1, 1995)
5.34.060: INVESTIGATION:
The director of public safety or his designee shall investigate all applications. (Ord. 1108 § 1, 1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 124/467
5.34.070: BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Before any license is issued to any applicant:
A. The applicant shall be required to provide a performance bond to the city in a sum not to exceed
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for any private patrolman and ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) for each private investigative service or private patrol service, which bond shall
guarantee faithful compliance with the provisions of this chapter, all other ordinances of the city
and the statutes of the state.
B. General and personal liability insurance for personal or property injury or death sustained by
persons arising out of any assault, battery, false imprisonment, false arrest, malicious prosecution,
abuse of process, libel, slander, misrepresentation, deceit or interference with property or contract
rights. The minimum limits for such insurance shall be one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) per incident or occurrence. (Ord. 1108 § 1, 1995)
5.34.080: IDENTIFICATION:
While undertaking any action in the performance of their duties, a private investigator or private
patrolman shall have in their possession an identification card with a photo attached which shall
contain the words "private patrolman", or "private investigator" and which identification card shall also
bear numerals designating the year in which such license is in force and effect. (Ord. 1108 § 1, 1995)
5.34.090: UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
It is unlawful for any person to wear or display any license required by this chapter unless such person
is duly licensed therefor. (Ord. 1108 § 1, 1995)
5.34.100: LICENSE AUTHORITY:
The granting of any license under the provisions of this chapter shall not be construed in any manner
as granting or providing any additional or further power of arrest than that granted under the
provisions of the statutes of the state, and the provisions of the ordinances of the city. Nor shall the
provisions of this chapter be construed in any manner as authority or power to carry weapons contrary
to the laws of the state. (Ord. 1108 § 1, 1995)
5.34.110: REVOCATION:
Any license may be revoked by the director of public safety for failure to maintain the qualifications
required in this chapter or for making a false statement on any application. Any licensee may appeal
any such revocation to the city council. At any such appeal, the licensee shall have the right to a
hearing and may be represented by counsel. (Ord. 1108 § 1, 1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 125/467
Chapter 5.36
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS
5.36.010: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this chapter a license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any
business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging in any activity or occupation, any person
or corporation shall be subject to the requirement, if by himself or through an agent, employee or
partner he holds himself out as being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits patronage
therefor, actively, or passively, or performs or attempts to perform any part of such business or
occupation in the city. (Ord. 1207 § 1, 2001)
5.36.020: LICENSE:
This chapter is not designed to define, nor regulate, the sale, loan, distribution, dissemination,
presentation or exhibition, of material or live conduct which is obscene. This chapter is designed to
license establishments that provide adult entertainment or themes of a distinct sexual nature. (Ord.
1207 § 1, 2001)
5.36.030: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are applicable to this chapter:
ADULT ARCADE MACHINES: Machines which are used by an individual to view films, videos, or
segments of films, which distinguish, characterize, or emphasize matters depicting, describing or
relating to activities of a sexual nature for the purposes of adult entertainment.
ADULT BUSINESS: An adult store, adult theater, adult entertainment establishment or adult business
which also includes any business that operates adult arcade machines on its premises.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment is defined as:
A. Any place of business, or commercial establishment, wherein the entertainment or activity
therein consists of substantially nude persons dancing with or without music or engaged in
movements of a sexual nature wherein the patron is directly or indirectly charged a fee or
required to make a purchase in order to view the entertainment or activity which consists of
persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie, bikinis or similarly styled garments, or where the patron,
directly or indirectly, is charged a fee to engage in personal contact by employees, devices or
equipment, or by personnel provided by the establishment.
B. An establishment which has seminude dancing or striptease performances, whether these occur
regularly or occasionally.
C. "Adult dancing" includes, but is not limited to: erotic, exotic, striptease, bikini or lingerie and shall
mean and relate to any performance, preview, play, show, skit, film, video, dance or other
exhibition performed before an audience depicting, describing or relating to activities of a sexual
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 126/467
nature for the purposes of adult entertainment.
D. "Substantially nude" as used in this section shall mean dressed in a manner so as not to display
any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, or displaying any portion of a
person's pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals. This definition of "adult
entertainment establishments" is to include, but not be limited to, bathhouses, massage parlors,
lingerie, modeling studios, or related or similar activities.
ADULT STORE: A. An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock or trade,
books, magazines, videos or films which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing, or relating to adult entertainment;
B. An establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material; or
C. An establishment which sells or displays for sale devices designated to stimulate sexual arousal
by contact with the skin or bodily orifices.
ADULT THEATER: An establishment, either enclosed or in the open air, used for presenting to an
audience through film, video or live performance material distinguished or characterized by emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to activities of a sexual nature for the purposes of adult
entertainment.
HOLDING COMPANY: A. Any corporation, firm, partnership, trust or other form of business
organization not a natural person which, directly or indirectly:
1. Owns;
2. Has the power, ability or right to control; or
3. Holds with the power to vote, all or any part of the outstanding shares, stocks, equity
securities or voting securities of a corporation which holds or applies for a license required by
this chapter.
B. For the purposes of this section, in addition to any other reasonable meaning of the words used,
a holding company "indirectly" has, holds or owns any power right or security mentioned in
subsection A of this definition if it does so through any subsidiaries, however many such
subsidiaries may intervene between the holding company and the corporate licensee or
applicant.
INTERMEDIARY COMPANY: Any corporation, firm, partnership, trust or other form of business
organization other than a natural person which:
A. Is a holding company with respect to a corporation which holds or applies for a license required
by this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 127/467
B. Is a subsidiary with respect to any holding company.
SUBSIDIARY: A. Any corporation all or any part of whose outstanding stocks, shares, voting securities
or equity securities are:
1. Owned;
2. Subject to a power or right of control; or
3. Held with power to vote, by a holding company or intermediary company.
B. Any firm, partnership, trust or other form of business organization not a natural person, all or any
interest in which is:
1. Owned;
2. Subject to a power or right of control; or
3. Held with power to vote, by a holding company or intermediary company. (Ord. 1207 § 1,
2001)
5.36.040: LICENSE REQUIRED; ALCOHOL LICENSES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate within the city limits any adult store, adult theater,
adult arcade machine business, or adult entertainment establishment, without first obtaining an
appropriately classified license as set forth in section 5.36.050 of this chapter.
B. No beer, wine or liquor license shall be issued to any "adult theater", "adult store", adult arcade
business or "adult entertainment establishment" business as defined in section 5.36.030 of this
chapter.
C. No adult theater, adult store, adult arcade business or adult entertainment establishment license
shall be issued to a beer, wine or liquor licensee. (Ord. 1207 § 1, 2001)
5.36.050: LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS:
A. Class A: Adult store which does not admit persons eighteen (18) years or younger.
B. Class B: Adult store which admits customers eighteen (18) years or younger to purchase
publications or items not related to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas but
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 128/467
which has a portion of its premises devoted to the sale or display of such publications, films, or
sexual devices.
C. Class C: Adult theater.
D. Class D: Adult arcade machines.
E. Class E: Any adult entertainment establishment which may also include the elements of class A, C,
and D but not class B. (Ord. 1207 § 1, 2001)
5.36.060: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a license to operate one of the establishments described in section 5.36.050 of this
chapter shall be made to the city clerk in such form and manner as prescribed by the city council
accompanied by the annual fee hereinafter prescribed, but the application shall contain at least the
following:
A. The name and residence address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of each employee.
C. If applicant is a corporation, the names and resident addresses of each of the officers, directors
and managers of said corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent (10%) of
the stock, shares, equity or voting securities of the corporation and the address of the corporation
itself, if different from the address of the proposed establishments.
D. If applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of each of the partners, including any
managing partners, limited partners, silent partners, investing partners and the address of the
partnership itself, if different from the address proposed for the establishment.
E. Written proof that the applicant is over the age of eighteen (18) years.
F. The business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately
preceding the date of the application including the names, dates of, location and nature of same.
G. The number of adult arcade machines to be installed, if any, and the name, address and employer
of the owner of said machines. If the owner is a corporation, the names and resident addresses of
each of the officers, directors and managers of said corporation and of each stockholder owning
more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation and the address of the corporation
itself, if different from the address of the proposed establishment(s).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 129/467
H. The class of license applied for and a statement why the proposed establishment falls within the
requested classification.
I. A criminal record of any partner, shareholder, employee, corporate partner or any person with a
financial interest in the business.
J. If the applicant is seeking a class B adult store license, a description of the manner in which minors
will be prevented from viewing publications, films of specified sexual activities or sexual anatomical
areas.
K. If a class A adult store license is being requested, a statement whether the applicant will display for
sale or sell any device designed to be used to stimulate sexual arousal or arousal by contact with
the human skin or bodily orifices.
L. A diagram of the floor plan and number of square feet and on premises parking spaces.
M. If the applicant is seeking a class C adult theater license, a statement whether the entertainment
will be live or on film. If live, a statement as to the nature of the live entertainment, e.g. burlesque,
dance, musical, drama, etc.
N. If a class E adult entertainment license is sought, a statement of the type and nature of
entertainment whether class A items are to be sold or offered for sale, and if adult arcade
machines, including the number of, will be available for patronage.
O. The date on which the applicant intends to open for business.
P. The type and nature of activity desired to be licensed and whether the type of activity shall at any
time require the total exclusion of minors from the premises.
Q. A legal description of the real property on which the premises are to be located, the name and
address of the record owner; the name and address of each lien holder; the name and address of
each party to a valid and subsisting contract of sale, deed of trust or other agreement the subject
of which is the aforesaid real property. If any of the persons sought to be identified by this section
is a corporation, the names and resident addresses of the officers, directors and managers of said
corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the
corporation and the address of the corporation itself, if different from the address of the proposed
establishment.
R. An agreement that if any of the information supplied pursuant to this section becomes outdated by
virtue of changes in the operation of the business or otherwise needs to be supplemented, the
licensee shall provide the city clerk with the modified or supplemental data within ten (10) days of
the change or addition being effective.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 130/467
S. As to subsections C, G and O of this section, if the owner or applicant corporation is an
"intermediary company", as defined in section 5.36.030 of this chapter, the identity of each related
"holding company" or "subsidiary", as those terms are defined in section 5.36.030 of this chapter,
shall be provided. In providing the identity of each such corporation, the applicant shall furnish the
names and addresses of each of the officers, directors and managers and of each stockholder or
shareholder owning more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation, and the address
of the corporation. (Ord. 1207 § 1, 2001)
5.36.070: CONTROL BY CITY CLERK:
The city clerk shall, within three (3) working days of a receipt of an application for license required by
this chapter submit a complete copy of the application to the planning and zoning administrator,
building inspector, southwest district health, fire chief for the city, attorney, city engineer and the
director of public safety. (Ord. 1207 § 1, 2001)
5.36.080: INVESTIGATION TO BE MADE BY CITY OFFICIALS AND OTHER
AGENCIES:
Upon receipt of an application for licensing from the city clerk as required by this chapter, respective
city officials and other governmental agencies shall commence investigations as to whether the
physical plant of the proposed establishment is in conformity with the state law and this code within
ten (10) days of receiving the license application and state whether the proposed establishment is in
compliance with the applicable ordinances, state laws and regulations. It shall further be the duty of
each respective official agency, should a license subsequently be granted to the applicant, to examine
and inspect such place licensed on a regular basis to determine continuing conformity to the
applicable laws and regulations. If, during such routine inspection, a discrepancy is noted, the official
noting such discrepancy shall so advise the licensee in writing.
The licensee shall have ten (10) days within which to correct the discrepancy. Reasonable extensions
of time may be granted the licensee if the discrepancy cannot be eliminated within a ten (10) day
period. (Ord. 1207 § 1, 2001)
5.36.090: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. When the city clerk has received a report and recommendation from each of the officials or
agencies designated in section 5.36.070 of this chapter and not later than twenty (20) days from
the filing of the application, the city clerk shall submit the license application and official reports to
the city council for inclusion in the council agenda.
B. The city council shall act upon the application at the next regular scheduled meeting after
submission of the application by the city clerk. If each of the designated officials or agencies has
determined that the proposed business establishment is in conformity with all applicable city and
state laws, and if it appears that there are no material misrepresentations or fraud in the
application or in connection with the investigation by the city officials or other governmental
agencies, the city council may grant a license to the applicant. (Ord. 1207 § 1, 2001)
5.36.100: INVESTIGATION BY CITY COUNCIL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 131/467
A. The city council prior to the issuance of a license requested by this chapter, and after review of the
submitted application, may undertake further investigation if it has reasonable cause to believe that
the applicant has or is attempting to perpetrate a fraud or material misrepresentation on the city.
Such further investigation may be completed and written findings issued at or prior to the next
regular meeting following the meeting at which such application was initially considered.
B. Upon a finding by the council that the material misrepresentation or fraud has been perpetrated
either in the application or in connection with the investigation by city officials or other
governmental agencies, said application may be denied by the city council. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to permit any investigation into the substantive content of the publications or
films to be displayed or sold by the applicant. (Ord. 1207 § 1, 2001)
5.36.110: MISDEMEANOR:
It shall be a misdemeanor for an applicant or licensee to make a material misrepresentation on his
application, to perpetrate a fraud on any investigative official or agency, to operate a business as
defined herein without first obtaining a business license or permit or to operate a business licensed
under this chapter in contravention to the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city. (Ord. 1207
§ 1, 2001)
5.36.120: REVOCATION:
The licensee shall be responsible for the operation of the licensed premises in conformity with the
ordinances of the city and the state. If a person is convicted of any felony or any misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude, or upon a conviction of the licensee or any agent or any employee of the
licensee of violating any law or any ordinance including this chapter, which is intended to protect the
health, welfare or safety of individuals living in this community or this state, and which violation occurs
in the course of the business activity licensed under this chapter, the city council may revoke all
licenses held by the licensee under this chapter for a period up to and including eighteen (18) months
from the date of conviction. Upon expiration of the period of revocation, the applicant will be eligible to
reapply for a license according to the procedures and requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1207 § 1,
2001)
5.36.130: PROCEDURE FOR LICENSE REVOCATION:
A. Any revocation of a license pursuant to this chapter shall not occur until a hearing is held before the
city council. Twenty (20) days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing and the nature of
the grounds for such revocation sufficient to inform the licensee and enable him to respond shall
be given. The licensee shall have the right to appear at said hearing in person or by counsel to
present evidence and argument on the licensee's behalf and cross examine witnesses.
B. The city council shall make a ruling based on the evidence presented to it at the hearing.
Thereafter, the licensee shall be informed in writing of the council's decision. If the council by
majority vote approves revocation, such revocation shall take effect when personal service of the
written decision is made upon the licensee or an agent or employee of said licensee. (Ord. 1207
§ 1, 2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 132/467
5.36.140: PRIOR LOCATION AND LICENSE LAPSE:
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way affect the rights of present adult businesses to continue their
operation so long as they adhere to the provisions of this chapter, including submission of properly
completed applications within thirty (30) days of the date of this chapter and otherwise maintain a
current license. Once an existing operation obtains a classified license, only subsequent change in
classification shall be treated as a new use and must qualify under the provisions of this chapter. If
there is a failure to timely renew a license, any subsequent application must satisfy all the
requirements of this chapter including section 5.36.160 of this chapter pertaining to location
restrictions. (Ord. 1207 § 1, 2001)
5.36.150: LICENSE FEES:
A. The following annual license fees must be paid to the city at the time the license application is
submitted:
1. Class A license: As set by resolution.
2. Class B license: As set by resolution.
3. Class C license: As set by resolution.
4. Class D license: As set by resolution per adult arcade machine.
5. Class E license: As set by resolution plus applicable fees for class A content and fees for each
arcade machine under class D.
B. The request for renewal of licenses must be made on forms supplied by the city clerk and such
requests must be submitted by December 1 for renewal for the next calendar year. Each renewal
application must be accompanied by the annual fee.
C. Where an application for a new license is made after January 1, the applicable fee shall be
apportioned in accordance with the number of days remaining in the calendar year. (Ord. 1371,
2012: Ord. 1207 § 1, 2001)
5.36.160: LOCATION OF BUSINESS:
No adult store, adult theater, adult arcade or adult entertainment establishment shall be located within
three hundred (300) yards of any school, church, bar, hospital, nursing home, assisted living facility,
adult or child daycare facility, liquor store or public park which is open to children. No adult store, adult
theater, adult arcade or adult entertainment establishment shall be located in any area which has been
zoned as A or B residential, C commercial, T trailer or as F unclassified or in any similarly designated
zone if those zoning designations should be changed. (Ord. 1207 § 1, 2001)
Chapter 5.37
CHILDCARE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 133/467
5.37.010: LICENSE AND CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall operate a "childcare center", a family home childcare or a group childcare, as those
terms are defined in section 17.08.010 of this code until that person has obtained a license from the
state of Idaho and a conditional use permit from the city. No permit for a conditional use shall be
issued by the city until a copy of the state license is provided to the city clerk. (Ord. 1344, 2011)
Chapter 5.38
PRECIOUS METAL AND GEM DEALERS
5.38.010: DEFINITIONS:
JEWELRY: Any tangible article of personal property ordinarily wearable on the person consisting in
whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum, aluminum, lead, brass, copper, pewter, alexandrite,
diamonds, emeralds, garnets, opals, rubies, pearls, jade, and such other metals, minerals or gems
customarily regarded as precious or semiprecious.
MEMBER OF THE GENERAL PUBLIC: Individuals, partnerships, corporations or other associations.
PRECIOUS METAL AND GEM DEALER: Any person, corporation, partnership or association which
engages in any transaction of buying, selling or receiving secondhand jewelry, sterling silverware or
gold or silver coins or bullion to or from the public within the city of Payette.
"Precious metal and gem dealer" does not include a business which smelts, refines, assays or
manufactures precious metals, gems or valuable articles and has no retail operation open to the
public.
SECONDHAND: Previously owned by a member of the general public immediately prior to the
transaction at hand. It does not mean previously owned by a wholesaler, retailer or by a secondhand
dealer licensed. (Ord. 1347, 2011)
5.38.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. No person, corporation, partnership or association shall engage in the business of dealing in,
selling and exchanging secondhand jewelry, sterling silverware or gold and silver coins or bullion
without having first obtained a license as provided in this section.
B. The requirements of this section do not apply to the following:
1. Transactions at occasional garage or yard sales, estate sales, coin, gem, or antique or stamp
shows, conventions or auctions.
2. Transactions involving the purchase of grindings, filing, slag, sweeps, scraps or dust from an
industrial manufacturer, dental laboratory, dentist or agent thereof.
3. Operations between dealers licensed under this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 134/467
4. Transactions at financial institutions licensed or regulated by the state of Idaho or U.S.
government. (Ord. 1347, 2011)
5.38.030: APPLICATION:
Application for a precious metal and gem dealer's license shall be made to the city clerk on forms
furnished by the city clerk, and shall contain the following:
A. Name, place and date of birth and street residence of the applicant.
B. The trade name, address of the business and name and address of the owner of the premises.
C. A statement as to whether within the preceding ten (10) years the applicant has been convicted of
any crime, petty misdemeanor or municipal ordinance violation relating to theft, damage or
trespass of property or operation of a business, the nature and date of the offense and the penalty
assessed.
D. Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation or partnership.
1. If the applicant is a corporation, the state of incorporation and the names and addresses of all
officers and directors.
2. If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners.
E. The name of the manager or proprietor of the business.
F. Such other reasonable and pertinent information as the city clerk may from time to time require.
(Ord. 1347, 2011)
5.38.040: INVESTIGATION:
The city clerk shall refer the application to the chief of police, who shall make a criminal history
background investigation of the applicant. Upon completion, the chief of police, or his representative,
shall forward the results of the investigation to the city clerk. If, as a result of the investigation, the
applicant is not found to have committed any of the acts requiring denial as listed below, the city clerk
shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, and approval of the city council, issue the license to the
applicant. The city clerk shall deny the applicant the license if the applicant has:
A. Committed any act consisting of fraud or misrepresentation;
B. Committed any act which, if committed by a licensee, would be grounds for suspension or
revocation of a license;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 135/467
C. Within the previous ten (10) years, been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony directly relating to
his or her fitness to engage in the occupation of peddler, solicitor or street vendor and including,
but not limited to, those misdemeanors and felonies involving moral turpitude, fraud or
misrepresentation;
D. Been charged with a misdemeanor or felony of the type defined in subsection C of this section and
disposition of that charge is still pending;
E. Ever been charged of any crime involving sexual abuse against a child;
F. Been refused a license under the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that any applicant
denied a license under the provisions of this chapter may reapply if and when the reasons for
denial no longer exist; and
G. Made any false or misleading statements in the application. (Ord. 1347, 2011)
5.38.050: DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The city shall have the authority to deny, revoke or temporarily suspend any license requested or
issued in accordance with this chapter for any of the following reasons:
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the application;
B. Fraud or misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of conducting the business or
trade;
C. Any violation of this chapter;
D. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
E. Conducting business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the
peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
F. No precious metal and gem dealer's license shall be granted to an individual, partnership or a
corporate applicant, unless the individual applicant, each of the partners, or the corporate agent
has been a resident of Idaho continuously for at least ninety (90) days prior to the date of the
application. (Ord. 1347, 2011)
5.38.060: REGULATIONS:
A. Altered Or Obliterated Serial Number: No licensee shall receive any item or property with an altered
or obliterated serial number, or from which a serial number has been removed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 136/467
B. Identification: No precious metal and gem dealer shall purchase or exchange any property without
first securing adequate identification from the seller as stipulated in section 5.38.080 of this
chapter.
C. Recordkeeping: Every licensed precious metal and gem dealer shall keep a transaction description
record as stipulated in section 5.38.090 of this chapter for any property purchased or exchanged. A
record of all transactions shall be delivered to the chief of police or the chief's designee at least
one time each week and at other times when requested by the chief or the chief's designee.
D. Transaction Record Reporting: Every dealer shall report each transaction description record as
required in section 5.38.090 of this chapter.
E. Inspection: Every item purchased or exchanged by a licensed precious metal and gem dealer shall
be open for inspection by the chief of police, or the chief's designee, at any reasonable time.
F. Holding Period: Every property exchanged or purchased by a precious metal and gem dealer,
except gold coins or bullion, or silver coins or bullion, shall be kept on the dealer's premises
separate and apart from any other property, unchanged and unaltered from the form it was
received for ten (10) days after a report is submitted to chief of police or the chief's designee.
G. Additional Holding Period: The chief of police may, at the chief's sole discretion, cause any property
exchanged or purchased, which the police chief has reason to believe was not exchanged or
purchased by the lawful owner, to be held for an additional holding period deemed reasonable by
the chief of police after the elapse of the initial ten (10) day holding period for identification by the
lawful owner.
H. Minors: No precious metal and gem dealer shall have any business dealings as a precious metal
and gem dealer with any person under eighteen (18) years of age, unless that person is with the
parent or guardian, or the dealer obtains or has on file a written consent signed in the dealer's
presence by the parent or guardian granting permission for that person to transact business with
the dealer.
I. Stolen Goods: Every precious metal and gem dealer shall report to the police any item presented to
the precious metal and gem dealer during the course of business the precious metal and gem
dealer has reason to believe was stolen, either by the person presenting the item or another party.
(Ord. 1347, 2011)
5.38.070: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements
of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 1347, 2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 137/467
5.38.080: ADEQUATE IDENTIFICATION:
A. Adequate identification obtained by precious metal and gem dealers shall be limited to one of the
following current and unexpired forms of identification:
1. A state of Idaho identification card.
2. A valid Idaho motor vehicle operator's license.
3. A valid motor vehicle operator's license, containing a picture, issued by another state.
4. A military identification card.
5. A valid passport.
6. An alien registration card.
B. No person pawning, pledging, exchanging, consigning, leaving for deposit or selling any property
with any licensee shall give a false or fictitious name, present false or altered identification
documents, give a false date of birth or give a false address of residence or telephone number to
the licensee gathering information for the transaction description record. (Ord. 1347, 2011)
5.38.090: TRANSACTION DESCRIPTION RECORD:
A. Records Kept: Transaction description records shall be kept either as computer files or in a written
document approved by the chief of police, or the chief's designee. Written transaction description
record documents shall be legible and in ink, and no entry made shall be erased, obliterated or
defaced. Licensed precious metal and gem dealers may keep transaction description records as
sequentially numbered invoices. Blank or voided invoices kept by precious metal and gem dealers
as transaction description records shall be kept in sequence. Computerized files, written
documents and invoices of transaction description records shall be open to inspection by the chief
of police, or the chief's designee, at any reasonable time. Computerized files, written documents
and invoices of transaction description records shall be maintained and retained for one year.
B. Record Information: Transaction description records shall include:
1. The date and time of the transaction.
2. A complete description in English of the item or property pawned, pledged, consigned,
exchanged or purchased including when applicable, but not limited to, any trademark,
identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, any engraved number, word or
initial, a description of any settings, a description by weight and design of the property, other
identification marks and inscriptions of a personal nature, whether the property is a male or
female item or property.
3. The amount of money loaned or paid.
4. The name, address and date of birth of the person pawning, pledging, exchanging, consigning
or selling the item or property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 138/467
5. Identification number from and a photocopy of the identification obtained as stipulated in section
5.38.080 of this chapter.
6. A signed, written declaration of ownership from the person pawning, pledging, exchanging,
consigning or selling the item or property, separate and apart from any computerized records
maintained and on a form approved by the chief of police, or the chief's designee, stating
whether the person owns the item(s) or property, how long the person has owned the item or
property, whether the person or another found the item or property, and if found, the details of its
finding.
C. Photographs:
1. Each transaction description shall include a color photograph or color video recording of:
a. Each customer pawning, pledging, consigning, exchanging or selling an item or property.
b. Every item or property pawned, pledged, consigned, exchanged or sold without a unique
serial or identification number permanently engraved or affixed.
2. Photographs shall be at least two inches (2") square.
The major portion of the photograph or the video recording of persons shall include an
identifiable facial image. Property photographed or video recorded shall be accurately depicted.
The licensee shall inform the person that he or she is being photographed or video recorded by
displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises. The licensee shall
keep the photograph or video recording for three (3) months.
D. Signature: The person pawning, pledging, consigning, exchanging or selling the item or property
shall electronically sign the computerized record, or sign an alternate form approved by the chief of
police, or the chief's designee, if computerized records are maintained, or sign the written
document transaction descriptions record or the invoice.
E. Other Information: Transaction records shall include any other reasonable information the chief of
police may from time to time require. (Ord. 1347, 2011)
Chapter 5.40
USED CAR SALES AND USED CAR LOTS
5.40.010: DEFINITIONS:
ESTABLISHED USED CAR LOT: Any land in the city of Payette maintained or used for conducting a
used car business which business was in existence at the time this chapter was created.
USED CAR: As used in this chapter, means any used, preowned or secondhand motor vehicle to
which a certificate of title or license plates have been issued and which motor vehicle has been
registered for use on the highways by a purchaser, consumer or by a dealer, and includes any "used
or secondhand vehicle", defined as any vehicle required to be titled, trailer coaches or trailers
weighing over one thousand (1,000) pounds.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 139/467
USED CAR BUSINESS: The purchase, sale, lease, consignment sale or exchange by any person,
firm or corporation of five (5) or more used cars within a twelve (12) month period.
USED CAR DEALER: A person who brokers, deals or engages in the purchase, sale, lease,
consignment sale or exchange of five (5) or more used cars within a twelve (12) month period.
USED CAR LOT: Any place where used cars are displayed and offered for purchase, sale, lease,
consignment sale or exchange in the open by a used car dealer or used car business. (Ord. 1348,
2011)
5.40.020: ESTABLISHED USED CAR LOTS:
Any established used car lot must have:
A. A permanent structure containing not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet of interior
floor space to be used as a business or sales office. Any new structure to be built shall conform to
this code and the international building code, 2009 edition. Any existing structure shall substantially
conform to standards established in this code, in regard to matters connected with public health
and safety. The city building inspector shall cause an inspection to be made to determine such
compliance.
B. Improved grounds complying with the following minimum requirements upon that portion of the land
to be used for display and/or offering for sale of used cars:
1. Parking space for inventory shall be not less than ten feet by twenty feet (10' x 20') for each
used car.
2. Improved ground shall contain a gravel base of not less than four inches (4") covered by a
minimum of two inches (2") of pavement or concrete that conforms to Idaho department of
transportation standards of specifications.
3. The finished grade of such improved grounds shall be not less than twelve inches (12") or more
than thirty six inches (36") above the grade of the street adjoining said premises.
4. Two (2) driveways, one for ingress and one for egress, or one driveway adequate to permit
simultaneous ingress and egress.
C. Must be in compliance with all standards of this code, including, but not limited to, section
17.72.020 of this code. (Ord. 1348, 2011)
5.40.030: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall operate as a used car dealer or engage in a used car
business within the city of Payette without a city used car sales license as herein provided. A separate
city used car sales license shall be required for each established used car lot.
The city clerk is hereby authorized to issue a city used car sales license upon submission by the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 140/467
applicant of a written application on forms to be provided by the city clerk and upon compliance by the
applicant with the following requirements:
A. The application shall be accompanied by written detailed plans showing the layout of land to be
used, the portion thereof to be improved as required herein, method proposed for improvement,
drainage, driveways for ingress and egress, and buildings to be built or existing buildings to be
used in the operation of the established used car lot.
The application shall also be accompanied by evidence that he/she has obtained all applicable
zoning, use, or site plan approvals/permits required to be obtained prior to operating a used car lot
or business in the proposed location in the city. The granting of a city used car sales license is
contingent on obtaining all applicable zoning, use, or site plan approvals/permits. The city clerk
shall submit all such plans to the city engineer for his/her approval prior to granting of the city used
car sales license.
B. Applicant must furnish evidence that he/she possesses a valid state of Idaho used vehicle dealer's
license.
C. There shall be a onetime city used car sales license fee set by resolution paid when an application
is filed. There shall be no other license fees as long as the lot remains in compliance with city
codes. In the event the city clerk determines that the used car sales lot is out of compliance with
city codes, the license shall become null and void, and before an applicant may recommence
business, there shall be a renewal application filed. There shall be a fee set by resolution paid with
the application for a renewal.
No city used car sales license issued under this chapter may be transferred except upon written
application by the licensee and the proposed transferee on forms to be provided by the city clerk
and the payment of a transfer fee set by resolution. Provided however, the transferee shall be
required to furnish any and all information as may be contained in an initial application for a city
used car sales license. Prior to transferring any city used car sales license, the city clerk shall
determine that the established used car lot for which the city used car sales license has been
issued is complying with all of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1371, 2012: Ord. 1348, 2011)
5.40.040: REGULATIONS:
A. Each licensee under this chapter shall comply with the following regulations:
1. Keep the premises in a neat and clean condition. Dealer shall not allow any used motor vehicles
that are part of its inventory to encroach upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other publicly
maintained areas of the city.
2. Not allow any loud or boisterous noises to emanate from its place of business, either by persons
congregating there or by the playing of recording instruments, radios and/or television sets or
other sound reproducing equipment.
3. At all times keep each motor vehicle used in connection with its said business or maintained as
part of the inventory thereof insured with public liability and property damage insurance in an
amount not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per person and twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) per accident, personal injury or death liability insurance and five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) property damage insurance. (Ord. 1348, 2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 141/467
5.40.050: LICENSE REVOCATION:
Any city used car sales license issued under this chapter shall be automatically revoked upon
termination, suspension, revocation or failure to renew the licensee's state of Idaho used vehicle
dealer's license or upon proof by competent legal evidence that the licensee made a false statement
in any application for city used car sales license filed upon this chapter. Any such city used car sales
license may be revoked by the city council in their discretion upon proof of conviction of the licensee
for a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1348, 2011)
5.40.060: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by fine, imprisonment or both, up to,
but not exceeding, the maximum penalties set forth in Idaho Code section 50-302, as amended. (Ord.
1348, 2011)
Title 6
ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04
ANIMALS AND POULTRY
6.04.010: ANIMALS; RIDING OR LEADING WITHIN CITY LIMITS:
No person shall, without first obtaining a permit from the City Clerk, ride any horse, mule, llama or
cattle, or suffer, permit or allow any horse, mule, llama or cattle to come upon any City park, any
street, sidewalk, or upon grass strips between sidewalk and roadway which lies within the City limits
and which is more particularly described as lying south of Third Avenue North, north of 6th Avenue
South, between Seventh Street and west of Tenth Street, or within any portion of the right-of-way of
any State highway, any portion of South Main Street. Leading any horse, mule, llama or cattle through
the prohibited areas is permitted during daylight hours only, and shall always proceed in single file on
the extreme right-hand portion of the roadway. Horses shall not be ridden or led on roadways during
hours of darkness. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an infraction for a first offense
and guilty of a misdemeanor for any second or subsequent offenses. (Ord. 1444, 2018)
6.04.020: ANIMALS; RUNNING AT LARGE; NOTICE OF SEIZURE AND
IMPOUNDMENT:
No cattle, horses, mules, hogs, llamas, goats or sheep shall be allowed to run at large, or be herded,
tethered or picketed in any of the streets, alleys or public grounds within the City limits; and it is made
and shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to seize and impound any and all cattle, horses, mules,
hogs, llamas, goats or sheep found tethered, picketed or running at large within the City limits.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 142/467
When a police officer seizes and impounds any animal mentioned above running at large, he shall
forthwith post notice as provided in Idaho Code, title 25, chapter 23. (Ord. 1444, 2018)
6.04.030: ANIMALS; SEIZED AND IMPOUNDED; SALE AT PUBLIC AUCTION:
Any animal seized and impounded under this chapter, if unclaimed or, if claimed, upon which the legal
charges and expenses have not been paid, shall be sold by the Chief of Police at public auction to the
highest bidder, at the time and place mentioned in the notice described in section 6.04.020 of this
chapter. All monies received by the Chief of Police from the sale of any animals so seized and
impounded shall be paid by him to the City Clerk. (Ord. 1433, 2017)
6.04.040: ANIMALS; SEIZED AND IMPOUNDED; CARE:
Any animal seized and impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall be provided with proper
care, food and water while so confined by the Chief of Police. (Ord. 1433, 2017)
6.04.050: ANIMALS; SEIZED AND IMPOUNDED; OWNER'S RIGHT OF
POSSESSION:
If, at any time prior to such sale set forth in section 6.04.030 of this chapter, the owner of any animal
so seized and impounded claims the same, he shall be entitled to the possession thereof, upon
payment to the Chief of Police of fees and of all legal charges and expenses incident to such taking up
and keeping. Such fine shall be paid by the Chief of Police to the City Clerk. (Ord. 1433, 2017)
6.04.060: ANIMALS; SEIZED AND IMPOUNDED; FEES:
The Chief of Police shall collect the actual and necessary expenses incurred for seizing, impounding,
keeping and selling any animal under the provisions of this chapter:
A. For taking up and impounding cattle, horses, mules, per head;
B. For hogs, sheep and goats, per head. (Ord. 1433, 2017)
6.04.070: ANIMALS; SEIZED AND IMPOUNDED; MONTHLY REPORT:
The Chief of Police shall report to the Council, monthly, a full statement of all stock impounded under
the provisions of this chapter, giving a description of all animals so impounded, the date when seized,
the date of sale, the amount received for fines or for the sale of such animals, the amount paid to the
City Clerk, and the owners if known to him. He shall receive a receipt in duplicate from the City Clerk
for all monies paid and shall file the duplicate with his report. (Ord. 1433, 2017)
6.04.080: PROHIBITED ENTRANCE INTO POUND; DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 143/467
Any person who breaks into the City pound or takes therefrom any animal that has been impounded
under the provisions of this chapter, or attempts to take the same from the Chief of Police while in his
possession, shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1433, 2017)
6.04.090: POULTRY:
For purposes of this section, "poultry" shall mean domesticated birds (galliformes and anseriformes),
and shall include chickens, ducks, and geese but shall not include peafowl, guinea fowl, ostriches, or
emus. Male poultry is prohibited in the corporate City limits.
A. Required Confinement: It is unlawful for any person to keep any chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys or
other poultry within the City limits, except the same shall be confined within a shed or other
enclosure sufficient to retain the same and prevent them from trespassing upon the streets, alleys
and other property within the City limits. In no event shall the coop and/or run constructed for
containing poultry be located in a front yard, and shall not be less than twenty five feet (25') from a
dwelling other than that of the person keeping or maintaining poultry.
B. Limits: A limit of no more than six (6) chickens, ducks, geese, turkey or other poultry is allowed per
lot/parcel smaller than three (3) acres. A limit of no more than twenty five (25) poultry is allowed on
a lot/parcel larger than three (3) acres, if such poultry are not intended for sale and do not
comprise a commercial agricultural use, except as outlined in T Transitional District.
C. Running At Large Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to permit or allow any chickens, ducks,
geese, turkeys or other poultry to run at large upon the streets, alleys or private property not
belonging to the owner of such poultry, within the corporate limits. Poultry is allowed to be free
range in a securely fenced rear yard and restricted to the owner's property. (Ord. 1433, 2017)
6.04.100: RESERVED:
(Ord. 1433, 2017)
6.04.110: MORATORIUM ON TRAPPING AND KILLING OF CATS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except an official of the City of Payette, a person designated by a
City official or a licensed veterinarian or their designee to trap and kill domestic and feral cats within
the City limits. (Ord. 1433, 2017)
6.04.115: KEEPING OF SWINE; DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
Any person who keeps within the corporate limits any swine, in or on any pen, place or premises, the
same shall be defined to be a nuisance and, under the provisions of this section, the owner, agent or
other person in charge of any such swine shall be deemed the author of such nuisance and shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1433, 2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 144/467
6.04.120: TRAPPING ANIMALS UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful to trap animals within the City limits of Payette, Payette County, Idaho. "Trapping"
is defined as the ensnarement, capture, entrapment, killing or taking of animals for the purpose of
removing, using, obtaining or selling animal pelts. (Ord. 1433, 2017)
6.04.125: DEAD ANIMALS; REMOVAL REQUIRED; NONCOMPLIANCE AS
MISDEMEANOR:
It shall be the duty of every person being the owner of, or having in his possession or under his control
or charge, any horse or other animal which shall in any manner come to its death, within the corporate
limits, to immediately remove the body or carcass of such animal beyond the limits of the City, and to
bury or burn or otherwise dispose of the same, so that it shall not become offensive; and any person
who neglects to comply with the provisions of this section, within twelve (12) hours after notice shall
have been served upon him, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1433, 2017)
Chapter 6.08
DOGS
6.08.010: DEFINITIONS:
CONFINED: Keeping an animal within a secure enclosure or pen that cannot be opened by any
person other than the owner or with the owner's assistance or consent and from which an animal
cannot escape.
GUARD DOG: Any dog trained or used to protect persons or property by attacking or threatening to
attack any person found within the area patrolled by the dog and that is either securely enclosed
within that area at all times or under the continuous control of a trained handler.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY: For purposes of this chapter, includes the owner's spouse, child, parent or
sibling.
MUZZLE: For purposes of this chapter, shall mean a restraining device made of metal, plastic, leather,
cloth or a combination of these materials that, when fitted and fastened over a snout/mouth/head,
prevents the dog from biting but allows room for the dog to breathe and pant. The muzzle must be
made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but
must prevent it from biting any person or animal.
ORDINANCE OFFICER: That person employed by the city of Payette who has as their primary
responsibility the enforcement of all city ordinances including all animal control ordinances.
OWNER: Any person who owns, possesses, keeps, exercises control over, maintains, harbors, feeds,
waters, transports, or sells an animal or one who assists another in possession, sale, transport,
harboring, feeding, watering or maintenance thereof. An owner need not have any pecuniary,
proprietary or economic interest in a dog.
SECURE PEN OR ENCLOSURE: A six (6) sided structure designed to prevent entry of a child or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 145/467
escape of a vicious dog. Such pen or structure must have minimum dimensions of five feet by ten feet
(5' x 10') per animal housed within and must have secure chainlink sides, a secure top and a secure
bottom. At a minimum, a pen or structure must have secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or
structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded in the ground no less than
two feet (2'). The enclosure must provide protection from the elements for the animal. All structures
erected to house a vicious dog must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the City and
shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. The gate of the pen or enclosure shall be secured with
a keyed or combination lock. All such structures shall be constructed in such a manner, and of such
materials, as approved by the Payette City building inspector and the Chief of Police or his appointed
representative. A certificate of inspection of the structures shall be made a part of that animal's file at
the Payette Police Department.
SECURE TEMPORARY ENCLOSURE: A secure temporary enclosure used for purposes of
transporting a vicious dog, and which includes a top and bottom permanently attached to the sides
except for a door for removal of the animal. Such enclosure shall be of such material and construction
and secured with a keyed or combination lock that when the door is closed the animal cannot exit the
enclosure on its own.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal, other than a "vicious dog", that, without intentional provocation, bites
or attacks humans or other animals; or in a vicious or terrorizing manner approaches any person in an
apparent attitude of attack, whether or not the attack is consummated or is capable of being
consummated.
VICIOUS DOG: A. Means any dog:
1. While at large, menaces, chases, causes injury, kills, displays threatening or aggressive
behavior or otherwise endangers the safety of human beings, domestic animals, or livestock;
or
2. Although not at large, bites or causes physical injury to any domestic animal or livestock or
person; or
3. Which is kept with the intention of using its size, manner, disposition, training, or breeding to
instill fear in others; or
4. Which is bred, trained, owned, possessed, or kept for the purpose of dogfighting; or
5. Which is used as a weapon in the commission of a crime.
B. A vicious dog is "unconfined", as the term is used in this chapter, if such dog is not confined in a
secure pen or enclosure upon the premises of the person in possession of such dog.
C. A "vicious dog" shall not include the following:
1. A police dog that is being used to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the
performance of their duties.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 146/467
2. A dog, when at the time an injury or damage to any domestic animal or livestock or person
was sustained, the precipitating cause constituted justified provocation as described in section
25-2810(3), Idaho Code. (Ord. 1427, 2017)
6.08.020: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required:
1. Any person who shall own or keep any dog within the City limits shall first obtain a license
therefor in compliance with this chapter;
a. Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any person visiting in
the City for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, any nonresident of the City not maintaining
a dog within the City limits, or the owner of any dog under four (4) months of age.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep a vicious dog within the City limits prior to the
issuance of a City of Payette dog license. No license shall be issued to the owner of any vicious
dog prior to complete compliance with all sections of this chapter. Compliance with this chapter
shall be verified by the Chief of Police, or his designee.
B. Dog License Fees: The City Clerk, or a designee, is hereby authorized to issue a license to any
owner or person having charge of any dog over four (4) months of age within the City upon
payment as set by resolution per head for each dog. Owners presenting veterinary certification that
the dog has been spayed or neutered will pay a fee as set by resolution. Persons who are at least
sixty two (62) years of age will pay a fee as set by resolution per head to license their
spayed/neutered dog(s). Dogs which have not been spayed or neutered are not eligible for a
reduced license fee. All licenses issued will be valid from the date of issue and will expire on March
31 of each year.
C. Vaccinations: Any owner or person having charge of any dog over four (4) months of age within the
City shall be required to have the dog vaccinated for rabies and to keep such vaccinations current.
If owner does not provide proof of such vaccination upon receiving a license, owner shall sign
application for license under penalty of perjury that required rabies vaccinations are current for
each dog licensed. This section does not apply to vicious dogs.
D. Vicious Dog License Fees: The City Clerk, or a designee, is hereby authorized to issue a license to
any person showing compliance with all requirements of this chapter, and upon payment as set by
resolution per head for each vicious dog. Vicious dogs are not eligible for a reduced license fee. All
licenses issued will be valid from the date of issue and will expire on March 31 of each year.
E. Due Date: Such license fees shall be due and payable on April 1 of each year, except as
hereinafter provided.
F. Penalty And Exceptions: If any license fee is not paid on or before April 1 of each year, the City
Clerk shall collect a penalty in addition to said license fee in the sum as set by resolution; provided,
however, that any dog born subsequent to April 1 of any year shall be licensed by the payment of
the appropriate license fee, without penalty, within four (4) months after its birth, and thereafter the
penalty shall be added as hereinbefore set forth, and any dog brought into the City subsequent to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 147/467
April 1 of any year shall be licensed by the payment of the appropriate license fee, without penalty,
within thirty (30) days after being brought into the City, and thereafter the penalty shall be added as
hereinbefore set forth. (Ord. 1447, 2018: Ord. 1427, 2017)
6.08.030: LICENSE TAGS:
A. Tag To Be Worn: Every owner shall be required to provide each dog a collar or harness to which
the license tag must be securely affixed, and shall ensure that the collar and the tag are constantly
worn. The absence of the license tag on a dog's collar shall be prima facie evidence that said dog
has not been legally licensed. Show dogs, during showing, are exempted from wearing the collar
and tag.
B. Lost Tag: A duplicate or replacement tag shall be issued by the City Clerk upon payment as set by
resolution for each tag so issued to replace the original tag which was lost or destroyed.
C. Unlawful To Remove: No person shall remove or cause to be removed the collar or tag from any
licensed dog without consent of the owner, keeper or harborer thereof. (Ord. 1402, 2016: Ord.
1400, 2015)
6.08.040: KENNEL LICENSE:
A. It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain, harbor or possess upon any one premises more than three
(3) dogs, unless the owner or person in charge thereof is engaged in the commercial business of
buying, selling, breeding, boarding or training of dogs and has first obtained a commercial kennel
license. Application for a commercial kennel license shall be made to the City Clerk and shall be
accompanied by an application fee as set by resolution. The kennel license shall not become
effective until it is reviewed and approved by the City Council.
B. No dog kennel license shall be issued for the operation or maintenance of a kennel in any
residential district or in any business district within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any residential
structure. Any person, firm or corporation operating or maintaining a licensed dog kennel within the
City must also obtain a certificate from the Zoning Administrator that the location conforms to the
regulations of the City.
C. Dog kennels shall be maintained in accordance with this section. The kennels shall be sufficiently
soundproof so that noises from within cannot be heard by adjoining landowners. No kennel shall
be built or constructed, nor shall any building be remodeled into a kennel, until all required building
permits are obtained and written consent is obtained from the property owner.
D. All kennels will be maintained in such a manner that there shall be no odor emanating from the
kennels that can be detected by any adjoining landowners. Sanitation shall be such that the kennel
shall not become a breeding area for flies, vermin or insects. All animals kept within the kennel
shall be properly fed and sanitarily housed. No animal kept in a kennel shall be mistreated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 148/467
E. The permit issued by the city council shall be a license and may be revoked upon a showing that
any requirement of this chapter is not being fulfilled. It shall be in effect for a period of one year
from date of issuance and shall expire without notice of any kind. A kennel license will be renewed
every year.
F. Whenever any kennel is maintained in such manner as to be offensive on account of noise or
odors, or otherwise, any person may make a complaint to the city council. Upon filing of such
complaint, the city council shall immediately notify the owner or keeper of such kennel to appear
before the council to show cause why the kennel license should not be revoked. Such hearing
shall not be less than five (5) days nor more than twenty eight (28) days from the date of filing such
complaint, and the notice shall be served not less than seven (7) days before hearing. After
hearing, the council will have the following options: 1) revoke or cancel the license; 2) put the
license on probation and subject to immediate revocation in the event of any additional violations,
subject to the terms and conditions as the council may deem appropriate; 3) dismiss the complaint.
(Ord. 1371, 2012: Ord. 1278 § 1, 2007: Ord. 1270 § 2, 2006)
6.08.050: POLICE AUTHORITY:
A. Fresh Pursuit: In the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, any peace officer, police officer,
ordinance officer or other public officer, is authorized to enter the premises of any person to take
possession of licensed or unlicensed at large, vicious dogs when in pursuit of any such dog at the
time the dog goes onto private property.
B. Exhibit License: It shall be unlawful for any owner or person keeping or harboring a dog for which a
license is required by this chapter to fail or refuse to exhibit the license or tag upon demand by a
police officer, ordinance officer, or other designated city official.
C. Interference With Police: Any person who shall molest, interrupt, hinder or prevent the chief of
police, or any peace officer, ordinance officer, or other public officer, in the discharge of his duty
herein prescribed, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1427, 2017)
6.08.060: OFFENSES AND NUISANCE CONDITIONS:
A. Running At Large Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any owner to permit any dog to be at large, off
or away from the premises of the owner, possessor, or keeper thereof.
B. Dogs Must Be Confined: A dog shall be confined upon the premises of the owner, possessor, or
keeper, in such a way as to keep the dog out of all public rights of way.
C. Nuisances: No person shall keep or harbor any animal in the city so as to create offensive odors,
excessive noise or unsanitary conditions which are a menace to the health, comfort or safety of the
public, or otherwise permit the commission or existence of a nuisance as defined hereafter. Any
animal is hereby declared to be committing a nuisance if it:
1. Disturbances: It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep any dog within the city limits which by
loud, continuous, frequent, or habitual barking, howling, whining, or yelping, annoys or disturbs
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 149/467
any neighborhood or person. When none of the residents who reside at the place where the
offending dog is being kept are at home at the time a dog is making such noises which give rise
to a complaint, such absence shall create a rebuttable presumption that the dog's barking,
howling, whining, or yelping was unlawful. Any dog, which has persistently created the noises
referred to in this section, as demonstrated by two (2) or more convictions of the owner thereof
for violating this section, is declared to be a public nuisance and may be impounded.
2. Biting: Bites another person or domestic animal.
3. Unsanitary Conditions: Any animal which scratches, digs, urinates or defecates upon any lawn,
tree, shrub, plant, building or any other public or private property, other than the property of the
owner, keeper or harborer of such animal, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Where the
owner, keeper or harborer of such animal immediately removes all feces deposited by such
animal and disposes of same in a sanitary manner, such nuisance shall be considered abated.
4. Sanitary Conditions: Every person who shall keep, maintain or harbor a dog shall maintain his
premises, including, but not limited to, dog pens or runs, in a clean and sanitary condition so that
they shall not be offensive, a harborage for vermin, or a health hazard. (Ord. 1427, 2017)
6.08.070: VICIOUS DOGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a vicious animal or dog without first complying
with the following:
A. No "owner", as defined in section 6.08.010 of this chapter, of a vicious dog shall suffer or permit
such animal to go unconfined on the premises of such person.
B. No "owner", as defined in section 6.08.010 of this chapter, shall suffer or permit such dog to go
beyond the premises of such person unless such dog is securely leashed and muzzled. When on
leash, the leash shall consist of a short high tensile strength material with a maximum length of
three feet (3') (0.9144 m). A vicious dog shall not be required to be muzzled when shown either in
a sanctioned American Kennel Club or United Kennel Club show.
C. Obtain a city dog license as required in section 6.08.020 of this chapter. Whenever any person
applies for and is granted a license to maintain a vicious dog, the application is permission from
the applicant for the chief of police, or his designee, to make whatever inquiry is deemed
necessary, including, but not limited to, entry onto the applicant's property to ensure ongoing
compliance with all provisions of this chapter. Any entry shall be limited to the purpose of
compliance inspections of the licensed premises and the licensed animal, and will be made in the
presence of the owner whenever practical.
D. Register the dog with the city police department in accordance with this chapter.
E. All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious dogs must, within ten (10) days of the effective date
hereof, provide to the police department two (2) color photographs of the registered animal clearly
showing the color and approximate size of the animal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 150/467
F. The owner of the vicious dog shall keep current the license for such vicious dog through annual
renewal. Such license is not transferable and shall be renewable only by the holder of the license
or by an immediate family member of the holder of such license. A vicious dog license tag will be
issued to the owner at the time of issuance of the license. Such license tag, along with the current
rabies tag, shall be attached to the vicious dog by means of a secure collar or harness, and shall
not be attached to any vicious dog other than the vicious dog for which the license was issued. If
the vicious dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate tag may be issued upon the payment of a fee
as stated in this chapter. The owner must be at least twenty one (21) years of age as of the license
issuance date.
G. The owner shall present to the chief of police proof that the owner has procured liability insurance
with an insurer authorized to write liability insurance in the state of Idaho providing coverage in
each occurrence in the amount of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) covering any
damage or injury that may be caused by a vicious dog during the twelve (12) month period covered
by the vicious dog license. This policy shall include the city of Payette as an additional insured,
with minimum limits of coverage of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), and shall have the effect of
saving harmless and defending the city of Payette and its officers, agents and employees from all
suits, claims, demands or actions at law or in equity arising directly or indirectly as the result of
injury to persons or damage to property occasioned by the maintenance of the vicious dog by the
owner. The policy shall contain a provision requiring the insurance company to provide written
notice to the chief of police not less than fifteen (15) days prior to any cancellation, termination, or
expiration of the policy.
H. The owner shall, at the owner's own expense, have the vicious dog spayed or neutered, and shall
present to the chief of police documentary proof from a licensed veterinarian that this sterilization
procedure has been performed.
I. The owner shall bring the vicious dog to a duly licensed veterinarian and shall cause a microchip ID
tag (such as the Avid microchip) to be placed in the vicious dog. Certification of this procedure,
along with the microchip ID number shall be provided to the chief of police. Vicious dogs that have
previously had a microchip ID tag placed in them shall have that chip verified by a duly licensed
veterinarian and provide the microchip ID number to the chief of police. Vicious dogs bearing
identification tattoos are not exempt from the microchip provision. The chief of police shall maintain
a file containing the microchip ID numbers and names of the vicious dogs and names and
addresses of the owners. The owner shall immediately notify the chief of police of any change of
address.
J. At all times when a vicious dog is at the property of the owner, the owner shall keep the vicious dog
"confined", as that term is defined in section 6.08.010 of this chapter. At all times when a vicious
dog is away from the property of the owner, the owner shall keep the vicious dog either securely
leashed and muzzled or in a "secure temporary enclosure", as that term is defined in section
6.08.010 of this chapter.
K. The owner shall not sell or otherwise transfer the vicious dog to any person except a member of the
owner's immediate family who will then become the owner and will be subject to all of the
provisions of this section. The owner shall notify the chief of police within five (5) days in the event
that the vicious dog is lost, stolen, dies, or has a litter. In the event of a litter, the owner must
deliver the puppies to the Payette animal shelter for destruction, or permanently remove the
puppies from Payette and provide sufficient evidence of such removal, by the time the puppies are
weaned, but in no event shall the owner be allowed to keep in Payette a vicious dog puppy born
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 151/467
after the date of publication of the ordinance codified herein that is more than eight (8) weeks old.
Any vicious dog puppies kept contrary to the provisions of this subsection are subject to immediate
impoundment and disposal pursuant to this chapter.
L. The owner shall have posted, at each possible entrance to the owner's property where the vicious
dog is kept, a conspicuous and clearly legible vicious dog sign. Such vicious dog sign must be at
least eight inches by ten inches (8" x 10") in rectangular dimensions and shall contain only the
words "VICIOUS DOG" in lettering not less than two inches (2") in height.
M. Exceptions:
1. Any member of the city of Payette police department, ordinance officer, or other city official, may
temporarily harbor and transport any vicious dog for purposes of enforcing the provisions of this
chapter.
2. Any humane society operating an animal shelter which is registered and licensed by the city
may temporarily hold any vicious dog that it has received or otherwise recovered, but only for so
long as it takes to contact the city of Payette police department or ordinance officer and either
turn the vicious dog over to these employees or receive permission to destroy or have destroyed
the vicious dog pursuant to the provisions of section 6.08.108 of this chapter. (Ord. 1427, 2017)
6.08.072: IMPOUNDING VICIOUS DOGS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1402, 2016)
6.08.080: GUARD DOGS EXCEPTED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1400, 2015)
6.08.090: KEEPING GUARD DOGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain guard dogs, as defined in section 6.08.010 of
this chapter, in any area for the protection of persons or property unless the following provisions are
met:
A. The dogs shall be confined to an enclosed area adequate to ensure they will not escape; or
B. They shall be under the absolute control of a handler at all times when not securely enclosed; and
C. In either subsection A or B of this section, the owner or other persons in control of the premises
upon which a guard dog is maintained shall post warning signs on, over or next to all exterior doors
stating that such dog is on the premises. At least one such sign shall be posted at each driveway
or entranceway to said premises. Such signs shall be in lettering clearly visible from either the curb
line or a distance of fifty feet (50'), whichever is less, and shall contain a telephone number where
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 152/467
some person responsible for controlling such guard dog can be reached twenty four (24) hours a
day; and
D. Prior to the placing of a guard dog on any property, the person or persons responsible for the
placing shall inform the police chief, ordinance officer, the fire department and any utilities who
have personnel that come upon premises or any business that is invited to come or send
employees upon the premises, in writing, of their intention to post said dog or dogs, the number of
dogs to be posted, the location where said dog or dogs will be posted, the approximate length of
time said dog or dogs will be guarding the area, the daily hours said dog or dogs will be guarding
the area, the breed, sex, age and rabies tag number of said dog or dogs. Such notice must be
renewed every six (6) months. (Ord. 1400, 2015)
6.08.100: PROHIBITED BREEDS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1427, 2017)
6.08.101: IMPOUNDING PROHIBITED BREED DOGS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1427, 2017)
6.08.102: PIT BULLS PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1400, 2015)
6.08.103: RESPONSIBILITY:
Owners of dogs shall be liable for any damage done by their dogs to any person, domestic animal,
livestock, or property, or for any costs incident to taking up and keeping their dog. Additionally, the
owners of any dog which shall bite any person while such person is on or in a private place, including
the property of the owner, shall be liable for such damages as may be suffered by persons bitten,
regardless of the former viciousness of such dog or the owner's knowledge of such viciousness.
A person is lawfully upon private property of such owner within the meaning of this section when he or
she is on such property in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by the laws of this state or
by the laws of postal regulations of the United States, or when he or she is on such property upon
invitation, expressed or implied, of the owner thereof; or when he or she is on such property in the
performance of a duty relative to public safety, which shall include policemen, firemen, or other
authorized members of boards or agencies of city government; provided, however, no owner of any
dog shall be liable for any damages to any person or his property when such person shall
mischievously or carelessly provoke or aggravate the dog inflicting such damage. (Ord. 1270 § 2,
2006: Ord. 980 § 7, 1988)
6.08.104: ACTION FOR DAMAGES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 153/467
If any vicious animal shall, when unprovoked, kill or wound, or assist in killing or wounding any sheep,
goat, lamb, cattle, horse, hog, swine, fowl, or other domestic animal, belonging to or in the possession
of any person, or shall, when unprovoked, attack, assault, bite or otherwise injure any human being or
assist in attacking, assaulting, biting or otherwise injuring any human being while out of or within the
enclosure of the owner or keeper of such vicious animal, or while otherwise, on or off the property of
the owner whether or not such vicious animal was on a leash and securely muzzled or whether the
vicious animal escaped without fault of the owner of keeper, the owner or keeper of such animal shall
be liable to the person aggrieved as aforesaid, for all damage sustained, to be recovered in a civil
action, with costs of suit. It is rebuttably presumed as a matter of law that the owning, keeping or
harboring of a vicious animal in violation of this chapter is a nuisance. It shall not be necessary, in
order to sustain any such action, to prove that the owner of such vicious animal knew that such vicious
animal possessed the propensity to cause such damage or that the vicious animal had a vicious
nature. Upon such attack or assault, the chief of police or his designee is hereby empowered to
confiscate and destroy such vicious animal, if the conduct of such vicious animal or its owner
constituted a violation of the provisions of this chapter, punishable by the confiscation and destruction
of the animal. (Ord. 1270 § 2, 2006)
6.08.105: IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES:
When a dog is impounded the owner shall pay a fee as set by resolution for each twenty four (24)
hour period, or portion thereof that the dog is impounded.
A. Impounding: Any dog found running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter may be
apprehended by any designated city employee and shall be impounded; provided, however, that if
any dog so found at large cannot be safely taken up and impounded, such dog may be slain
forthwith. Such dog shall be impounded and disposed of in accordance with provisions in this
chapter. Any action taken by a police officer, ordinance officer, or other designated city employee,
in the performance of his duties, that requires the death, injury, or destruction of a dangerous or
vicious dog found running at large, shall not be considered to be cruel or inhumane treatment of
the animal.
B. Period Of Confinement; Records: Any dog which bites any person and causes a break in the skin of
that person, regardless if the bite is provoked or unprovoked, or is suspected of having rabies,
shall be seized and impounded for a period of ten (10) days as required by Idaho state law. The
chief of police and health department shall be so notified and the animal disposed of only under
their direction. A complete registry shall be kept of every dog so impounded, entering the breed,
color and sex of such dog, whether licensed, and time and place of taking. If licensed, the name
and address of the owner and the number of the license tag shall be entered.
C. Impoundment Fees: For the first occurrence of impounding a dog running at large, the owner
thereof shall pay to the City a fee as set by resolution for the taking up of such animal; for the
second occurrence of impounding a dog running at large, the owner thereof shall pay to the City a
fee as set by resolution for the taking up of such animal. For the third or any subsequent
occurrence of impounding a dog running at large, the owner thereof shall pay the City a fee as set
by resolution for the taking up of such animal for each such occurrence. Said impoundment fees
shall be paid to the City Clerk's Office. Prior to the release of any dog impounded for running at
large, the owner shall provide proof that he has possession of a current City of Payette license tag
for said dog.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 154/467
D. Care Of Impounded Animals: Any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall be
provided with proper care, food, and water while so confined. (Ord. 1400, 2015)
6.08.106: RESTRICTIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1400, 2015)
6.08.107: APPEALS:
Any order or decision of the Ordinance Officer regarding an animal under this chapter, including a
declaration or finding that a dog is a vicious or nuisance dog due to its actions or its breed, as set forth
in this chapter, may be appealed by the owner, keeper or harborer to the Chief of Police within ten (10)
days after receipt of written notice thereof. Upon appeal, the Chief of Police shall provide to the dog's
owner, keeper or harborer the opportunity to appear before him and present evidence, if any, relative
to the appeal. The owner, keeper or harborer of the dog shall be notified in writing of the Chief's
decision regarding the appeal. A decision by the Chief upon appeal may be appealed within fifteen
(15) days after the date of the Chief's decision to the City Council. (Ord. 1400, 2015)
6.08.108: DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED DOGS:
All unclaimed dogs impounded shall be kept for the number of days as required by Idaho Code. If
possession of any dog is not recovered as above set forth, the dog may be disposed of by delivery to
any person who will pay the license fee if the dog remains in the City of Payette, by delivery to a third
party humane shelter, or the dog may be destroyed in a humane manner. (Ord. 1447, 2018)
6.08.109: OWNERS TO PAY COSTS:
The owner or representative of the owner of any dog which may be taken up and impounded under
the provisions of this chapter, may recover possession of such dog upon payment to the City the
impoundment fees, license fee, and other costs herein provided together with payment to the
appropriate animal shelter, if any. (Ord. 1427, 2017)
6.08.110: PENALTIES:
A. Violations And Penalties:
1. A violation of subsection 6.08.020A1, section 6.08.030 and subsections 6.08.060A and B of this
chapter is an infraction punishable as provided in section 18-113A, Idaho Code.
2. A violation of all other sections in this chapter are subject to the provisions of section 25-2811,
Idaho Code.
In addition, the Judge may order any dog destroyed which habitually creates a nuisance to any
neighborhood or person. The conviction of an owner for a second or subsequent offense of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 155/467
allowing a dog to bark or create noise which is a nuisance to the neighborhood or another
person, shall be sufficient to establish that a dog habitually creates a nuisance.
B. Payment Of Expenses: Any person found guilty of violating this chapter shall pay all expenses,
including shelter, food, boarding and veterinary expenses necessitated by the seizure of the dog
for the protection of the public, and such other expenses as may be required for the care or
destruction of any such dog. (Ord. 1447, 2018)
Chapter 6.10
EXOTIC ANIMALS
6.10.010: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this chapter, "exotic or wild animal" shall mean those species of animals that are
exotic to humans. "Exotic animal" is any animal which is wild, fierce, dangerous, noxious or naturally
inclined to do harm. Exotic or wild animals, however domesticated, shall also include, but not be
limited to:
A. Class mammalia:
1. Order Artiodactyla (except domestic sheep and llamas but only after receiving a conditional use
permit).
2. Order Carnivora (only those specified below):
a. Dog family (Canidae): All except domesticated dogs, including wolf, fox, coyote, dingo,
jackals, wolf hybrids, etc.
b. Cat family (Felidae): All except commonly accepted domestic cats, including lions, pumas,
panthers, mountain lions, leopards, jaguars, ocelots, magays, tigers, wildcats, cougars, etc.
c. Bears (Ursidae): All bears, including grizzly bears, brown bears, black bears, etc.
d. Weasels (Mustelidae): All including weasels, martens, mink, wolverine, ferrets, badgers,
otters, ermine, mongoose, etc.
e. Raccoons (Procyonidae): All raccoons and civets.
f. Porcupine (Erethizontidae): All porcupines.
g. Skunks.
B. Class reptilia:
1. Order Squamata:
a. All venomous and constricting snakes or lizards.
2. Order Crocodilia:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 156/467
a. All alligators, crocodiles, caimans, gavials, etc.
C. Venomous invertebrates. (Ord. 1293 § 1, 2008)
6.10.020: PROHIBITION:
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or entity to harbor, keep, maintain or possess within the
city of Payette any wild or exotic animal as defined herein. (Ord. 1293 § 1, 2008)
6.10.030: CIRCUSES EXCEPTED:
The provisions of section 6.10.020 of this chapter shall not apply to approved circuses within the city
of Payette. (Ord. 1293 § 1, 2008)
6.10.040: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by fine and/or imprisonment up to but
not exceeding the maximum penalties set forth in Idaho Code section 50-302, as amended. Each day
during which a violation takes place or is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate violation of
this chapter. (Ord. 1293 § 1, 2008)
Chapter 6.15
KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK
6.15.005: DEFINITIONS:
COMMERCIAL LIVESTOCK USE: The raising of livestock for the specific purpose of selling the
livestock or livestock products (such as milk, meat, eggs, etc.) represents commercial livestock use.
Such use is prohibited in all residential zones. The raising of animals for youth development activities
involving 4-H or Future Farmers of America (FFA) and the sale of such animals shall not be
considered a commercial use.
LIVESTOCK: Those classes of animals that are kept and housed outside the home or in enclosures
such as pens, barns, corrals or paddock areas. Livestock includes, but is not limited to, cows, goats,
horses, mules or donkeys, llamas, sheep and/or anything similar to the aforementioned. Livestock
also includes any grazing or foraging animal. Swine and male "billy" goats are strictly prohibited in City
limits. (Ord. 1451, 2018)
6.15.010: TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
It is unlawful to keep livestock within the City except by permit issued by the City under the terms and
conditions set forth in this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 157/467
A. Number Of Animals Allowed: Property owners are allowed the following maximum number of
animals per one acre of fenced, irrigated pasture land:
Animal
Maximum Number
Per 1 Acre
Cows or similar 2
Goats or sheep 4
Horses or similar 2
Llamas or similar 2
The number of animals allowed per one acre of fenced irrigated pasture land is based upon the
size and characteristics of the animal. The animal control officer or designee shall determine the
equivalent number of animals allowed for animals not listed in the above table, including
miniature forms of large animals, and shall take into consideration the purpose of this section
and the impacts to adjacent properties in making a determination.
In instances where a mixed livestock density is desired, the number of types of animals desired
shall be divided into the maximum number allowed. For instance, an individual who has one acre
of fenced, irrigated pasture land wants to have sheep, and cows which is two (2) different types
of animals. The maximum number of sheep allowed is four (4). Four (4) divided by two (2)
equals two (2). The maximum number of cows allowed is two (2). Two (2) divided by two (2) is
one. Therefore, the individual could have, as livestock, a combined total of two (2) sheep, and
one cow on one acre of land.
Maximum density shall not apply to offspring under nine (9) months of age.
B. Permit Requirements: Any person desiring to keep livestock may make application to the City and
shall supply proof that the applicant and premises comply with the following requirements, as well
as certifying that he or she will comply with all the following conditions for maintaining the livestock.
The animal control officer may deny a permit if the applicant has a record of failure to comply with
the provisions of this chapter. Additionally, the animal control officer may revoke any permit for
failure to comply with any of the conditions or restrictions of the permit. Appeal of the denial or
revocation may be made in writing to the City Council.
1. The applicant will submit a site plan that will include property lines, existing structures and
buildings and the location and size of the proposed cage or pen. (The area and materials used
must be in compliance with standards set by the animal control officer or authorized designee,
based on the size and nature of the animal.)
2. The applicant will identify the animal to be kept on premises, to include species, age, tag or
brand if any, and general physical description of each individual animal, such that the animal can
be positively identified.
3. The minimum area required for each permit shall be one acre, of which seventy five percent
(75%) shall be irrigated "pastureland" with full vegetative cover watered regularly so as to be
kept in a healthy, green, and growing condition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 158/467
4. An applicant must make and demonstrate adequate provisions to keep livestock at least thirty
feet (30') from any residential dwelling on any adjacent parcel of land, regardless of ownership of
the land.
5. Any animal shelter or feeding facility shall be located at least fifty feet (50') from any residential
dwelling located on the property and at least fifty feet (50') from any residential dwelling located
on any parcel of land adjacent to the parcel on which the livestock are kept.
6. A permittee shall at all times maintain the acreage on which livestock are kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
7. A permittee shall at all times maintain any shelter or feeding facility for the livestock in a clean
and sanitary condition.
8. A permittee is prohibited from maintaining the acreage as a commercial feedlot to prepare
livestock for market.
9. No permit may be transferred to any other person or location.
C. Fees: The initial fee for each livestock permit shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
Thereafter, the permittee must pay an annual renewal fee as set by resolution of the City Council
for each permit, accompanied by written notice of any change in number of livestock or amount of
acreage. The animal control officer or the designee may perform inspections to verify the
information provided, and deny any permit renewal for failure to comply with this chapter.
D. Exception: Any person may apply to the Planning and Zoning Commission through a conditional
use permit for an exception to the strict terms of the livestock permit requirements. The
commission may grant or deny the request. If it is determined that an exception may be granted,
the commission may impose additional conditions upon a permittee, including, but not limited to,
types of enclosure, number of animals, size of the parcel, standards of upkeep, proof of consent of
seventy five percent (75%) of the neighbors living within one hundred feet (100') of the boundaries
of the permit area, size of animals, accommodations for animals or other reasonable requirements.
E. Transfer Of Permit Prohibited: No livestock permit may be transferred to any other person or
location. (Ord. 1451, 2018)
6.15.015: RENEWAL:
Any permits or licenses held on the date of passage hereof must be renewed bi-annually by complying
with all provisions of this chapter. At the time of the application for renewal, the standards in this
chapter must be complied with. (Ord. 1451, 2018)
Title 7
RESERVED
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 159/467
Title 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.04
MILK
(Rep. by Ord. 1252 § 1, 2005)
Chapter 8.08
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
8.08.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
COLLECTOR: The person holding a license or contract with the city, or employed and thereby
authorized and designated by the city, to collect, handle, transport and dispose of refuse and wastes.
GARBAGE: Includes all putrescible waste, except sewage and body waste, including waste
accumulation of animal, food or vegetable matter, and including waste that attends the preparation,
use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit and vegetables; and includes all of such
wastes or accumulations of vegetable matter of residences, restaurants, hotels and places where food
is prepared for human consumption. "Garbage" does not include recognized industrial byproducts.
INSPECTOR: The authorized employee or employees of the city having, or some individual
designated by the council as having, the duty of the enforcement of this chapter.
REFUSE: Solid wastes, including garbage and rubbish.
RUBBISH: Refuse other than garbage; such as tin cans, bottles, ashes, paper, pasteboard, cardboard
or wooden boxes, brush, leaves, weeds, and cutting from trees, lawns, shrubs and gardens, or other
waste materials produced in the normal course of doing business or in everyday living. "Rubbish"
does not include recognized industrial byproducts.
WASTE: Unwanted solid, liquid or gaseous materials. (Prior code § 8-1-1)
8.08.020: DISPOSAL SYSTEM; USE REQUIRED WHEN:
A. Mandatory Use Of System: Every owner or occupant of premises within the city limits must use the
refuse collection and disposal system provided for in this chapter, and shall deposit or cause to be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 160/467
deposited in accordance with this chapter all rubbish and garbage that is of such nature that it is
perishable or may decompose, or may be scattered by wind or otherwise, and which is
accumulated on such premises. All actual producers of refuse, or the owners of premises upon
which refuse is accumulated, shall use and be responsible for at least the minimum level of solid
waste collection service and associated charges for residential or commercial service, whichever
service may apply.
B. Self-Haul: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the personal, limited and occasional hauling of solid
waste, recyclable materials, or yard wastes by the producer of waste from the producer's property
to an approved Payette County solid waste, recyclable materials, or yard waste collection site.
Occasional haulers who haul the waste they generate are not exempt from the mandatory solid
waste collection service and payment requirements and are responsible for any associated fees for
such collection site services, as applicable. (Ord. 1301 § 1, 2008: prior code § 8-1-2)
8.08.030: DISPOSAL SYSTEM; VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
The actual producers of refuse, or the owners of premises upon which refuse is accumulated, who
desire personally to collect and dispose of refuse, or desire to dispose of waste material not included
in the definition of refuse or not acceptable for collection, and collectors of refuse from outside of the
city who desire to haul over the streets of the city, shall use a vehicle so equipped and operated as to
prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom and waste from being blown, dropped or spilled. (Prior
code § 8-1-3)
8.08.040: DISPOSAL SYSTEM; ESTABLISHED; LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. There is established a system of refuse collection, transportation and disposal.
B. It is unlawful to engage in the business of collecting, transporting, hauling or conveying of any
refuse over the streets or alleys of the city, or to dump or dispose of the same, unless and until
such person is licensed therefor or has a contract therefor as an authorized representative of the
city. (Prior code § 8-1-4)
8.08.050: ACCUMULATION UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for an owner or occupant of any premises to allow, permit or to suffer to accumulate in or
about any public or private premises any garbage or tin cans, except in covered containers of an
approved type set forth in this chapter, or any other rubbish so as to cause such premises to be or
remain in such condition as to create a nuisance or offensive odor, atmosphere or rodent harborage.
(Ord. 893, 1978: prior code § 8-1-5)
8.08.060: PROHIBITED ACTS OF DISPOSAL:
No person shall throw, discard or deposit any rubbish, garbage or refuse in or upon any street, alley,
sidewalk or vacant ground or in or upon any canal, irrigation ditch, drainage ditch or other
watercourse, unless upon express permit granted by the council. (Prior code § 8-1-6)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 161/467
8.08.070: CONTAINERS; CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS; SANITARY
MAINTENANCE:
Containers at one-family and two-family dwellings shall be a ninety five (95) gallon roll cart which has
been approved by the city and supplied by the collector.
Containers at multiple-family dwellings shall have at least a one-half (1/2) cubic yard capacity for each
dwelling unit, unless a smaller capacity is approved by the collector. The containers shall be
constructed of twelve (12) or fourteen (14) gauge steel and have lids covering the same. Front loading
containers shall have wheels or skids, steel channels to enable loading with a hydraulic lift, and shall
have a capacity from two (2) to ten (10) cubic yards. Rear loading containers shall have four (4)
wheels, steel bars to enable loading with a hydraulic lift and shall have a capacity from one to three (3)
cubic yards. All such containers shall be subject to the approval of the collector.
Residential users may elect to use garbage receptacles approved by the mayor and city council,
which receptacles are capable of being picked up by a franchisee of the city with equipment designed
to be compatible with that container. (Ord. 1266 § 1, 2006: Ord. 982 § 1, 1988: Ord. 893, 1978: prior
code § 8-1-7)
8.08.080: CONTAINERS; USE:
All garbage shall be drained free of liquids before it is placed in the container. No free liquids shall be
placed in the container. Lids of such containers shall not be removed except when necessary to place
garbage and rubbish in such containers or to take the same therefrom and shall be immediately
replaced by the person removing the same. (Ord. 1266 § 2, 2006: Ord. 893, 1978: prior code § 8-1-8)
8.08.090: HANDLING OF CERTAIN KINDS OF RUBBISH; COMPOST PILES:
A. Rubbish consisting only of cardboard or wooden boxes and/or brush, leaves, weeds and cuttings
from trees, lawns, shrubs and gardens, shall be deposited in garbage containers; provided by the
collector.
B. Compost piles may be maintained for fertilization purposes, and matter used for fertilization
purposes only may be transported, kept and used; provided, that the same shall not constitute a
nuisance.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to permit the violation of any rule or regulation of
the fire department. (Ord. 1266 § 3, 2006: prior code § 8-1-9)
8.08.100: COLLECTION; SCHEDULE; PLACEMENT; REASONABLE AMOUNTS:
A. Rubbish and garbage shall be collected from all premises within the city at least once each week.
Such premises wherein large accumulations of garbage occur may be classified separately with
more frequent collection from such premises. The council shall establish a schedule of collection,
and the owner or occupant of all premises within the city shall place all refuse at the street curb, at
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 162/467
the inside edge of the sidewalk where the sidewalk is adjacent to the curb, or front property line
adjoining the public road or right of way and not in the alley line of said premises upon the day
scheduled for pick up for such premises, but shall not be so placed except on collection days.
B. The collector shall collect a reasonable accumulation of refuse during a collection period but shall
have the authority to refuse to collect unreasonable amounts. (Ord. 1266 § 4, 2006: prior code § 8-
1-10)
8.08.110: COLLECTION; FEES:
Fees and rates for collection of refuse at residences shall be a fee set by resolution per dwelling unit
per month, payable by the owner of the premises. Other rates are set as follows:
A. A fee set by resolution for rental of a ninety five (95) gallon cart per month.
B. Commercial rates are set by resolution.
There will be an additional charge if container is overloaded or overweight of one hundred fifty
(150) pounds per cubic yard.
C. The fees for other premises from which refuse is collected shall be set by negotiation and contract
between the city and the owner or occupant. No charge will be made during the time the premises
are vacant and no refuse is collected therefrom; provided, which period of time is not less than
thirty (30) days; and provided further, that notice of such vacancy shall be given in writing to the
clerk prior to such vacancy.
D. The fees shall be subject to modification, upon application to the council by the owner or occupant,
in all cases where fees so established shall be unjust or oppressive. (Ord. 1371, 2012: Ord. 1266
§ 5, 2006: Ord. 1253 § 1, 2005: Ord. 1079 § 1, 1994: Ord. 1006 § 1, 1990: Ord. 986 § 1, 1988:
Ord. 978, 1987: Ord. 954, 1984: Ord. 927, 1981: Ord. 881, 1978: prior code § 8-1-11)
8.08.120: COLLECTION; BILLING AND PAYMENT PROCEDURE:
A. Fees shall be carried on the water bills, wherever applicable, and the water department is
authorized and directed to discontinue services to any premises where the entire water and refuse
collection bill is not paid, in the same manner that service is discontinued for nonpayment of a
water bill.
B. All fees shall be paid by the person responsible for the same at the office of the city clerk within ten
(10) days after receipt of a statement and, if not paid, the same shall become delinquent, and after
sixty (60) days' delinquency, a charge as set by resolution shall be added to the account. For
failure to pay such charge, the city may levy a special assessment against the premises, in such
amount and in such manner as other special assessments are levied, and foreclose the same in
the manner provided for the foreclosure and collection of other special assessments. (Ord. 1371,
2012: Ord. 1266 § 6, 2006: prior code § 8-1-12)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 163/467
8.08.130: COLLECTION; DISPOSITION OF FEES:
All fees and charges provided for in sections 8.08.110 and 8.08.120 of this chapter, when collected,
shall be placed in the utility fund and paid into the general fund of the city. (Prior code § 8-1-13)
8.08.140: DISPOSAL; SITE; SUPERVISION:
The disposal of all refuse collected, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be in the city dump
and under the supervision of the city superintendent. (Prior code § 8-1-14)
8.08.150: OFFICERS' RIGHT OF INSPECTION:
All appropriate officers of the city shall have the right of ingress to or egress from any premises for the
purpose of inspecting all places and containers where rubbish or garbage is accumulated or kept.
(Prior code § 8-1-15)
8.08.160: LICENSING AND CONTRACTING; SOLE AUTHORITY OF MAYOR AND
COUNCIL:
A. The mayor and council have the sole authority to do the following:
1. License, to grant franchises, contract or perform all services pertaining to sanitary collection and
disposal of garbage and rubbish under this chapter.
2. To establish reasonable fees for licenses.
3. To enter into contracts with one or more contractors.
4. To establish reasonable rules and regulations governing the conduct and operation of such
licensees or contractors.
B. The council may require of any such collector or contractor a bond in a reasonable amount, the
condition of which shall be the satisfactory performance of the contract. (Ord. 982 § 2, 1988: prior
code § 8-1-16)
8.08.170: MATERIALS NOT ACCEPTABLE FOR COLLECTION:
Dirt or earth debris from construction or lawn renovation, rocks, stones, automobile bodies and parts,
dead animals too large to be handled by one man, and building materials, such as masonry, plaster,
scrap lumber and wood shavings, are not acceptable for collection, and such items shall be collected
and disposed of by the building contractor, owner or occupant of the premises. (Prior code § 8-1-17)
8.08.180: NONAPPLICABILITY TO SPECIAL COLLECTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 164/467
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in any manner to affect special collections ordered by the
council or proclaimed by the mayor. (Prior code § 8-1-18)
8.08.190: GARBAGE HAULING BY FRANCHISEE:
No person, other than a franchisee of the city, shall solicit to haul, or haul from any residential or
commercial user within the city, any refuse, garbage or recyclable material. Nor shall any person
remove or recycle any material from any garbage can, dumpster or refuse receptacle serviced by any
franchisee of the city without the consent of the franchisee. (Ord. 982 § 3, 1988)
8.08.200: MAINTAINING WASTE CONTAINERS AND CONTAINER AREA:
A producer or generator of waste shall be responsible for maintaining waste cans and containers and
shall maintain the area around such cans and containers in a clean or sanitary condition. If a waste
producer allows an unsanitary condition to exist in or around his refuse cans or containers, the
franchisee, after ten (10) days' notice to the producer that an unsanitary condition exists, may assume
responsibility for cleanup and bill the producer directly for the contractor's costs and expenses
incurred in the cleanup. Notice shall be given to the city clerk. The producer shall be responsible for
paying the city's franchisee for any cleanup that is necessitated as a result of that producers not
complying with this chapter. (Ord. 982 § 4, 1988)
Chapter 8.09
REGULATION OF THE SALE OF METHAMPHETAMINE
PRECURSOR DRUGS
8.09.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in this chapter:
METHAMPHETAMINE PRECURSOR DRUGS: A. A drug or product containing as its sole active
ingredient pseudoephedrine or any of its sales, optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers; or
B. A combination drug or product containing as one of its active ingredients pseudoephedrine, or
any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
C. This term does not include any compounds, mixtures, or preparations that are in liquid, liquid
capsule, or gel capsule form.
OVER THE COUNTER SALES: A retail sale of a drug or product but does not include the sale of a
drug or product pursuant to the terms of a valid prescription.
RETAILER: Any person, corporation, partnership or other business entity conducting business within
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 165/467
the city of Payette, Idaho, who sells or furnishes any over the counter drug product containing
pseudoephedrine. (Ord. 1254, 2006)
8.09.020: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. It shall be unlawful within the incorporated limits of the city for any retailer or employee thereof to
knowingly sell, transfer, or to otherwise furnish in a single transaction more than three (3)
packages of any product that he or she knows to contain more than a total weight of nine grams
(9 g) of methamphetamine precursor drugs.
B. The limits established in this section shall not apply to any quantity of methamphetamine precursor
drugs dispensed pursuant to a valid prescription. (Ord. 1254, 2006)
8.09.030: LIMITATION ON ACCESSIBILITY TO AND SALE OF METHAMPHETAMINE
PRECURSOR DRUGS:
A business establishment that offers for sale methamphetamine precursor drugs shall ensure that all
packages of the drugs are displayed and offered for sale only:
A. Behind a checkout counter where the public is not permitted; or
B. Inside a locked display case; and
C. All sales shall be conducted by or with an employee of the retailer and shall not be conducted by a
self-service system. (Ord. 1254, 2006)
8.09.040: PENALTY:
Any person or entity violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, the penalty for
which shall be a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment not to exceed
six (6) months, or both. (Ord. 1254, 2006)
Chapter 8.12
WEEDS AND OTHER WASTE SUBSTANCES1
8.12.010: WITHIN CITY LIMITS; DECLARED NUISANCE WHEN:
It shall be a nuisance and is unlawful for the owner, agent of such owner, tenant or occupant of any
real property within the city to permit or allow upon said real property, or upon any sidewalk abutting
same, or upon the alleys abutting the same to the center thereof, or along or in ditches, fence lines
and to the edges of all curbs, sidewalks and roadways, any growths of weeds or grasses which
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 166/467
exceed eight inches (8") in height. It is also declared to be a nuisance and unlawful for any owner,
tenant or occupant of any property to allow or permit an accumulation of rubbish, trash, litter, debris,
garbage or other waste substances. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 2005: Ord. 1144 § 1, 1997: Ord. 1092 § 1, 1995:
prior code § 8-3-8)
8.12.020: WITHIN CITY LIMITS; REMOVAL REQUIRED WHEN:
All occupants, tenants, owners and agent of such owners of real property within the municipality are
required to remove all rubbish, trash, litter, debris, garbage or other waste substances, and to remove
or cut and chop into small pieces any growths of weeds or grasses which exceed eight inches (8") in
height and are located on said real property. The spraying to kill weeds and grasses does not excuse
the eight inch (8") requirement. Upon notice from the city of Payette, the occupants, tenants, owners
and agents of such owners shall have ten (10) working days in which to comply. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 2005:
Ord. 1144 § 3, 1997: prior code § 8-3-10)
8.12.030: REMOVAL; NOTIFICATION; NONCOMPLIANCE; ACTION BY CITY:
A. The city clerk, ordinance officer or other duly authorized representative is authorized and
empowered to give actual notice to the owner, agent of such owner, tenant or occupant of real
property to comply with sections 8.12.010 through 8.12.020 of this chapter; provided, however, if
actual notice is not possible, the city clerk, ordinance officer or other duly authorized representative
shall give written notice by return receipt requested mail, addressed to said owner, agent of owner,
tenant or occupant at his last known address.
B. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any such owner, agent of owner, tenant or occupant to
comply with said sections, the designated official is authorized and empowered to pay for and
employ labor for the removal of the waste substances and/or the cutting and chopping of the
weeds and grasses mentioned in said sections. The reasonable value of the services rendered in
removing the waste substances and/or the cutting and chopping of the weeds and grasses, plus an
administrative fee set by resolution, if not paid by the owner, agent of such owner, tenant or
occupant of said real property within thirty (30) days after completion, shall be filed as a lien
against the real property, and, may be declared delinquent and be certified to the tax collector of
the county by the city clerk, and shall be, by said tax collector, placed upon the tax roll and
collected in the same manner and subject to the same penalties as other city taxes. A copy of the
recorded lien will be sent to the owner, agent of such owner, tenant or occupant at his last known
address by return receipt requested mail. (Ord. 1371, 2012: Ord. 1238 § 1, 2005: prior code § 8-3-
12)
8.12.040: NONCOMPLIANCE; DECLARED MISDEMEANOR; SEPARATE
OFFENSES:
A. The failure, neglect or refusal of a tenant, occupant, owner or agent of such owner to comply with
sections 8.12.010 through 8.12.030 of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor.
B. Each and every ten (10) days any such owner, agent of owner, tenant or occupant fails, refuses or
neglects to comply with provisions of sections 8.12.010 through 8.12.030 of this chapter shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 167/467
constitute a separate and distinct offense, and each of such separate offenses shall be punishable
as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1238 § 1, 2005: prior code §§ 8-3-13, 8-3-14)
Chapter 8.16
NUISANCES1
8.16.010: NAUSEOUS DRAINAGE AND SEWAGE DEVICES; ACTS CONSTITUTING
MISDEMEANOR:
If any person suffers or permits any cellar, vault, private drain, cesspool, privy, sewer or grounds, upon
any premises belonging to or occupied by him within the corporate limits of the city, to become
nauseous, foul, offensive or injurious to the public health, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior
code § 8-3-2)
8.16.020: GROUNDS OR PREMISES; ACTS CONSTITUTING MISDEMEANOR:
If any person owns, occupies or keeps any grounds or other premises in the city in such condition as
to be offensive and a nuisance to the neighborhood, or to any family or person, such person shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 8-3-3)
8.16.030: DEAD ANIMALS; REMOVAL REQUIRED; NONCOMPLIANCE AS
MISDEMEANOR:
It shall be the duty of every person being the owner of, or having in his possession or under his control
or charge, any horse or other animal which shall in any manner come to its death, within the corporate
limits, to immediately remove the body or carcass of such animal beyond the limits of the city, and to
bury or burn or otherwise dispose of the same, so that it shall not become offensive; and any person
who neglects to comply with the provisions of this section, within twelve (12) hours after notice shall
have been served upon him, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 8-3-4)
8.16.040: OFFENSIVE MATTER; PROHIBITED DISPOSAL; DECLARED
MISDEMEANOR:
If any person throws, places or conducts or suffers his or her servant or child to throw, place or
conduct into any street, alley or lot, within the limits of the city, any putrid or nauseous beef, pork, fish,
hides or skins of any kind, or any filth, offal, dung, dead animals, vegetables or other unsound or
offensive matter, or anything likely to become offensive; or allows such filth, offal, dung or other
offensive matter as aforesaid, to be or remain upon the premises or in any outhouse, stable, privy or
other place occupied by him, or in any alley or street contiguous to or in front of such premises, in
such manner as to be likely to become offensive to the neighborhood or deleterious to the health of
the citizens, and suffers the same to remain twenty four (24) hours after notice to remove the same by
any officer of the city, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 8-3-5)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 168/467
8.16.050: KEEPING OF SWINE; DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
Any person who keeps within the corporate limits any swine, in or on any pen, place or premises, the
same shall be defined to be a nuisance and, under the provisions of this section, the owner, agent or
other person in charge of any such swine shall be deemed the author of such nuisance and shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 8-3-6)
8.16.060: DEPOSIT OF RUBBISH AND REFUSE IN STREETS; DECLARED
MISDEMEANOR:
Any person who deposits any cans, rubbish or refuse in any street or alley, or allows any such cans,
rubbish or refuse to remain in any street or alley for twenty four (24) hours after being notified by any
city official to remove the same, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 8-3-7)
8.16.070: TRAPPING ANIMALS UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful to trap animals within the city limits of Payette, Payette County, Idaho. "Trapping" is
defined as the ensnarement, capture, entrapment, killing or taking of animals for the purpose of
removing, using, obtaining or selling animal pelts. (Ord. 1100 § 1, 1995)
Chapter 8.20
FIREWORKS1
8.20.010: DEFINITIONS; ADOPTED FROM IDAHO CODE:
The definitions of fireworks, nonaerial common fireworks and special fireworks as set out in section
39-2602(3), (6) and (8), Idaho Code are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated hereat for use
in this chapter. (Ord. 1210, 2002)
8.20.020: PROHIBITION; EXCEPTION; PERMIT:
It is unlawful for any person within the city to import, export, offer for sale, sell, have, possess for any
use or purpose, keep, store or permit the keeping or storing of fireworks, other than nonaerial common
fireworks, for any use or purpose, except that a person holding a special fireworks permit issued
pursuant to this chapter may use special fireworks for a safely supervised and conducted public
display of fireworks. Temporary storage of special fireworks shall not be permitted in the city. (Ord.
1210, 2002)
8.20.030: DATES OF SALE AND USE; HOURS OF SELLING:
A person who does not possess a valid fireworks permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 169/467
import, export, possess for the purpose of sale, offer for sale, or sell any fireworks for any use or
purpose. No fireworks shall be sold or offered for sale or discharged within the city except between
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon, June 23 and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight July 5 of each year or except
between twelve o'clock (12:00) noon December 26, and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight January 1, or,
except as provided for in subsection 8.20.040D of this chapter. (Ord. 1210, 2002)
8.20.040: PERMIT; APPLICATION; CONTENTS:
A. Any person desiring to sell nonaerial common fireworks shall file his application for a permit with
the city clerk no later than June 10 of any year.
B. Any person desiring to make a public display of special fireworks, other than nonaerial common
fireworks, within the city shall file his application for a permit with the city clerk at least twenty (20)
days in advance of the proposed event.
C. Each application for a permit pursuant to this section shall contain the following information:
1. The name and address of applicant;
2. The names and addresses of the officers, if any, of the applicant;
3. The location where the applicant will sell fireworks;
4. The name and address of any wholesaler or distributor from whom the retailer proposes to
purchase fireworks for resale;
5. The applicant's state sales tax permit number;
6. The manner, methods, and times when and how the applicant proposes to sell fireworks;
7. A drawing depicting the stand dimensions, location of the stand on the property with setbacks
from property lines, and uses of adjacent properties;
8. Such other information as the city clerk may require on a standard form submitted to all
applicants and which is reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and morals.
D. Any person desiring to use fireworks as part of a play or similar theatrical production shall first
obtain a permit following the same procedures as set out in subsection C of this section, which
permit shall not be issued until all of the requirements of Idaho Code section 39-2605(1)(a) and (4)
are met. (Ord. 1210, 2002)
8.20.050: APPLICANT; INVESTIGATION; PERMIT APPROVAL OR DENIAL
STANDARDS:
The director of the department of public safety, the fire chief or their designee shall cause an
investigation to be made of each application and submit to the council a report of those findings and
recommendations for or against the issuance of the permit. The council shall have the power in its
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 170/467
discretion to grant or deny any application subject to such reasonable conditions, if any, as it shall
prescribe and subject to the following conditions:
A. Retail sale of fireworks to be permitted from temporary stands only. Except as may be provided for
in subsection O of this section, no sales shall be permitted from permanent buildings or structures.
B. Temporary stands need not comply with the requirements of the building code of the city; provided,
however, that all such stands shall be erected under the supervision of the fire chief or his
designee and shall meet any structural stability requirements set by the city as they pertain to
temporary structures. Stands shall be constructed in a safe manner and of such materials as will
ensure the safety of the attendants, patrons and other persons. If wired for electricity, the wiring
must conform to the electrical code of the city and the state of Idaho.
C. Each stand shall have at least two (2) exits at least thirty inches (30") wide which shall be
unobstructed at all times and one additional exit for each thirty two feet (32') of rear wall area in
excess of twenty five feet (25'). All doors shall open outward and be free and clear at all times.
D. Each stand shall have at least two (2) fire extinguishers with a 2-A rated minimum rating or other
type fire extinguishers approved by the fire chief or his designee. The extinguishers shall be
located in a readily accessible place and shall be charged and in good working order.
E. No smoking shall be permitted in or within twenty five feet (25') of a fireworks stand. "NO
SMOKING" signs shall be prominently displayed both inside and outside a fireworks stand and in a
manner approved by the fire chief or his designee.
F. All weeds, grass and other combustible material shall be cleared from the fireworks stand and for a
distance of not less than twenty feet (20') on each side of the stand.
G. Fireworks stands shall not be located within twenty five feet (25') of any other building or structure
nor within fifty feet (50') of the property line of any gasoline station, oil storage tank or premises
where inflammable liquids are kept or stored, nor within one hundred feet (100') of fuel dispensing
devices.
H. Each fireworks stand shall have an adult supervisor in attendance at all times. No child or children
under the age of sixteen (16) years shall be allowed inside any fireworks stand at any time, nor
shall any child under the age of sixteen (16) years be allowed to sell fireworks.
I. Fireworks stands shall be located only in those areas within the city where business or commercial
activities are authorized.
J. Fireworks shall not be discharged, ignited or exploded within one hundred feet (100') of any
fireworks stand, gasoline station, oil storage tank or premises where inflammable liquids are kept
or stored.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 171/467
K. No fireworks stand shall have a floor area in excess of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet.
L. If merchandise is left in the stand when not open for business, an adult night watchman shall be
present at the location. No person employed as a watchman shall be permitted to remain inside
any stand when it is not open for business.
M. No person shall allow any rubbish to accumulate, or permit a fire nuisance to exist in or around the
area where fireworks are sold.
N. No building where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall be used for
the retail sale of safe fireworks.
O. The council may establish other regulations for permanent structures where fireworks are to be
sold, so long as said regulations are reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and
morals and apply uniformly to all applicants. (Ord. 1210, 2002)
8.20.060: FEES SET BY RESOLUTION:
By resolution, the city council shall set the fee for permits to sell fireworks, to have public displays or
for any other fireworks related activity for which a fee may be charged, which fee shall be paid to the
clerk before issuance of the permit. (Ord. 1210, 2002)
8.20.070: PERFORMANCE BOND REQUIRED:
An applicant for retail sale of fireworks shall post cash or a bond of one hundred dollars ($100.00) with
the city prior to issuance of a permit to guarantee removal of the temporary fireworks stand and all
rubbish and debris from the premises, the acts to be completed not later than July 10 of each year. In
event of failure of the person holding the permit to remove the stand, rubbish and debris to the
satisfaction of the fire chief, the bond shall be forfeited to the city. In no event shall the applicant be
entitled to the return of said cash bond or cash deposit if applicant has failed to remove said
temporary fireworks stand and clean up all debris by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of July 10 of the year
in which the permit is granted, and failure to do so shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1210, 2002)
8.20.080: STORAGE LIMITATIONS; REMOVAL:
Storage of any class of fireworks prior to display or sale and unsold stocks of fireworks remaining after
the lawful period of sale as provided by permit shall be only in such places of storage as the fire chief
issuing the permit shall approve. Unsold stocks of fireworks remaining after the authorized retail sales
period shall be removed from the city on or before July 26. (Ord. 1210, 2002)
8.20.090: EXCEPTIONS TO CHAPTER REQUIREMENTS:
Toy guns and similar devices using caps containing not more than twenty five one-hundredths (0.25)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 172/467
grain of explosive per compound cap are excluded from the operation of this chapter. (Ord. 1210,
2002)
8.20.100: RECORDKEEPING REQUIRED:
Each permittee shall be required to retain at the licensed premises while said premises are open, and
at his principal place of business for a year thereafter, copies of all invoices, receipts and orders
evidencing the source from which he acquired the fireworks which were sold within the city limits.
(Ord. 1210, 2002)
8.20.110: LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Before the city clerk issues any permit or before any permit becomes valid an applicant shall first file
with the city clerk a public liability and products liability insurance policy, or a true copy thereof, which
insurance includes both "accident" and "occurrences" coverage. The insurance coverage limits for
both public liability coverage and for products liability coverage shall be at least one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) per person per occurrence, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per
occurrence aggregate for personal injury, and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per
occurrence for aggregate property damage. Each policy of insurance shall be in a form and substance
acceptable to the city and shall name as insured parties under the terms of the policy all city officials,
elected and appointed, while in the performance of official functions regarding all operations pertaining
to said permit, any licensee or licensor of the applicant, and all vendors of fireworks covered by the
permit to be issued to the applicant. Said policy of insurance shall be so written that it cannot be
canceled without at least thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the city from the underwriting
insurance company. The policy of insurance shall be underwritten through or by a qualified and duly
licensed insurance company or companies authorized to do business in the state, and a copy of said
policy shall be filed with the city clerk prior to the issuance of the permit. For public displays the
insurance requirement shall be one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for aggregate personal injury and
property damage. (Ord. 1210, 2002)
8.20.120: PROHIBITION AGAINST STORAGE IN HAZARDOUS AREA:
Fireworks shall not be stored, kept, possessed, used or deployed in any area which is designated as a
hazardous fire area by the fire chief. The fire chief, or his designee, is hereby authorized to seize any
fireworks, whether on display, being used, possessed, stored or simply kept if they are in a hazardous
fire area. (Ord. 1210, 2002)
8.20.130: PROHIBITION AGAINST USAGE IN CERTAIN AREAS; PENALTY:
A. Except when permitted as a public display pursuant to sections 8.20.040 and 8.20.050 of this
chapter, it is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession or to use fireworks of any
kind at any time in any city park, any city park parking lot, the band shell, any city property, the
swimming pool, any school, any school parking lot, or upon any public property.
B. Any violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor public offense punishable by a fine not to
exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 1210, 2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 173/467
8.20.140: ADOPTION OF IDAHO CODE SECTION 39-2611:
Idaho Code section 39-2611 imposing liability upon parents and guardians for damages caused by
minors is hereby adopted in full verbatim. (Ord. 1210, 2002)
8.20.150: ADOPTION OF STATE FIREWORKS CODE; PERMITTEE COMPLIANCE
WITH STATE FIREWORKS LAW REQUIRED; PENALTY:
Idaho Code title 39, chapter 26 is adopted in full. It shall be the duty of every person issued a
fireworks permit to comply with all the provisions of the state fireworks law and of this chapter. Any
violation of the state fireworks law or any of the provisions of this chapter by any permittee, or by any
of its agents, employees or officers, shall constitute a cause in and of itself to deny any subsequent
application for a permit. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished in accordance with the misdemeanor provisions of
Idaho Code. (Ord. 1210, 2002)
Chapter 8.24
EXPLOSIVES1
8.24.010: PROHIBITED ACTS; EXCEPTION:
A. It is unlawful for any person to make, keep or transport any gunpowder, nitroglycerin or other highly
explosive substance within the limits of the city.
B. A vehicle carrying explosives may be permitted on the streets of the city only if a special written
permit has first been obtained from the chief of police. Such permit shall specify the exact route to
be used by said vehicle and may permit the vehicle to be parked at a certain specified place for a
certain specified amount of time. Each such permit shall be valid only for the one specified use.
(Prior code §§ 7-4-1, 7-4-2)
Chapter 8.28
OPEN AND RECREATIONAL BURNING
8.28.010: IDAHO AIR POLLUTION CONTROL COMMISSION REGULATIONS
ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
For the purpose of regulating and governing conditions causing a polluted atmosphere which causes
an unreasonable interference with human, plant or animal life or the reasonable use of property, the
regulations for control of open burning adopted by the Idaho department of environmental quality, are
adopted by reference. (Ord. 1391, 2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 174/467
8.28.020: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Open Burning: "Open burning" is defined as the burning of materials wherein products of
combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney
from an enclosed chamber. Any person seeking to conduct an open burn shall apply with the city
clerk, fire chief or their designee and obtain a permit for burning. This permit shall expire within five
(5) days. Provided, however, that in the event an air quality advisory is issued, a burning ban is in
effect, outside air temperatures exceed ninety degrees Fahrenheit (90°F), wind is blowing in
excess of ten (10) miles per hour or for any other reason, or any condition exists which in the
opinion of the fire chief or a designee would constitute a public hazard, burning permits may be
terminated and no further permits issued.
B. Recreational Fire Permit And Use Requirements: A "recreational fire" is defined as any small fire in
an approved, self-enclosing portable device or noncombustible structure located at a residence for
the purposes of recreation and personal enjoyment. With the exception of fires used in approved
outdoor cooking devices that are fueled by natural gas, propane, or charcoal, a city permit must be
obtained prior to having a recreational fire. Each city permit shall be effective for ninety (90) days.
C. Bonfires And Ceremonial Burns: Bonfires and ceremonial burns, hereafter called bonfires, are
permitted by permit only. All permitted bonfires must be conducted in accordance with the rules
established herein. An application for a permit must be filed with the fire chief, city clerk or their
designee a minimum of one week prior to the requested burn date. Permits are only valid for the
day of the bonfire.
D. Field Burns: A "field" is defined as an area of open land. Field burning is permitted by permit only.
All permitted field burns must be conducted in accordance with the rules established herein. An
application for field burning shall be obtained from the fire chief, city clerk or their designee at least
seven (7) calendar days prior to the requested burn date. If a permit is issued, it will be issued for a
specific day and will be valid only for that specified day. No less than twenty four (24) hours before
and no more than forty eight (48) hours before the proposed burning date, the permit holder shall
contact the fire department to inquire if conditions exist which would invalidate the burn permit.
E. Rejection Or Modification Of Application: The fire chief, city clerk, or their designee shall have the
right to reject or modify any application which, while meeting these requirements, may present an
unreasonable hazard to the safety, health or property of others. (Ord. 1408, 2016)
8.28.030: RIGHT OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION:
The fire chief or any authorized officer, agent, employee or representative of the city of Payette who
presents credentials shall be permitted to inspect an area where open burning, outdoor burning, or
recreational burning is taking place or will take place pursuant to a burning permit for the purpose of
ascertaining compliance with the provisions of a permit and/or this chapter. (Ord. 1391, 2015)
8.28.040: OPEN BURNING REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 175/467
A. It shall be unlawful to burn garbage, refuse, weeds, grasses, fields, or any combustible matter
within the city limits, except as herein provided.
B. Unless otherwise designated by the fire chief or their designee, burning shall be permitted
throughout the year. Burning shall be between the hours of dawn to dusk.
C. There shall be no burning of any substance which is designated as hazardous waste or hazardous
material by the EPA.
D. The use of burning barrels is allowed for yard debris only and burning of household garbage is
strictly prohibited.
E. The prohibition of this section shall not apply to wood burning stoves.
F. No burning shall be done upon any city street, right of way, easement or property. (Ord. 1391, 2015)
8.28.050: BURNING REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Minimum Safety Procedures To Be Followed:
1. Recreational fires shall be no closer than fifteen feet (15') from any building, structure, property
line, or any other combustible materials.
2. Any person who obtains a permit for recreational fire shall be responsible for any damages
caused by the fire.
3. "Portable devices" (defined as devices commercially designed and intended to contain and
control outdoor wood fires) shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations and must be employed upon a noncombustible surface.
4. The width of the noncombustible surface must be twice the height of the approved portable
device or noncombustible structure.
5. All recreational fires shall have a diameter of no more than three feet (3') and may not extend
more than two feet (2') high. No person shall maintain a recreational fire in an approved portable
device or combustible structure so that flames extend beyond the fire chamber.
6. No recreational fire shall be started or allowed to continue burning when the wind direction or
wind speed will cause smoke, embers, or other burning materials to be carried by the wind
toward any other combustible and/or flammable materials. Wind speeds may not be in excess of
ten (10) miles per hour.
7. Smoke from any recreational fire shall not create a nuisance for neighboring property owners.
Persons with permits are encouraged to speak with surrounding neighbors regarding
recreational fire usage to reduce the possibility of nuisance complaints. The fire shall be
extinguished immediately upon the complaint of a neighboring property owner in regard to
nuisance smoke.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 176/467
8. Only clean, dry, and untreated wood shall be burned, provided that the wood does not extend
outside of the fireplace. Material for fires shall not include rubbish, garbage, recyclable items,
trash, any material made of or coated with rubber, plastic, leather or petroleum based materials,
and shall not contain any flammable or combustible liquids.
9. Either a charged water hose, or a five (5) gallon water bucket, or a five (5) pound ABC fire
extinguisher shall be available in a safe location near the recreational fire within twenty five feet
(25').
10. All recreational fires shall be attended by at least one person who is eighteen (18) years of age
or older, from the ignition of the fire until the fire is completely extinguished.
B. Bonfires, Field Burns And Ceremonial Burns:
1. The fire chief or a designee may inspect the site of the bonfire or field burn prior to approving the
application to ensure the area is safe and accessible to emergency equipment.
2. Excessive winds, temperatures or any other adverse conditions which exist as determined by
the fire chief or a designee may result in an order requiring the cancellation or extinguishing of a
bonfire or field burn in progress. (Ord. 1408, 2016)
8.28.060: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with the general misdemeanor laws of the
state of Idaho. Each day upon which such a violation occurs constitutes a separate violation. (Ord.
1391, 2015)
Chapter 8.29
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
8.29.010: PAYETTE AIRPORT; HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND CHEMICAL
SPRAYING BANNED:
The following acts are hereby prohibited:
A. Landing or taking off from the Payette airport before or after spraying any crops with any chemical
spray.
B. Using the Payette airport as a base for spraying operations.
C. Transporting any hazardous material over, along or upon the airport property in any type of
conveyance or container. (Ord. 1010 § 1, 1990)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 177/467
8.29.020: VIOLATION; INJUNCTION:
Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. In addition to being a misdemeanor, any entity,
either public or private, may sue to enforce the terms of this chapter, and may obtain an injunction
against any conduct which violates any state, federal or county rules or regulations pertaining to use
of hazardous chemicals for aerial application of chemicals. (Ord. 1010 § 1, 1990)
Chapter 8.30
KEY LOCKBOX SYSTEM
8.30.010: KEY LOCKBOX REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN BUILDINGS OR
STRUCTURES:
The following buildings or structures shall be equipped with a key lockbox at or near the main
entrance or such other location required by the fire chief or his/her designee:
A. All commercial or industrial buildings or structures that are secured in a manner that restricts
access during an emergency; state or federally regulated banks, savings and loans, and credit
unions are excluded from compliance with this chapter;
B. Any building or facility containing a quantity of hazardous materials;
C. Governmental structures;
D. Nursing care facilities;
E. Educational or childcare facilities;
F. All places of assembly. (Ord. 1369, 2012)
8.30.020: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES:
All commercial and industrial structures requiring a change of occupancy (use) inspection subject to
this chapter shall have the key lockbox installed and operational prior to final inspection and
occupancy. (Ord. 1369, 2012)
8.30.030: TYPE OF LOCKBOX SYSTEM:
The fire chief shall designate the type of key lockbox system to be implemented within the city and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 178/467
shall have the authority to require all structures to use the designated system. The fire chief shall be
authorized to implement rules and regulations for the use of the lockbox system. (Ord. 1369, 2012)
8.30.040: MAINTENANCE OF LOCKBOX:
The owner or operator of a structure, gated community, or complex required to have a key lockbox
shall, at all times, maintain the operation of the lockbox, and keep labeled keys in the lockbox that will
allow access to the following:
A. Keys to locked points of egress, whether on the interior or exterior of such buildings;
B. Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms;
C. Keys to locked electrical rooms;
D. Key to elevator controls;
E. Keys to any other areas as designated by the Payette fire department. (Ord. 1369, 2012)
8.30.050: INSTALLATION AND LOCATION:
All key lockboxes (also known as a "knox box") shall be recess mounted into the building/structure at
a height of not less than six feet (6') above the ground (surface grade). The faceplate of the key
lockbox shall be flush with the exterior facade of the structure/building on new construction. All key
lockboxes shall be located as close as reasonably possible to the main entrance to the
structure/building. (Ord. 1369, 2012)
Title 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Chapter 9.02
IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER
9.02.010: DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
If any person, in the city, impersonates any peace officer by wearing a star or otherwise does so, such
person shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 6-1-7)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 179/467
Chapter 9.04
INTERFERING WITH AN OFFICER
9.04.010: DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
Any person who molests, interrupts, hinders or prevents any public officer in the discharge of his
duties, or such duties as may from time to time be prescribed by the council, shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 6-1-9)
Chapter 9.05
TRESPASSING
9.05.010: TRESPASSING PROHIBITED:
Any person, except under a landlord-tenant relationship, who, being first notified either verbally or in
writing, by the owner, agent or a designee thereof, to immediately depart from certain real property
and who: a) refuses to depart after being so notified; or b) returns to the property within thirty (30)
days after expulsion without the owner's, agent's or designee's permission, is guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) or thirty (30) days in jail, or both
fine and jail. (Ord. 1134 § 1, 1996)
9.05.020: WINDOW PEEPING:
It shall be unlawful for any person, without first obtaining permission of the person or persons in lawful
possession of any premises upon which a residential dwelling is located, to enter upon the premises
of another for the purpose of looking, peeking, staring or peeping in the windows of said residence. A
violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed three hundred
dollars ($300.00) or six (6) months in jail, or both fine and jail. (Ord. 1134 § 1, 1996)
Chapter 9.14
EXPECTORATING
9.14.010: ON SIDEWALKS; DECLARED UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to spit or expectorate upon any of the sidewalks within the corporate limits
of the city. (Prior code § 8-3-1)
Chapter 9.16
INDECENT EXPOSURE1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 180/467
9.16.010: DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
Any person who indecently or immorally exposes his or her person, or who commits any indecent or
immoral act in or upon any street, alley or in or about any public premises or public place or general
public resort, within the city limits, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 6-1-8)
Chapter 9.18
INTOXICATED PERSONS1
9.18.010: ACTS CONSTITUTING MISDEMEANOR:
A. Any person who is in a state of intoxication within the city limits shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
B. Any person who is in a state of intoxication and is violent, riotous, disorderly and uses obscene or
indecent language, in or upon any street or alley or in or about any public premises or place of
general or public resort within the city limits, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code
§ 6-1-10)
Chapter 9.20
HOUSES OF ILL FAME; PROSTITUTION1
9.20.010: DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
Every person who keeps any house for the purpose of assignation or prostitution, or any house of
public resort by which the peace, comfort or decency of the immediate neighborhood is disturbed;
every person who rents or leases any house of assignation or prostitution, or knowingly permits it to
be used for such purpose; every person who lives in or about a house of ill fame; and every common
prostitute living within the city limits for the purpose of prostitution, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Prior code § 6-1-6)
Chapter 9.22
GAMBLING1
9.22.010: ACTS CONSTITUTING MISDEMEANOR:
A. Every person who deals, plays or carries on, opens or causes to be opened, or who conducts either
as owner, or lessee, whether for hire or not, any game of faro, monte, roulette, lasquenet, rouge-etnoir
or ronder or any game played with cards, dice or any other device, for money, checks, credit
or any other representative of value, within the city limits, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 181/467
B. Every person who knowingly permits any of the games prohibited by subsection A of this section to
be played, conducted or dealt in any house owned, rented or conducted by such person, in whole
or in part, is punishable as provided for in chapter 1.12 of this code.
C. Every person duly summoned as a witness for the prosecution on any proceeding had under this
section who neglects or refuses to attend, as required, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior
code § 6-1-5)
Chapter 9.24
DISORDERLY HOUSES
9.24.010: ACTS CONSTITUTING MISDEMEANOR:
Any person who keeps any disorderly house or other place of business and allows, permits or suffers,
in any house, place or building kept, used or occupied by him within the city limits, any disorderly,
noisy or riotous conduct or quarreling or fighting shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code
§ 6-1-11)
Chapter 9.26
RIGHT OF ENTRY
9.26.010: DESIGNATED CITY OFFICIALS AUTHORIZED; OBSTRUCTION OR
RESISTANCE DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
If the owner or keeper of, or any person within, any gambling house or room, disorderly house or
house of ill fame, within the city, refuses to permit any designated official of the city to enter such room
or house, it is lawful for any of the officials named to enter upon and into such premises by force by
breaking doors or otherwise, and to arrest, without warrant, all suspicious persons found therein. Any
person obstructing or resisting any such officer in the performance of the duties required by this
section, or any other duties imposed or that may be prescribed by the council, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Prior code § 6-1-14)
Chapter 9.27
SNIFFING OR INHALING CERTAIN SUBSTANCES
9.27.010: DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to sniff, smell, inhale or ingest in any manner,
any fumes emanating from gasoline, paint, glue or any other foreign substance obtained without a
prescription, for the purpose of inducing an euphoric state, to experience a mind altering effect, to
cause a hallucination, to induce a mind altering effect or for the purpose of getting high. Any person
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 182/467
found guilty of violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by either
imprisonment in the Payette County jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months or by a fine not to
exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1027 § 1, 1991)
Chapter 9.30
DOG OR COCK FIGHTS1
9.30.010: DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
Every person who participates in any dog or cock fighting, or who aids or abets the same by his
presence, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 6-1-4)
Chapter 9.32
DISTURBING THE PEACE1
9.32.010: DISORDERLY OR RIOTOUS CONDUCT; DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
Any person who is guilty of any noisy, riotous or disorderly conduct, or in any way commits a breach of
the peace or anything that is offensive to the senses or dangerous to the peace of the inhabitants of
the city, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 6-1-1)
9.32.020: DISTURBING MEETINGS; DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
A. Every person who, without authority of law, wilfully disturbs or disrupts any assembly or meeting
that is not unlawful in its character, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. No person shall engage in any conduct which disturbs or disrupts a lawfully convened court
proceeding, a public hearing or a public meeting.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person who has engaged in any conduct which has disturbed or
disrupted a lawfully convened court proceeding, public hearing or a public meeting to refuse to
leave the meeting when asked to do so by the presiding officer, a sergeant at arms, a law peace
officer or a representative of the presiding officer.
D. Every person who wilfully disturbs or disquiets any assemblage of people met for religious worship,
either within the place where such meeting is held or so near it as to disturb the order and
solemnity of the meeting, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1388, 2014)
9.32.030: PUBLIC DISTURBANCE NOISES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 183/467
It is unlawful for any person to cause, or for any reason, in charge, control or possession of property,
to permit or allow to originate from the property, sound that is a public disturbance noise. The following
sounds are determined to be public disturbance noises:
A. The frequent, repetitive or continuous sounding of any horn or siren attached to a motor vehicle,
except as a warning of danger or as specifically permitted or required by law;
B. The creation of frequent, repetitive or continuous sounds in connection with the starting,
operation, repair, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle, off highway vehicle or
internal combustion engine within a residential district, so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere
with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or possessors of real property;
C. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on or near the public streets, at any time and
place so as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, comfort and repose of owners or
possessors of real property;
D. The creation of frequent, repetitive or continuous sounds which emanate from any building,
structure, apartment, or condominium, which reasonably interfere with the peace, comfort, and
repose of owners or possessors of real property, such as sounds from audio equipment, musical
instruments, band sessions, or social gatherings;
E. Sounds from motor vehicle sound systems, such as tape players, radios, and compact disc
players, operated at a volume so as to be audible greater than fifty feet (50') from the vehicle
itself;
F. Sound from audio equipment, such as tape players, radios, or compact disc players, operated at
a volume so as to be audible greater than fifty feet (50') from the source, and if not operated
upon the property of the operator.
The foregoing provisions shall not apply to regularly scheduled events at parks, such as public
address systems for baseball games or park concerts. (Ord. 1080 § 1, 1994)
9.32.040: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person violating the provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine in a sum not exceeding
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or one year in the Payette County Jail, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 1388, 2014)
Chapter 9.34
UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY1
9.34.010: DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 184/467
If two (2) or more persons assemble for the purpose of disturbing the public peace of the city or for the
purpose of committing any unlawful act within the city limits, and do not disperse upon being
commanded to do so by the chief of police, assistant policemen or any authorized representative of
the city, the persons so offending shall upon conviction thereof be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code
§ 6-1-2)
Chapter 9.36
QUARRELING
9.36.010: ACTS CONSTITUTING MISDEMEANOR:
If two (2) or more persons meet in any street, alley or public place in the city to do an unlawful act
upon a common cause of quarrel, and make advances toward it; or do an unlawful act of violence or
engage in any fight either with or without any common cause of quarrel; or act in a violent, tumultuous
or riotous manner, they shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 6-1-13)
Chapter 9.38
VAGRANCY1
9.38.010: ACTS CONSTITUTING VAGRANCY; MISDEMEANOR:
A. Every person shall be guilty of vagrancy when he:
1. Solicits anyone to engage in, or engages in, lewd or dissolute conduct in any public place or in
any place open to the public or exposed to public view; or
2. Accosts other persons in any public place or in any place open to the public for the purpose of
begging or soliciting alms; or
3. Loiters in, about or upon any street, alley or other public way or public place, or in any place
open to the public, without lawful business and conducting himself in a lewd, wanton or
lascivious manner in speech or behavior; or
4. Has upon his person or in his possession any instrument, tool or other implement for picking
locks or pockets or any implement that is usually employed or that reasonably may be inferred to
have been designed to be employed in the commission of any felony, misdemeanor or the
violation of any ordinance, and who fails to account for the possession of same; or
5. Loiters, remains, or wanders upon the streets or from place to place without apparent reason or
business and who refuses to identify himself and to account for his presence when requested by
a police officer to do so, if the surrounding circumstances are such to indicate to a reasonable
man that the public safety demands such identification; or
6. Occupies, lodges or sleeps in any building, structure or place, whether public or private, or any
automobile, truck, railroad car or other similar vehicles or equipment without the permission of
the owner or person entitled to the possession or in control thereof; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 185/467
7. Loiters, prowls or wanders upon the private property of another, without visible or lawful
business with the owner or occupants thereof; or
8. Loiters or remains in or about a school, not having any reason or relationship involving custody
of or responsibility for a pupil or student, or any other specific, legitimate reason for being there,
and not having written permission from anyone authorized to grant the same; or
9. Loiters, prowls, remains or wanders in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law abiding
individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the
vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm
is warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight upon appearance of a police officer, refuses to
identify himself or manifestly endeavors or by deliberate furtive action attempts to conceal
himself or any object. Unless flight by the actor or other circumstances make it impracticable, a
police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an arrest for an offense under this section, afford the
actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting him
to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an
offense under this section if the police officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it
appears at trial that the explanation given by the actor was true and, if believed by the police
officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.
B. Any person who commits any of the acts prescribed and defined in subsection A of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 911, 1980)
Chapter 9.44
MALICIOUS INJURY TO PROPERTY1
9.44.010: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It is unlawful for any person wilfully and maliciously to injure, deface, mutilate, remove, pull down,
break or in any manner interfere with or molest or secrete or destroy any real or personal property
belonging to or under the control of any person. (Prior code § 6-1-17)
Chapter 9.54
RUNAWAY CHILDREN AND CURFEW HOURS1
9.54.010: RUNNING AWAY PROHIBITED FOR PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN:
It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age who lives, resides or is present within
the city to: a) run away or attempt to run away from his/her parents, custodial parent, guardian or other
legal custodian; b) be a person who has run away from his/her parents, custodial parent, guardian or
other legal custodian; c) commit or do any act which places him/her beyond the control of his/her
parents, custodial parent, guardian or other legal custodian. (Ord. 1165 § 1, 1999: Ord. 904, 1980)
9.54.020: CURFEW HOURS FOR PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 186/467
A. It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to be upon any street, alley, public
ground, public place, or upon any private property open to the public or exposed to public use
within the city, between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
B. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or any other person having or exercising custodial
control of any person under eighteen (18) years of age, to permit such person to be or to remain, in
or upon any street, alley, public ground, public place, or upon any private property open to the
public or exposed to public use within the city, between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. (Ord. 1165 § 1, 1999: Ord. 904, 1980)
9.54.030: EXCEPTIONS TO CURFEW HOURS:
The provisions of section 9.54.020 of this chapter shall not apply to any person who is accompanied
by his/her parent(s), guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of him/her, nor to any
person who is in the performance of an errand or duty directed by his/her parent(s), guardian or other
adult person having the care and custody of him/her, nor to any person who is actually at the time
engaged in legitimate employment for profit. (Ord. 1165 § 1, 1999: Ord. 904, 1980)
9.54.040: ENCOURAGING OR CAUSING RUNAWAYS OR CURFEW VIOLATIONS
PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person by any act or neglect to permit, encourage, aid or cause any person under
the age of eighteen (18) years to commit any act prohibited by sections 9.54.010 and 9.54.020 of this
chapter. (Ord. 1165 § 1, 1999: Ord. 904, 1980)
9.54.050: PRESENCE IN PUBLIC PLACE DEEMED PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF
CHAPTER VIOLATION:
The presence of a person under eighteen (18) years of age in or upon any street, alley, public ground,
public place, or any private property open to the public or exposed to public use within the city,
between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M., when that underage
person is not accompanied by his/her parent(s), guardian or one having legal custody of said child,
nor while that underage person is engaged in the performance of an errand or duty directed by his/her
parent(s), guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of him/her, nor being actually
engaged in legitimate employment for profit shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1165 § 1, 1999: Ord. 904, 1980)
9.54.060: VIOLATION; DIFFERENT PENALTIES FOR CHILDREN AND ADULTS:
A violation of this chapter shall be a general misdemeanor. A violation of this chapter by a minor child
shall bring said child within the purview of the juvenile corrections act of the state of Idaho, or any
successor act thereto. Any violation of this chapter by an adult shall be a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment in the Payette County jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by a fine not to
exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by both such imprisonment and fine. (Ord. 1165 § 1, 1999:
Ord. 904, 1980)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 187/467
Footnote 1: IC § 16-1803.
Chapter 9.56
CIGARETTE SALES1
9.56.010: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A. It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or any agent thereof, with or without a license, to sell,
give, distribute or make available, either directly or indirectly, any cigarettes, cigarette paper, snuff,
chew, chewing tobacco or any other tobacco products to any person under eighteen (18) years of
age.
B. It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase, receive, accept, share,
possess, handle or use in any manner, any cigarettes, cigarette papers, snuff, chew, chewing
tobacco or any other tobacco products, or anything purporting to be or resembling a cigarette.
(Ord. 1164 § 1, 1999: prior code § 6-1-15)
Chapter 9.62
FIREARMS1
9.62.010: DISCHARGE UNLAWFUL WHEN:
It is unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, paintball gun, or air gun within the city limits,
except in the necessary defense of life, person or property or when rendered necessary when making
an arrest. It shall be lawful to discharge a firearm, paintball gun or air gun in a building or facility that
has been used as an indoor firing range prior to the adoption of this section. (Ord. 1184 § 1, 2000:
prior code § 6-4-1)
9.62.020: BOWS AND ARROWS, UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire, discharge or shoot any bow and arrow within or into the city
limits. The term bow shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, a standard bow, compound bow,
recurve bow, long bow, hunting bow, cross bow or any other bow designed to propel an arrow. (Ord.
1051 § 1, 1992)
9.62.030: AIR GUNS:
The chief of police is hereby authorized to establish a procedure which will allow residents who are at
least twenty one (21) years old and who can demonstrate that they have liability insurance to apply for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 188/467
and receive a permit to discharge an air gun when that resident can demonstrate that the use of such
a weapon is necessary to remove birds or animals which are damaging their property or food sources.
A resident who receives such a permit shall be strictly liable for any damage caused during the use of
such a weapon. Any use of an air powered gun without first securing a permit shall be a violation of
section 9.62.010 of this chapter. (Ord. 1251 § 2, 2005)
9.62.040: PENALTY:
Any person who is found to have violated this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished
in accordance with the misdemeanor statutes of the state of Idaho. (Ord. 1251 § 1, 2005: Ord. 1051
§ 1, 1992)
Chapter 9.65
GANG ACTIVITY
9.65.010: DEFINITIONS:
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions of Idaho Code section 18-8502 are adopted by
reference and incorporated herein by the city as if set out in full verbatim.
B. For purposes of this chapter, a "public place" means the public way or any other location open to
the public, whether publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to, any street, sidewalk,
avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground or other public ground or public building,
any common area of a school, hospital, apartment house, office building, transport facility, shop,
privately owned place of business to which the public is invited, including any place of amusement,
entertainment, or eating place. Any "public area" also includes the front yard area, driveway and
walkway of any private residence, business, or apartment house. (Ord. 1315 § 2, 2010)
9.65.020: UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF GANG AFFILIATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to use, display or wear colors, emblems or insignia on
or about their person in any public place, with the intent of communicating membership in, support of,
affiliation, association, identification with any gang. (Ord. 1315 § 2, 2010)
9.65.030: UNLAWFUL DISPLAY FOR GANG RECRUITMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to use, display or wear colors, emblems or insignia on
or about their person in any public place, with the intent to recruit any other person into any gang.
(Ord. 1315 § 2, 2010)
9.65.040: UNLAWFUL DISPLAY TO INCITE VIOLENCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 189/467
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to use, display or wear colors, emblems or insignia on
or about their person in any public place, with the intent to threaten, insult, incite, challenge to fight or
invite others to fight. (Ord. 1315 § 2, 2010)
9.65.050: PENALTY:
Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in
accordance with the misdemeanor statutes of the state of Idaho, and shall be responsible for the city's
cost of prosecution including attorney fees incurred by the city. Each day that a violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 1315 § 2, 2010)
Chapter 9.67
PROHIBITION OF POSSESSION, SALE, ADVERTISING
OR USE OF "SPICE" AND SIMILAR PRODUCTS
9.67.010: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The city of Payette, Idaho, hereby finds and declares that the products and synthetic substances
described hereunder are commonly used as an alternative to marijuana, that the synthetic substances
are potentially dangerous to users and that the long term effects are not yet known. The city council
declares that the products which contain these synthetic substances often use a disclaimer that the
product is "not for human consumption" to avoid regulations requiring the manufacturer to list the
product's active ingredients and that most of these products only list the ingredients of damiana leaf
and mullein leaf extract. The council further declares that the synthetic substances described
hereunder are not yet categorized as illegal controlled substances under state or federal law, and that
it is proper and necessary for the city of Payette to exercise its authority to safeguard and protect the
public health and safety. Finally, the council declares that it is within the policy power of city of Payette,
granted by article XII, section 2 of the Idaho state constitution, to legislate the use, possession and
sale of synthetic cannabinoids and/or the substances known as "spice" in order to preserve the
public's health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 1326, 2010)
9.67.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is
intended, certain terms used herein are defined as follows:
SPICE: Any herbal or plant material, incense or other substance, regardless of the purpose it is
marketed for, or whether it is labeled as unsuitable for human consumption, which contains one or
more synthetic cannabinoids or their analogs or homologues.
A. Spice includes products by whatever trade name that are treated, sprayed, or saturated with
one or more of the chemicals identified in the definition of "synthetic cannabinoids" as defined
herein. Some currently marketed products containing synthetic cannabinoids identified in the
definition of "synthetic cannabinoids" as defined herein include, but are not limited to: K2, K3,
spice, black mamba, Mr. Smiley, vanilla voodoo, rage and posh.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 190/467
B. Spice includes any incense or alternative smoking blend product, which contains damiana leaf
and/or mullein leaf extract.
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS: A synthetic substance with a chemical structure or pharmacological
activity similar to tetrahydrocannabinol, also known as THC, which is the main psychoactive
substance found in marijuana. For the purpose of this chapter, synthetic cannabinoids are more
specifically identified as follows:
A. 1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole, a substance also known as JWH-018;
B. 1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole, a substance also known as JWH-073;
C. 2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol, a substance also known as CP
47,497 and its homologues;
D. (dexanabinol, (6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10atetrah
ydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol), a substance also known as HU-211;
E. Any salt, isomer, analog or homologue of the above mentioned chemicals;
F. Any other known synthetic cannabinoid; or
G. Any similar chemical substances which when inhaled, injected or otherwise ingested are
capable of causing a condition of intoxication, inebriation, excitement, stupefaction, or the dulling
of the brain or nervous system. (Ord. 1326, 2010)
9.67.030: POSSESSION, USE OR SALE OF SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS:
Except as authorized by title 37, chapter 27 of the Idaho Code, as amended, it is unlawful for any
person or entity, to manufacture, make, compound, mix, distribute, dispense, ingest, use, possess,
purchase, attempt to purchase, sell, display for sale, advertise for sale, attempt to sell, give, trade or
barter, any one or more of the following chemical compounds and/or substances, known as synthetic
cannabinoids, either in their chemical form or as the product commonly known as spice, including their
salts, isomers, homologues and salts of their isomers and homologues:
A. Salvia divinorum or Salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as Salvia
divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and
every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or
extracts;
B. 1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-018);
C. 2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl)-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol (also known as CP-47/497), and the
dimethylhexyl, dimethyloctyl and dimethylnonyl homologues of CP-47/497;
D. 1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-073);
E. 1-(2-(4-(morpholinyl)ethyl))-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-200);
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 191/467
F. 1-Pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole (also known as JWH-250);
G. 1-Hexyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-019);
H. 1-Pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-398);
I. 1-(3-trifluoromethylphenyl) piperazine (also known as TFMPP);
J. Any similar structural analogs of the above chemical compounds;
K. Any other synthetic cannabinoids; and
L. Any commercial products sold as aromatics or incense under the brand names spice, black
mamba, K2, puff, smoke, skunk, pandora potpourri and sugar sticks or other brand names, that
have been determined by chemical testing laboratories, law enforcement or other governmental
agencies to contain any of the foregoing compounds. (Ord. 1326, 2010)
9.67.040: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE:
It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution for possession or use of synthetic cannabinoids under
this chapter that said possession or use is under and pursuant to the direction or prescription of a
licensed physician or dentist authorized in the state of Idaho to direct or prescribe such act. (Ord.
1326, 2010)
9.67.050: SEIZURE OF COMPOUNDS:
If any of the intoxicating chemical compounds prohibited herein are found in the possession of any
person, they may be confiscated and destroyed by law enforcement officials. (Ord. 1326, 2010)
9.67.060: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
The city of Payette shall have the authority to seek an injunction against any person or business
violating section 9.67.030 of this chapter. In any action seeking an injunction the city of Payette shall
be entitled to collect its enforcement expenses, including reasonable attorney fees incurred at trial and
on appeal. (Ord. 1326, 2010)
9.67.070: SUBSEQUENT STATE ACTION:
If the Idaho state legislature adopts a statute enacting criminal penalties for prohibitions set forth in
this chapter, then upon the effective date of such state statute, provisions of this chapter that are
addressed by the state statute shall no longer be deemed effective. Any violations of this chapter
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 192/467
committed prior to the Idaho state legislature enacting such a statute may be prosecuted. To the
extent that the provisions within this chapter are not preempted by state statute, the provisions of this
chapter shall remain valid and in effect. (Ord. 1326, 2010)
Title 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.04
STATE STATUTES ADOPTED
10.04.010: DESIGNATED:
Chapters 5, 6, and 7 of title 49 of the Idaho Code, which codifies the state motor vehicle laws and
rules of the road, are adopted by reference. (Ord. 873, 1977)
Chapter 10.08
ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS
10.08.010: DUTY AND AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT
OFFICIALS:
A. It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the
chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of the state and the municipality.
B. Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are
authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal; provided, that in the event of a fire or other
emergency, or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may
direct traffic as conditions may require.
C. Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in
directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. (Prior code § 10-2-1)
10.08.020: UNLAWFUL ACTS GENERALLY:
It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by the
provisions of this title. (Prior code § 10-2-2)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 193/467
10.08.030: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS
REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person wilfully to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a
police officer or fire department official. (Prior code § 10-2-3)
10.08.040: APPLICABILITY TO PUSHCARTS, ANIMALS AND ANIMAL DRAWN
VEHICLES:
Every person propelling any pushcart, driving any animal drawn vehicles or riding an animal upon a
roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this title applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except
those provisions which by their own nature can have no application. (Prior code § 10-2-4)
10.08.050: USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES;
UNLAWFUL WHEN:
It is unlawful for any person upon roller skates or riding any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device to go
upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk. When crossing a street, such person
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This
section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street. (Prior code § 10-2-5)
10.08.060: APPLICABILITY TO PUBLIC EMPLOYEES AND VEHICLES:
The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of
the United States government, the state, the county or the municipality, and it is unlawful for any such
driver to violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted. (Prior code § 10-2-6)
Chapter 10.12
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES1
10.12.010: CHIEF OF POLICE'S AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND MAINTAIN:
The chief of police shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as
required under the traffic regulations of the municipality to make effective the provisions of said
regulations, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem
necessary. (Prior code § 10-3-1)
10.12.020: CONFORMITY TO APPROVED SPECIFICATIONS REQUIRED:
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the approved specifications. All signs and
signals required by this chapter for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 194/467
type and location throughout the municipality. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent
with the provisions of this title shall be official traffic control devices. (Prior code § 10-3-2)
10.12.030: CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY ZONES:
The chief of police is authorized to do the following:
A. Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway,
crosswalks at intersections, where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing
the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary.
B. Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary
for the protection of pedestrians. (Prior code § 10-3-10)
10.12.040: TRAFFIC LANES:
A. The chief of police is authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway
where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
B. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or
refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of such lane, except when lawfully passing
another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. (Prior code § 10-3-11)
Chapter 10.16
SPEED RESTRICTIONS1
10.16.010: OPERATION AT CAREFUL AND PRUDENT SPEED REQUIRED:
Any person driving a vehicle in the city shall drive the same at a careful and prudent speed not greater
than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street or alley
and of any other conditions then existing; and no person shall drive any vehicle upon a street or alley
at such a speed as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person. (Prior code § 10-4-1(A))
10.16.020: LIMITS DESIGNATED; UNLAWFUL TO VIOLATE:
A. Subject to the provisions of section 10.16.010 of this chapter and except in those instances where a
lower speed is either posted or is specified in this title, it is prima facie lawful for the driver of a
vehicle to drive at a speed set out below, except in any case when such speed would be unsafe:
1. Fifteen (15) miles per hour when approaching within fifty feet (50') of a railroad crossing when
the driver's view is obstructed. A driver's view shall be deemed to be obstructed when, at any
time during the last two hundred feet (200') of his approach to such crossing, he does not have a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 195/467
clear and uninterrupted view of such railway crossing and of any traffic on such railway for a
distance of four hundred feet (400') in each direction from such crossing;
2. Twenty (20) miles per hour in any school zone while school is in session between eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M.;
3. Fifteen (15) miles per hour when approaching within fifty feet (50') and while traversing an
intersection of streets when the driver's view is obstructed. A driver's view shall be deemed to be
obstructed when, at any time during the last fifty feet (50') of his approach to such intersection,
he does not have a clear and uninterrupted view of such intersection and of the traffic upon all of
the streets entering such intersection for a distance of two hundred feet (200') from such
intersection;
4. Fifteen (15) miles per hour while traversing or going around curves or traversing a grade upon a
street when the driver's view is obstructed within a distance of one hundred feet (100') along
such street in the direction in which he is proceeding;
5. Fifteen (15) miles per hour in any alley and in public parks, unless a different speed is posted;
6. Thirty five (35) miles per hour on through highways and all other conditions not covered in this
subsection;
7. Unless a different speed limit is posted in a specified area, it shall be prima facie lawful to drive
twenty five (25) miles per hour within the city limits.
B. It is unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed limitations set forth in subsection A of this
section. In every charge of violation, the complaint shall specify the speed at which the defendant
is alleged to have driven and the speed which subsection A of this section declares lawful at the
time and place of such alleged violation. (Ord. 1215 § 1, 2002: prior code § 10-4-1(B))
Chapter 10.20
PARKING
10.20.010: ALL NIGHT; PROHIBITED IN BUSINESS DISTRICT WHEN:
It is unlawful for any person except physicians on emergency calls, to park a vehicle within the
business district for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes between two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of any day. (Prior code § 10-7-13)
10.20.020: TRUCKS IN BUSINESS DISTRICT; PROHIBITED:
Parking of trucks and/or truck trailers is prohibited within the business district. (Prior code § 10-7-14)
10.20.030: ON ROADWAY; PROHIBITED WHEN:
It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 196/467
A. Displaying such vehicle for sale;
B. Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. (Prior
code § 10-7-15)
10.20.040: ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
A. The chief of police is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any
street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic
or create a hazardous situation.
B. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any
school property as authorized in subsection A of this section, it is unlawful for any person to park a
vehicle in any such designated place. (Prior code § 10-7-16)
10.20.050: ON NARROW STREETS:
A. The chief of police is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width
of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet (20'), or upon one side of a street as indicated by such
signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet (30').
B. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in subsection
A of this section, it is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of
any such sign. (Prior code § 10-7-17)
10.20.060: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING NEAR CONGESTED PLACES:
A. The chief of police is authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places not exceeding
one hundred feet (100') in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would
create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay in traffic.
B. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized in subsection A of
this section, it is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated
place. (Prior code § 10-7-18)
10.20.070: SIGN ERECTION; POLICE CHIEF'S DUTY:
Whenever any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be
the duty of the chief of police to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof, and such regulations
shall not be effective unless said signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense.
(Prior code § 10-7-22)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 197/467
10.20.080: DESIGNATED SPACES; PROTRUSION PROHIBITED:
Whenever parking spaces or lanes have been designated and marked upon any of the streets of the
city by the city, no car or motor vehicle shall be parked so that any portion thereof protrudes beyond
any line designating such parking space or lane. (Prior code § 10-7-23)
10.20.090: TIME RESTRICTION IN CERTAIN AREAS; DESIGNATED NO PARKING
AREAS; PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
A. It is the purpose of this section to alleviate traffic congestion and to alleviate parking congestion
caused by numerous operators of motor vehicles who park their vehicles for unreasonably long
periods of time in the most congested streets of the city and thus impede traffic.
B. It is unlawful to park any motor vehicle for more than two (2) hours continuously at any one place
between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., on any day except on Sundays and
legal holidays, upon 1st Avenue North between the alley one-half (1/2) block west of 8th Street and
the alley one-half (1/2) block east of 8th Street, Center Avenue between 7th Street and 9th Street,
1st Avenue South between 8th Street and the alley one-half (1/2) block east of 8th Street, and 8th
Street between 3rd Avenue North and 2nd Avenue South.
C. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined a fee set by resolution. Upon a
third or subsequent conviction of a violation of said section, within any ninety (90) day period, the
fine shall be set by resolution.
D. It is unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to move such motor vehicle within the area
designated in subsection B of this section for the purpose of evading the time limit prescribed
therein.
E. There shall be no parking in the traveled or paved portion of the highway right of way on 16th
Street, commonly known as Highway 95, from three hundred feet (300') north of 7th Avenue North
to three hundred feet (300') south of 6th Avenue South. Parking in violation of this subsection shall
be an infraction.
F. There shall be no parking on, over or along South 18th Street, commonly known as Highway 52,
from one hundred fifty feet (150') north or south of the intersection of South 18th Street and
Hughes Drive. Parking in violation of this subsection shall be an infraction. (Ord. 1377, 2013)
10.20.100: U-TURNS AND CROSSING TRAFFIC:
A. It shall be unlawful to execute a U-turn on the following designated streets which lie within the city
limits of Payette: Main Street; Highway 95; Center Avenue; Highway 52; Seventh Avenue North.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 198/467
B. While operating a motor vehicle within one hundred (100) yards of a school, it shall be unlawful to
cross an oncoming traffic lane to discharge passengers.
C. A violation of either subsection A or B of this section shall be an infraction. (Ord. 1002 § 1, 1990)
10.20.110: FIRE STATION EXITS; FIRE HYDRANTS:
No vehicle shall be parked within ten feet (10') of any fire hydrant and no vehicle shall be parked in
front of the main doors to the fire station nor in any street, alley, driveway or throughway which
impedes or impairs the ability of the firetrucks to make an exit from the fire station in an emergency
situation. (Ord. 997 § A, 1989)
10.20.120: EMERGENCY VEHICLES; INTERFERENCE WITH:
Any vehicle which is parked in any location which interferes with the ability of any emergency vehicle
to respond to an emergency situation shall be subject to being towed away without notice of any kind
and without liability for damages to any individual who engages in the towing. That towing will be done
at the owner's expense. (Ord. 997 § B, 1989)
10.20.130: ALLEYS; FIVE MINUTE PARKING:
No person shall leave any motor vehicle parked or unattended in any alley within the city for more
than five (5) minutes. No person shall leave a motor vehicle parked or unattended in any street or
alley with the motor running. (Ord. 997 § C, 1989)
10.20.140: TRUCK OR SEMITRAILERS; TEMPORARY PARKING:
It is unlawful for any person to park any tractor truck or semitrailer on the streets or street right of way.
Temporary parking will be allowed but only during such time as the vehicle is being loaded or
unloaded and in no event to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. In the event loading is going to exceed
fifteen (15) minutes, the driver shall notify the city clerk or the chief of police and will park the vehicle
in such a manner as to minimize the impact on the flow of traffic. In the event any law enforcement
officer determines that the parked vehicle constitutes a hazard to persons or property, the officer has
the authority to order the driver to remove the truck from that location and refusal to do so shall be a
violation of this section. (Ord. 997 § D, 1989)
10.20.150: MAIN STREET; HOURS:
There shall be no parking on Main Street from two thirty o'clock (2:30) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
Any vehicle parked in violation of this section will be subject to immediate tow at the owner's expense
without the person towing said vehicle incurring any liability of any kind. (Ord. 997 § E, 1989)
10.20.160: DESIGNATED NO PARKING AREAS; UNLAWFUL TO PARK:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 199/467
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave parked or standing or unattended any automobile,
motor driven vehicle, trailer, trailer house, boat, recreation vehicle or other type of vehicle in any area
which has been designated as a no parking area. (Ord. 997 § F, 1989)
10.20.170: WEIGHT LIMITATION:
No truck or van of more than one ton capacity shall be parked upon any street in the city. (Ord. 997
§ G, 1989)
10.20.180: STREET SWEEPING; SNOW REMOVAL:
It is unlawful for any person to hinder, interfere with, delay or obstruct any person engaged in street
sweeping or snow removal for the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle of
any description, any trailer or boat, recreational vehicle, or leave any other obstruction adjacent to,
upon, in or on a right of way, in such a manner as to interfere with the street sweeping or snow
removal by the city. (Ord. 997 § H, 1989)
10.20.190: REMOVAL OF VEHICLE AT OWNER'S EXPENSE:
From February 16 to November 14, any vehicle which is parked in violation of any parking restrictions
stated herein, after the violation is allowed to exist for a period of twenty four (24) hours, shall be
subject to immediate removal at the owner's expense. This shall not, in any way, change, amend or
alter the right of removal as defined in specific sections hereinabove set forth. (Ord. 997 § I, 1989)
10.20.200: SNOW REMOVAL; PARKING RESTRICTION PROCLAMATION:
November 15 to February 15, in event that snowfall may, or has, accumulated on the public streets of
the city in amounts sufficient to pose a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of
the city, requiring snowplowing and/or removal operations, the mayor or his agent is hereby authorized
to issue a proclamation invoking parking restrictions on all streets within the city limits, as set forth in
section 10.20.190 of this chapter. (Ord. 997 § J, 1989)
10.20.210: TOWING VEHICLES AWAY IN VIOLATION:
The parking restrictions shall become effective two (2) hours after being broadcast by the radio and
television stations having a general audience within the city, as set forth in section 10.20.200 of this
chapter. If a vehicle is not moved, a police officer will attempt to notify the owner by going to the house
adjacent to the parked vehicle and request the vehicle be moved. If the vehicle is not moved within ten
(10) minutes, it shall be towed away as set forth in section 10.20.150 of this chapter. The parking
restrictions shall be in force until set aside by the mayor or his agent. (Ord. 997 § K, 1989)
10.20.220: SNOW REMOVAL; PRIVATE CONTRACTOR:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 200/467
Snow removed from private property by someone other than the property owner, renter or lessee shall
be done by a private contractor who is licensed by the city. (Ord. 997 § L, 1989)
10.20.230: CONTRACTOR DEFINED:
"Contractor" shall be defined as someone who is paid to remove or plow snow with a motorized piece
of equipment. (Ord. 997 § M, 1989)
10.20.240: VIOLATIONS; MISDEMEANOR:
Any violation of this chapter, in addition to subjecting the vehicle to being towed, shall be a
misdemeanor subject to the general misdemeanor statutes of the state of Idaho. (Ord. 997 § N, 1989)
Chapter 10.24
LOADING AND UNLOADING
10.24.010: CURB ZONES; POLICE CHIEF'S DESIGNATION AUTHORITY:
The chief of police is authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones
and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which
the provisions of this chapter are applicable. (Prior code § 10-7-19)
10.24.020: CURB ZONES; PERMITS; REQUIRED; FEE:
The chief of police shall not designate or assign any curb loading zone upon special request of any
person unless such person makes application for a permit for such zone and for two (2) signs to
indicate the ends of each such zone. Said permit fee shall be set and designated by the governing
body. (Prior code § 10-7-20)
10.24.030: CURB ZONES; STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING; PROHIBITED
WHEN:
It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other
than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick up and loading of materials, in any place
marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are
in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading or unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes.
(Prior code § 10-7-21)
Chapter 10.28
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 201/467
10.28.010: FUNERALS OR OTHER PROCESSIONS; UNLAWFUL TO DRIVE
BETWEEN:
It is unlawful for a driver of a vehicle to drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other
authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated.
(Prior code § 10-10-6)
10.28.020: FUNERALS OR OTHER PROCESSIONS; RULES FOR INVOLVED
DRIVERS:
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right hand edge of the roadway
as practical and shall follow the vehicle as close as is practical and safe. (Prior code § 10-10-7)
10.28.030: FUNERALS OR OTHER PROCESSIONS; IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED:
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the
outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia, or by such other method as may be
determined and designated by the chief of police. (Prior code § 10-10-8)
10.28.040: FUNERALS OR OTHER PROCESSIONS; PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any funeral procession or parade containing persons or vehicles to occupy, march or
proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police and such
other regulations as are set forth. (Prior code § 10-10-9)
10.28.050: BUS STOPS; DESIGNATION AUTHORITY; USE; UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A. The chief of police shall have the authority to designate bus stops at such locations and in such
manner and number as may be necessary and of the greatest benefit and convenience to the
public. Every such bus stop shall be designated by appropriate signs.
B. The operator of a bus shall not stop such bus at any place for the purpose of taking on or
discharging passengers other than at a bus stop so designated, except in case of emergency.
C. It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle at an authorized bus stop so
designated or between the right curb and any such stop, except that the operator of a passenger
vehicle may temporarily stop thereat for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the
discharge or the pick up of passengers then in readiness at the curb. (Prior code § 10-10-14)
10.28.060: EXHAUST BRAKES PROHIBITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 202/467
A. It shall be unlawful for any diesel powered motor vehicle exceeding ten thousand (10,000) pounds'
total gross vehicular weight, while operating within the city limits of Payette, to make use of
exhaust brakes for the purpose of braking, slowing or stopping.
B. The term "exhaust brakes" shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, exhaust brakes
commonly known as jake brakes. (Ord. 1166 § 1, 1999)
Chapter 10.32
REMOVAL OF VEHICLES
10.32.010: VIOLATORS DESIGNATED; DECLARED NUISANCES; AUTHORIZATION
TO ABATE:
The following vehicles, together with or in addition to any other vehicles parked in violation of any
ordinance of the city or the laws of the state, are declared to be nuisances, and said nuisances may
be abated by the city by the towing and impounding of said vehicles:
A. Any unattended vehicle stopped, standing or parked in violation of any of the provisions of this title;
B. A vehicle found upon the streets or alleys of the city with faulty or defective equipment;
C. Any vehicle left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or at any subway where such vehicle
constitutes an obstruction to traffic;
D. Any vehicle upon a street so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or
persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as
to be unable to provide for its custody or removal;
E. Any vehicle left unattended upon a street or alley and so parked illegally as to constitute a definite
hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic;
F. Any vehicle left parked in the same place on any street or alley continuously for seventy two (72)
hours;
G. Any vehicle the driver of which has been taken into custody by the police department under such
circumstances as would leave such vehicle unattended in a street, alley or restricted parking area;
H. Any vehicle found being driven on the streets not in a proper condition to be driven;
I. Any vehicle found so parked as to constitute a fire hazard or an obstruction to firefighting apparatus,
and the same may be summarily abated by removing any such vehicle by or under the directions
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 203/467
or at the request of a police officer to a place of storage within the city by means of towing or
otherwise. (Prior code § 10-8-1(A))
10.32.020: IMPOUNDED VEHICLES; NOTIFICATION OF OWNER:
As soon as is reasonable under the circumstances, a written notice that the violator vehicle has been
impounded shall be caused to be mailed to the owner and recorded lienholder, if there is one, of the
said vehicle at their last known addresses as shown by the records of the motor vehicle division of the
state department of law enforcement. If the license plates on said vehicle are from another state,
written notice shall be mailed to the state department of motor vehicles requesting such department to
notify the registered owner of such vehicle that the same has been impounded by the city police
department and that the same will be sold at public auction if not claimed by the owner or his proper
representative, as provided by section 10.32.050 of this chapter. (Prior code § 10-8-1(B))
10.32.030: IMPOUNDED VEHICLES; OWNER LIABLE TO CRIMINAL
PROCEEDINGS:
The impounding of a vehicle shall not prevent or preclude the institution and prosecution of criminal
proceedings in the city court or elsewhere against the owner or operator of such impounded vehicle.
(Prior code § 10-8-1(C))
10.32.040: IMPOUNDED VEHICLES; RELEASE REQUIREMENTS:
Before the owner or his agent shall be permitted to remove a vehicle which has been impounded he
shall:
A. Furnish satisfactory evidence to the police department of his identity and his ownership of said
vehicle;
B. Request and obtain from the police department a written order, directed to the place of storage in
which said vehicle is impounded, authorizing the release of said vehicle to said owner or his agent
upon the payment to said place of storage of towing and storage charges reasonably incurred in
the towing and storage of said vehicle from the date of said impounding to the time of presenting
the order of release from the police department therefor. (Prior code § 10-8-1(D))
10.32.050: IMPOUNDED VEHICLES; UNREDEEMED; AUCTIONING PROCEDURE:
If, at the expiration of thirty (30) days after mailing the notice provided for in section 10.32.020 of this
chapter, such vehicle is not redeemed by the owner or his proper representative, the chief of police or
his authorized agent shall proceed to sell the same at a public auction to the highest bidder after first
giving at least ten (10) days' notice of said sale by publishing said notice at least once in a newspaper
published in the city, stating the time and place of such sale. Such notice shall also describe the
vehicle to be sold with reasonable certainty and shall state to whom, if anyone, the records of the
office of the motor vehicles division of the state department of law enforcement show the same to
belong, and, if the name of the owner is unknown, said fact shall be stated. If the name of the owner
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 204/467
or recorded lienholder, if any, is known, the police department shall send such owner or recorded
lienholder a copy of such notice, as published, immediately after the publication of same, which notice
shall be mailed to their last known address or their address as shown on the records of the motor
vehicle division of the Idaho department of law enforcement. A copy of this notice, as published, shall
immediately, after publication, be mailed to the owner of the place of storage. The money received by
the chief of police, or his authorized agent, from the sale of any such vehicle shall be applied first to
the actual cost of towing and storage of such impounded vehicle, then to pay the cost of advertising
the notice of sale in the amount as set by resolution for each vehicle so impounded; and the balance if
any, shall then be deposited into the city treasury to be used as provided in section 10.32.060 of this
chapter. (Ord. 1371, 2012)
10.32.060: AUCTIONED VEHICLES; PROCEEDS TO FORMER OWNER WHEN:
At any time within one year from and after such sale, the former owner of the vehicle sold, upon
application to the council and upon presentation of satisfactory proof that he was the owner of the
vehicle sold, shall be paid the proceeds of such sale less the necessary expenses thereof and less the
towing, impounding and storage charges provided for in section 10.32.050 of this chapter. (Prior code
§ 10-8-1(F))
10.32.070: IMPOUNDED VEHICLES; RECORDKEEPING:
The police department shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded by manufacturer's name or
make, body type, motor and license number, names and addresses of all persons claiming the same,
and such other descriptive matter as may identify such vehicles, the nature and circumstances of the
impounding thereof, the violation on account of which such vehicles were impounded, the date of such
impounding, and the name and address of any person to whom any such vehicle is released. (Prior
code § 10-8-1(G))
10.32.080: IMPOUNDMENT OF STOLEN OR IMPROPERLY REGISTERED OR
NUMBERED VEHICLES:
The police department shall immediately impound in a proper place of storage in the city all vehicles
found within the city that are improperly registered, stolen or bear defaced motor numbers, and shall
immediately thereafter notify in writing the commissioner of the state department of law enforcement
of such impounding, setting forth in such notice the date found, the address where found, the make,
registration number and the date and place where stored. (Prior code § 10-8-1(H))
10.32.090: PARKED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
If at any time a vehicle is parked on private property without the consent of the owner of such property,
the police department is authorized to remove said vehicle therefrom and to cause the same to be
stored; provided, that the owner of such private property has first signed a complaint against the
owner or operator of said vehicle. (Prior code § 10-8-2)
10.32.100: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 205/467
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any
kind.
PROPERTY: Any real property within the city which is not a street or highway.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE: A machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the
ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery
and shall include, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon.
(Ord. 940, 1982)
10.32.110: LEAVING OF WRECKED, NONOPERATING VEHICLE ON STREET:
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street
or highway within the city. (Ord. 940, 1982)
10.32.120: ALLOWING WRECKED OR DISCARDED VEHICLES ON PRIVATE
PROPERTY:
No person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant,
lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded
vehicle to remain on such property longer than forty eight (48) hours, and no person shall leave any
such vehicle on any property within the city for a longer time than forty eight (48) hours, except that
this section shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building or a vehicle on the
premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner as permitted by zoning
ordinances, or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and
manner by the city, or under special permit as provided in section 10.32.130 of this chapter. (Ord. 940,
1982)
10.32.130: SPECIAL PERMIT AND FEE:
Upon application of any person for a special permit and the payment of a fee set by resolution the city
clerk shall cause a permit to be issued to such applicant for salvage of parts from one vehicle for
necessary repair of an existing vehicle. The permit shall be valid for not to exceed thirty (30) days.
(Ord. 1371, 2012)
10.32.140: IMPOUNDING:
The chief of police, or other appropriate official or any member of his department designated by him is
authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place within the city which reasonably
appears to be in violation of this chapter. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or
disposed of in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 940, 1982)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 206/467
10.32.150: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 940, 1982)
Chapter 10.36
BICYCLES, IN-LINE SKATES, ROLLER SKATES AND
SKATEBOARDS
10.36.010: RIDING OR PARKING ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED WHEN; PERMITS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1135 § 1, 1996)
10.36.020: BICYCLES, IN-LINE SKATES, ROLLER SKATES AND SKATEBOARDS
PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN CITY STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to ride, operate, use or propel a skateboard, in-line skates, roller skates or bicycle
over and along the sidewalks running along the following named streets: Main Street from Third
Avenue North to Second Avenue South and east and west one block on the side blocks; Ninth Street
from First Avenue North to First Avenue South; Center Avenue from Seventh Street to Tenth Street;
and from Seventh Street to Sixth Street going over the overpass. Carrying, pushing or walking a
bicycle or skateboard is excluded from the definition of "propel". (Ord. 1135 § 2, 1996: Ord. 1009 § 1,
1990)
10.36.030: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
A violation of this chapter shall be a general misdemeanor and subject to the penalties set forth in the
Idaho state statute. In addition, any law enforcement officer of the city or any law enforcement officer
assisting a city officer may seize a bicycle, in-line skates, roller skates or skateboard which has been
used in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1135 § 3, 1996: Ord. 1009 § 1, 1990)
10.36.040: HEARING:
In the event the skateboard, in-line skates, roller skates or bicycle has been seized by a law
enforcement officer, a person owning the skateboard, in-line skates, roller skates or bicycle may make
application through the director of public safety to have the skateboard, in-line skates, roller skates or
bicycle returned. Upon hearing before the director of public safety, that officer may determine whether
or not cause exists for return of the skateboard, in-line skates, roller skates or bicycle. In the event that
the officer finds that the skateboard, in-line skates, roller skates or bicycle should not be returned, that
decision can be appealed to the city council. If that decision is upheld by the city council, then that
decision may be appealed to the district court. (Ord. 1135 § 4, 1996: Ord. 1009 § 1, 1990)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 207/467
Chapter 10.40
RAILROADS1
10.40.010: UNLAWFUL RIDERS:
It is unlawful for any person, within the corporate limits, without the permission of the conductor to
jump on, from or to ride upon a train of railroad cars, or any car or engine or part of such train, while
the same is in motion. (Prior code § 9-7-1)
10.40.020: OBSTRUCTING STREETS:
It is unlawful for any railroad operating within the limits of the city to let any of its cars or trains of cars
stand or remain on any street crossed by such railroad for longer than five (5) minutes from the time of
stopping of such car or train of cars, at any time either day or night. (Prior code § 9-7-2)
10.40.030: PARKING AND STANDING TRAINS NEAR STREET RIGHT OF WAY:
It is unlawful for any railroad to park and let stand railroad cars of any type within one hundred feet
(100') of a street crossing right of way. (Prior code § 9-7-3)
10.40.040: USE OF FLYING SWITCH AT STREET CROSSING; FLAGMAN
REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any railroad to use a flying switch across any street crossing without the presence of
a flagman at said crossing. (Prior code § 9-7-4)
10.40.050: SPEED RESTRICTION:
It is unlawful to operate a train of railroad cars, or any car or engine or part of such train, at any speed
exceeding sixty (60) miles per hour. (Prior code § 9-7-5)
Footnote 1: IC § 50-306.
Chapter 10.45
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICES
10.45.010: USE OF WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 208/467
A. No person shall operate a motor vehicle while using a handheld electronic wireless
communications device while playing games thereon, or to write, send, or read a text based
communication.
B. "Handheld electronic communications device" includes wireless or cellular phones, PDAs,
Blackberries, smartphones, laptop and notebook computers utilizing VoIP (voice over internet
protocol) technology, wireless and cellular phones utilizing push to talk technology and any other
mobile communication device that uses shortwave analog or digital radio transmissions between
the device and a transmitter to permit wireless communications to and from the user of the device.
C. As used in this section "write, send, or read a text based communication" means using an
electronic wireless communications device to manually communicate with any person using a text
based communication, including, but not limited to, communications referred to as a text message,
instant message, or electronic mail.
D. For purposes of this section, a person shall not be deemed to be writing, reading, or sending a text
based communication if the person reads, selects, or enters a telephone number or name in an
electronic wireless communications device for the purpose of making or receiving a telephone call.
E. A violation of this section is an infraction punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(Ord. 1351, 2011)
Title 11
RESERVED
Title 12
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PARKS
Chapter 12.04
SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION
12.04.010: RIGHT TO CONDEMN:
Every sidewalk within the corporate limits which is not on the grade or line fixed or which may be fixed
by the council, or which is in a bad state of repair or which is or may be dangerous to pedestrians
using the same, may be declared a nuisance by the mayor and council and be condemned in the
manner set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 9-1-1)
12.04.020: RIGHT TO ORDER NEW CONSTRUCTION:
In cases where the convenience or safety of the public renders the construction of a sidewalk
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 209/467
advisable, the construction of new sidewalks where none exist may be ordered in the same manner as
is provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 9-1-2)
12.04.030: PROPOSED IMPROVEMENT; COMMITTEE REPORT; REQUIRED
INFORMATION:
Whenever the committee on streets, alleys and sidewalks of the council deems the removal, repair or
reconstruction of old sidewalks or the construction of new sidewalks to be advisable, it shall file with
the city clerk, in writing, a report so certifying, which report shall state the following:
A. If a sidewalk exists, the reason or reasons why the same should be repaired, reconstructed or
replaced with a new sidewalk;
B. If no sidewalk exists, the reason why the construction of a sidewalk is advisable;
C. The legal description of each lot, parcel or tract of land abutting, fronting or contiguous to the
proposed sidewalk;
D. The name and last known address of the owner of each such lot, parcel or tract of land;
E. Whether any existing sidewalk shall be repaired or a new walk constructed in its place;
F. The amount or proportion of the expense of such repair, construction or reconstruction which will
fairly measure the special benefit accruing to the owner of such abutting property. (Prior code § 9-
1-3)
12.04.040: PROPOSED IMPROVEMENT; COMMITTEE REPORT; AFFIRMATIVE
COUNCIL RESOLUTION; REQUIREMENTS:
The council may, upon the presentation of the report referred to in section 12.04.030 of this chapter,
pass a motion or resolution indicating its intention to repair or construct new sidewalks and/or remove
old sidewalks. Said resolution shall specify the amount or proportion of the expense of such
improvement proposed to be assessed against the abutting property, and shall fix a time and place,
not less than ten (10) days, for the hearing of protests against the proposed improvement. (Prior code
§ 9-1-4)
12.04.050: PROPOSED IMPROVEMENT; NOTICE OF HEARING:
The city clerk shall issue a notice to each property owner, setting forth the time and place for such
hearing and stating the general character of the proposed improvement as outlined in the committee's
report and the resolution of the council, insofar as the same affects the individual property owner to
whom the notice is directed, and shall cause said notice to be served upon each property owner at
least ten (10) days before the time set for the hearing upon the same in the following manner:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 210/467
A. If the owner in whose name the property stands on the county records can be found within the city,
by personal service;
B. If the owner cannot be found within the city, then upon any agent of the owner that can be found
within the city, by personal service;
C. If neither owner nor agent can be found within the city, then upon the tenant or occupant of the
premises, by personal service;
D. If neither owner, agent or tenant can be found within the city, then by mailing a copy of said notice
to such property owner at his last known address, by registered mail, or if no address is known,
addressed to such property owner at Payette, Idaho;
E. If the name of the owner is not known, by publication in one issue of the official newspaper of the
city. (Prior code § 9-1-5)
12.04.060: PROPOSED IMPROVEMENT; CONDUCT OF HEARING:
At the time and place fixed by said motion and notice for such hearing, as specified in sections
12.04.040 and 12.04.050 of this chapter, a hearing shall be held before the council to determine
whether or not existing sidewalks should be condemned and whether new sidewalks should be
constructed or old sidewalks repaired. Testimony shall be adduced and any property owner or other
person in interest may be heard. The proceedings shall be informal. (Prior code § 9-1-6)
12.04.070: PROPOSED IMPROVEMENT; COUNCIL DECISION; METHODS OF
ACTION WHEN AFFIRMATIVE:
The council shall, at the conclusion of such hearing, make such order as it deems appropriate. If old
sidewalks are condemned, the resolution embodying such order shall so state and shall order the
property owner to remove the same within such period as the council may deem reasonable, not less,
however, than two (2) days. If the repair of an existing sidewalk is ordered, the nature of the repairs
shall be set forth and the property owners shall be ordered to make such repairs within such period as
the council may deem reasonable, not less, however, than two (2) days; provided, however, that if the
council finds that any sidewalk constitutes an immediate hazard to the safety of pedestrians using the
same, the removal or repair of the existing sidewalk may be ordered to be done forthwith, either by the
property owner or by the city. If the construction of a new sidewalk is ordered, the property owner may
be ordered to complete the construction of the same within such period as the council may deem
reasonable, not less, however, than twenty (20) days. The city engineer shall be required to estimate
the costs of each and all of the proposed improvements and repairs. (Prior code § 9-1-7)
12.04.080: PROPOSED IMPROVEMENT; COUNCIL'S ORDER FINAL SUBJECT TO
COURT APPEAL:
The order made upon any hearing concerning a proposed sidewalk and curb improvement shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 211/467
final and binding, subject only to the right of any person aggrieved to appeal to the district court of the
state within twenty (20) days from the time said order is entered. (Prior code § 9-1-8)
12.04.090: FAILURE OF OWNER TO COMPLY; CITY ACTION:
If the property owner fails, neglects or refuses to remove old sidewalks, repair old sidewalks or
construct new sidewalks as required by council order, then the city may proceed to remove, repair or
construct the same at any time within a period of one year from the date on which the property owner
was ordered to have completed such work; and the cost and expense of such work, or such amount or
proportion thereof as the council deems just, shall be assessed against the property as provided in
this chapter. (Prior code § 9-1-9)
12.04.100: BY OR ON BEHALF OF CITY; REQUIRED PROCEDURE:
No work shall be done by the city until the estimates of the engineer have been filed with the city clerk.
The work may be done by the city by day labor or by contract. No contract shall be entered into for an
amount exceeding the estimate of the engineer. If the work is done by contract, the contract shall be
let upon competitive bids after not less than five (5) days' published notice. The work shall be done
under the supervision of the overseer of streets and the city engineer. (Prior code § 9-1-10)
12.04.110: BY OR ON BEHALF OF CITY; COSTS AND EXPENSES; CITY LIABILITY:
The costs and expenses of all work done by or on behalf of the city pursuant to section 12.04.100 of
this chapter, whether by contract or day labor, shall be a legal charge against the city. (Prior code § 9-
1-11)
12.04.120: BY OR ON BEHALF OF CITY; COST ASSESSMENT; RECORDKEEPING;
LIEN ON PROPERTY:
A. The city engineer shall keep a true and accurate record of the cost and expense of the work done
and performed by virtue of section 12.04.100 of this chapter, and shall file with the city clerk a
statement of the cost and expense chargeable against each property owner, which statement shall
state separately as to each owner:
1. The description of the lot, lots or tract to which the estimate pertains;
2. The cost of the material;
3. The cost of labor;
4. The cost of supervision, including to pro rata portion of any per diem or other compensation due
to the city engineer;
5. The cost and expense of serving any notice required to be served by this chapter, and of
collecting the assessment;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 212/467
6. The amount or proportion of the total cost which the council has ordered assessed against the
property.
B. The city clerk shall enter the information contained in the city engineer's report in a book to be kept
for that purpose and, from the date of such entry, the amount of such expense chargeable against
the property shall be and shall constitute a lien upon the premises and property therein described
prior to all other liens except general taxes. (Prior code § 9-1-12)
12.04.130: LIEN ON PROPERTY; NOTIFICATION OF OWNER; PROTEST
PROCEDURE:
A. Within five (5) days after entering such liens as described in section 12.04.120 of this chapter, the
city shall mail a notice of the total amount of the lien, together with a description of the property, to
the owner of the property at his last known address or, if the owner is not known, to his agent or, if
no agent is known, then to the tenant or occupant of the premises. Within ten (10) days after the
mailing of such notice, any party in interest may file with the city clerk a written protest against said
assessment.
B. If a protest is made, the council shall fix a time and place for hearing the same, give reasonable
notice of such hearing to the party protesting, and may, upon such hearing, revise, reform or
correct such assessment and approve the same as corrected. If no protest is made, the
assessment shall be approved and confirmed by the council as entered by the city clerk. An order
confirming any assessment made under the provisions of section 12.04.120 of this chapter shall be
subject to an appeal to the courts within twenty (20) days from the date of the order. No appeal
shall lie thereafter. (Prior code § 9-1-13)
12.04.140: BY OR ON BEHALF OF CITY; COST ASSESSMENTS; COLLECTION
PROCEDURE:
Such assessments as set forth in section 12.04.120 of this chapter may be collected as other
municipal taxes and assessments are collected, and may be certified to the county tax collector for
collection and be entered upon the tax rolls; or the city may collect the same by a civil suit, or by an
action to foreclose its assessment lien, in any court of competent jurisdiction with all such legal rights
and remedies as may be permitted by law. The city's cause of action shall be deemed to have accrued
upon the confirmation of said assessment as is set forth in section 12.04.130 of this chapter. Such
assessments, if certified to the county tax collector for collection, shall draw interest and penalties for
nonpayment at the rate specified for nonpayment of general taxes and, if not so certified to the county
tax collector, shall draw interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per year from the date of confirmation
of said assessment until paid. (Prior code § 9-1-14)
12.04.150: SPECIFICATION CONFORMITY GENERALLY:
All sidewalk construction, as provided by this chapter, contemplated, whether by the city or property
owners, shall conform to such specifications as are prescribed by the mayor and council in
conformance with the laws of the state. (Prior code § 9-1-15)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 213/467
12.04.160: APPLICATION; REQUIRED INFORMATION; ESTABLISHMENT OF LINE
AND GRADE:
A. Persons desiring to construct walks or curbs shall make written application to the city clerk, upon
blanks supplied by the city, for the establishment of line and grade. This application shall state the
exact location of the proposed construction, the name of the person applying, the name of the firm
or individual doing the work, and the date on which it is desired to start construction.
B. The city clerk shall deliver the application to the city engineer without delay. The city engineer shall
establish the desired line and grade at the earliest possible date, and shall notify the applicant
when said work will be completed. Engineering fees for line and grade are the responsibility of the
owner/applicant. (Ord. 1008 § 1, 1990: prior code § 9-1-16)
12.04.170: SIDEWALKS TO BE CONCRETE:
All sidewalks built within the corporate limits of the city shall be constructed of concrete. (Prior code
§ 9-1-17)
12.04.180: SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION; CONFORMITY WITH STANDARD
SPECIFICATIONS:
All sidewalks and curbs constructed within the corporate limits shall be constructed under the
supervision of and subject to the inspection of the city engineer and the street authority committee,
and shall be in conformity with the standard specifications required by the city and the lines and
grades laid out on the ground by the engineer. Stakes set by the engineer shall be preserved by the
owner and the contractor doing the work. (Prior code § 9-1-18)
12.04.190: STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS; NONCONFORMITY; REBUILDING OR
REPAIRING REQUIRED:
Where sidewalks or curbs have been constructed or repaired without first having obtained a grade and
line therefor from the city engineer, or where the same have not been constructed in conformity with
the established grade and line or not in conformity with the standard specifications of the city relative
to concrete sidewalks and curbs, said sidewalks and curbs shall be rebuilt or repaired at the owner's
expense to so conform as provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 9-1-19)
12.04.200: INJURING OR DEFACING; DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
Any person who injures or impairs or marks or defaces, or causes to be injured or impaired or marked
or defaced, any sidewalk, curbing or paving surface of any street or alley shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Prior code § 9-1-20)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 214/467
12.04.210: OBSTRUCTIONS; PERMISSION REQUIRED; VIOLATION DECLARED
MISDEMEANOR; PROCESS OF OBTAINING A PERMIT:
(Rep. by Ord. 1284 § 1, 2007)
12.04.220: TAKING DOWN OR REMOVING BARRICADES DECLARED
MISDEMEANOR:
Any person who takes down or removes any barricade placed on any sidewalk, street or alley by any
department of the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 9-1-22)
12.04.230: PARKING STRIPS; FILLING REQUIRED; VEGETATION PERMISSIBLE;
VIOLATION DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
A. The owners of property in front of which or contiguous to which there has been laid cement
sidewalks and curbings shall fill or level off the space between the outer edge of the sidewalk and
the inner edge of the curb wherever and whenever it may be necessary to so do, so as to make
the same correspond with the level of the sidewalk and the top of the curbing. The material to be
used in such filling shall be productive and fertile soil, the surface of the fill to be leveled and
uniform in appearance.
B. Flowers, shrubs, grass and trees may be planted in the parking strips; provided, that trees and high
shrubs shall not be planted at the corners of street intersections and that all trees shall be planted
on a line indicated by the city engineer.
C. Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this section or violating any of the provisions of
the same shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 9-1-23)
12.04.240: GROUND BETWEEN CURB AND PROPERTY LINES; UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It is unlawful for any person to deface or mark, to tie or hitch horses to, or place bills or placards on
any trees, poles or hydrants placed on the piece of ground lying between the curb lines and property
lines. (Prior code § 9-1-24)
12.04.250: SPECIFICATIONS DESIGNATED:
A. Curb Requirements: Curbs shall be standard curb and gutter, not over six inches (6") high above
the gutter, and constructed to specifications set down by the city. Standard curb shall be required
when it is placed in an area where standard curbing already exists. Roll curbs shall be allowed
when the newly constructed roll curbing will abut to other rolled curbing or in new subdivisions
where curbing has not yet been constructed. These requirements may be changed when in the
opinion of the city engineer, altering the requirements would be in the best interest of the city.
Standard curbs without gutters shall not be allowed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 215/467
B. Residential Construction: Sidewalks shall be required on all new residential construction. Sidewalks
in residential areas shall be four feet (4') wide and constructed to specifications of the city. Any
deviation in width must have the permission of the planning commission and will only be allowed in
order for sidewalks to conform to existing sidewalks adjacent to said lots. The mayor, city clerk, city
engineer, or their appointed agent, may authorize an exception in a specific instance or instances
where sidewalks are impossible or impractical to construct. Conditions can be imposed which shall
require a developer to make the improvements which have been waived at some time in the future
when construction of the improvements are practical.
C. Commercial Property Development: Standard curb and gutter shall be constructed in front of all
commercial property development and along the side street of said property. Sidewalks in
commercial areas shall be five feet (5') minimum width, and wider if necessary to conform with
sidewalks already in existence, or from curb to property line.
D. Curb Cuts: Requests for curb cuts must be made, in writing, to the city clerk's office. Curb cuts up
to twenty feet (20') may be allowed on fifty foot (50') lots, and up to thirty five percent (35%) on lots
above fifty feet (50'). No curb cut may be longer than thirty five feet (35'), and twenty one feet (21')
of curb must be left between any two (2) curb cuts except where there are adjoining driveways.
Curb cuts in compliance with these regulations may be approved by the city clerk and city
engineer, or their designees. A request for any deviation in these regulations must be referred to
the planning commission for approval before the council will consider such request. Every
application for a building permit shall show where the curb cut will be and must have the approval
of the engineer or building official.
E. Responsibility: If the property owner fails, neglects or refuses to construct sidewalks or curbs as
required by this section, then the city may proceed to construct the same in accordance with the
provisions of section 12.04.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 1318 § 1, 2010: Ord. 1261 § 1, 2006: Ord.
1258 § 1, 2006: Ord. 1202 § 1, 2001: Ord. 1197 § 1, 2001: Ord. 1059 § 1, 1993: prior code § 9-1-
25)
12.04.260: CONSTRUCTION IN CITY STREETS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1284 § 2, 2007)
12.04.270: MINIMUM RIGHT OF WAY ON SECTION AND QUARTER SECTION
LINES:
In addition to any other standard or specification required by the city for street rights of way, all streets
which are developed along section lines or quarter section lines, or any easements which are granted
for future development along those lines, shall provide a minimum street right of way width of eighty
feet (80'), and quarter section lines shall have a minimum right of way width of seventy feet (70'). (Ord.
1274 § 1, 2007: Ord. 1129 § 1, 1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 216/467
Chapter 12.05
ENCROACHMENT PERMITS
12.05.010: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases defined in this section apply:
CITY ENGINEER: The individual designated by the city of Payette to perform engineering services for
the city of Payette.
CITY STREET SUPERINTENDENT: The individual designated by the city of Payette to administer the
Payette street department.
EASEMENTS: Any right created by grant, reservation, agreement, prescription or necessary
implication in favor of the city of Payette to use the land of another, including, but not limited to, an
easement for vehicular access and utilities.
ENCROACHMENT: Any excavation, digging, paving, landscaping, construction of an improvement or
placement of personal property within an easement or right of way. Encroachments include, but are
not limited to, fences, sidewalks, driveways, mailboxes, newspaper boxes, utility boxes and poles,
trees, shrubs, grass, sprinklers and other landscaping improvements.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The individual designated by the city of Payette to administer the public
works department, including the Payette street department.
RIGHT OF WAY: Any property owned by, or dedicated to, the city of Payette for the purposes of
providing city services and general circulation to the public. Such rights of way include, but are not
limited to, the following: public streets, alleys and sidewalks. (Ord. 1284 § 1, 2007)
12.05.020: ACTIONS REQUIRING ENCROACHMENT PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity other than the city or its contractors or agents, or that
person's or entity's contractor, subcontractor, paving company, landscaper or agent, to excavate, dig,
pave, landscape or construct improvements, within or on any right of way or easement or make any
alterations thereto without first obtaining an encroachment permit from the city of Payette. The
issuance of an encroachment permit does not establish any property or easement rights to the
permittee. An encroachment permit is merely a license and is revocable by the city of Payette at any
time for any reason. (Ord. 1284 § 1, 2007)
12.05.030: ENCROACHMENT PERMIT APPLICATION:
The party applying for a permit shall provide, at a minimum, the following information to the city of
Payette at least three (3) business days prior to any action being taken on the permit application:
A. Name, phone number and address of applicant;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 217/467
B. Location of proposed encroachment;
C. Need or reason for encroachment;
D. Description of activity within the right of way or easement, including a plan;
E. Time period in which the proposed encroachment will take place;
F. Contractor performing the work if other than the applicant;
G. Appropriate application processing fee;
H. Any additional information requested by the city. (Ord. 1284 § 1, 2007)
12.05.040: ACTION ON ENCROACHMENT PERMIT APPLICATION:
The public works director or his or her designee may issue an encroachment permit only after
determining the following:
A. Granting the request will not contribute to the public expense;
B. Granting the request will not jeopardize the public health, safety or welfare;
C. Construction will be conducted in such a way that circulation needs can reasonably be met;
D. Drainage systems will not be adversely affected;
E. Following construction, the affected right of way or easement will be restored to its original
condition.
The public works director or his or her designee may impose reasonable conditions to an approved
encroachment permit. (Ord. 1284 § 1, 2007)
12.05.050: CITY STANDARDS:
All encroachments shall be constructed in accordance with any applicable city standards. (Ord. 1284
§ 1, 2007)
12.05.060: FEES, ENCROACHMENT PERMIT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 218/467
A. Any application for an encroachment permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application
fee set by resolution by the Payette city council. A review of an application for an encroachment
permit is not required until the appropriate application fee has been submitted.
B. The bonding requirements set forth in section 12.05.070 of this chapter shall also apply as set forth
therein.
C. Upon approval of an application for an encroachment permit and at the time of the issuance of the
encroachment permit, the applicant shall pay an inspection fee set by resolution by the Payette city
council.
D. In the event a person or entity is required to file an application for an encroachment permit pursuant
to subsection 12.05.100D of this chapter, the applicant shall, at the time of filing an application for
an encroachment permit, pay a nonrefundable discovery/notification fee set by resolution by the
Payette city council. (Ord. 1284 § 1, 2007)
12.05.070: BONDING REQUIRED:
All commercial enterprises, including paving companies, general contractors, subcontractors and
landscapers, submitting an application or performing work under the provisions of this chapter shall
also provide or have on file with the city clerk a current bond in the minimum amount of two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00). The minimum amount of the bond required in this section may be adjusted by the
city engineer, depending upon the size and nature of the project. In lieu of a bond, cash may be
substituted for a bond. (Ord. 1284 § 1, 2007)
12.05.080: APPEALS:
Any applicant may appeal a decision or action made in connection with this chapter to the Payette city
council within fifteen (15) days from the date of the decision or action. The appeal shall specifically
state the decision appealed and the reasons for the appeal. If no appeal is filed within the fifteen (15)
day period, the decision or action shall be deemed final. (Ord. 1284 § 1, 2007)
12.05.090: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. No person or entity shall water or irrigate property in such a manner that water is sprayed upon
pavement within a right of way or easement.
B. Loading, unloading or operation of track type vehicles on pavement areas in a right of way or
easement is prohibited. (Ord. 1284 § 1, 2007)
12.05.100: VIOLATION; PENALTIES AND REMEDIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 219/467
A. Violations: Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by fine and/or
imprisonment up to, but not exceeding, the maximum penalties set forth in Idaho Code section 50-
302, as amended. Each day during which a violation takes place or is allowed to continue shall
constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
B. Civil Remedies: In addition to any remedy available to the city, the city may maintain an action for
an injunction and/or damages pursuant to Idaho law for any violation of this chapter. If the city is
determined to be the prevailing party in any such action, the city shall be entitled to recover from
the other party or parties all attorney fees incurred in connection with such action.
C. Removal Of Encroachment: In addition to any remedy available to the city, the city may remove any
encroachment with or without notice to the person or entity responsible for encroachment, and may
seek damages for the reimbursement of costs of the removal of the encroachment.
D. Requirement Of An Encroachment Permit For Previously Installed Encroachment: In the event a
person or entity violates the provisions of this chapter by failing to obtain an encroachment permit,
the city may, in addition to any other remedy available to the city, require the person or entity to file
an application for an encroachment permit. In the event the city denies the encroachment permit
application for such an encroachment, the city may then pursue any of its other remedies
described in this section. In the event an encroachment will require an inspection after an approval
of an encroachment permit, the inspection fee shall be paid as required by subsection 12.05.060C
of this chapter. But if an encroachment will not require an inspection after an approval of an
encroachment permit, the inspection fee established by subsection 12.05.060C of this chapter is
not required to be paid. (Ord. 1284 § 1, 2007)
12.05.110: ENCROACHMENT PERMIT FOR FIBER OPTIC CABLE, INTERSTATE
SERVICES AND OTHER COMMUNICATION, CONDUCTION OR TRANSMISSION
FACILITIES EXCLUDED FROM TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES:
A fiber optics communication system is an interstate network of fiber optic cables and all related
property including conduit, carrier pipe, cable fibers, repeaters, power sources and other attachments
and appurtenances necessary for fiber optics communication but which is excluded from
telecommunications and telecommunications services. The city shall determine through the
application process whether this permit is appropriate for applicant's activities. (Ord. 1292 § 1, 2008)
12.05.115: FIBER OPTIC CABLE LICENSE:
No person shall place, install, construct, operate or maintain any fiber optic equipment, facilities or
system for fiber optic communication services, any interstate services or other communication,
conduction or transmission facilities excluded from the definition of telecommunications and
telecommunications services as defined in Idaho Code title 61, chapter 1 and section 63-3501, in,
upon or under the surface of any highway, public place, street or right of way, unless a fiber optic
cable license has first been obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In addition to
obtaining the fiber optic cable license as provided herein, any person desiring to place, install,
construct, operate or maintain such facilities in, upon or under any highway must also obtain a fiber
optic cable, encroachment permit, as required herein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 220/467
A. The requirement to obtain a fiber optic cable license set forth in this section does not apply to those
activities or operations of a telecommunications corporation which meets the requirements set
forth in Idaho Code section 62-618.
B. A fiber optic cable license pursuant to this chapter shall not authorize the use of the highways to
provide any other service; nor shall the issuance of the same invalidate any franchise, license or
permit that authorizes the use of the highways for such other services; nor shall the fact that a
person holds a franchise, license or permit to make any other use of the highway or to provide or
operate any other service, authorize installation, maintenance, construction or operation of fiber
optic cable, interstate services or other facilities required to be licensed by this section in any
highway in the city, or permit such licensee to provide fiber optic cable services by means of such
facilities without obtaining a fiber optic cable license hereunder.
C. Any license granted pursuant to this section shall not be exclusive. (Ord. 1292 § 1, 2008)
12.05.120: APPLICATION FOR FIBER OPTIC CABLE LICENSE:
A person desiring a fiber optic cable license shall file an application with the city manager, in the form
prescribed by the city manager, together with that part of the nonrefundable application processing fee
established by council resolution. The full fee shall be paid on demand from the city and shall be in an
amount established by the city manager as necessary to recover all reasonably related costs incurred
by the city to review and process the application. At the discretion of the department, an application for
a fiber optic cable license may be processed simultaneously with the same applicant's application for
an encroachment permit for the installation of the fiber optic cable or other facilities permitted under
this section. It is anticipated the city will retain outside experts to assist in the review and processing of
complex license and encroachment permit applications and all costs for such experts shall be
recovered through the application processing fee. (Ord. 1292 § 1, 2008)
12.05.125: TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR A FIBER OPTIC CABLE LICENSE:
A. The applicant shall maintain insurance of the types and in the amounts specified by the city, and
provide proof of insurance as required by the city; post performance bonds and security funds
required; shall agree to fully indemnify the city, its officers, agents, boards and commissions, in a
form satisfactory to the city; and shall agree that it shall have no recourse whatsoever against the
city, its officers, agents, boards, commissions, agents or employees for any loss, costs, expense or
damages arising out of any provision or requirement of the city because of the enforcement of the
license or franchise or because of defects in this chapter; or the license or franchise issued or as a
result of any damage that may result from the city's exercise of its rights under the license, or
applicable provisions of law.
B. The initial license term shall be for a period of five (5) years and may be renewed for five (5) year
terms.
C. A fiber optic cable license is personal to the licensee. Except as provided in the license, no transfer
or change of control over the licensee (including, but not limited to, forced or voluntary sale,
merger, consolidation, receivership, or any other means) shall occur unless prior application is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 221/467
made to the city and the city's prior written consent is obtained, which consent will not be
unreasonably withheld or delayed.
D. Licensee shall produce books and records for the city's inspection and copying, prepare reports,
respond to questions and permit the city to have access to its facilities as the city may request in
order to determine whether licensee has complied with its obligations under the license or other
applicable law or regulation.
E. The applicant shall agree to provide and maintain accurate maps showing the location of all its
facilities including all the facilities it will use in the highways within the city, and to comply with such
other mapping requirements that the city may establish from time to time.
F. The applicant shall agree to comply with right of way use requirements that the city may establish
from time to time.
G. The applicant shall agree to comply with and be bound by the administrative and enforcement
provisions as may be prescribed from time to time by the city.
H. The applicant must agree to abide by such other conditions and terms as required by the city
council upon consideration of the application.
I. In the event there is a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions contained in
a franchise or license granted by the city to an applicant, the provisions of the franchise or license
shall prevail. (Ord. 1292 § 1, 2008)
12.05.130: REVOCATION:
A fiber optic cable license shall be subject to revocation for the same reasons and upon the same
notice and hearing provisions as set forth in section 12.05.125 of this chapter, except subseection
12.05.125C of this chapter is not a basis for revocation of the license regulated in this section.
A. The licensee fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the license or other applicable law.
B. The licensee fails to make the payments in the amounts and at the times specified in the license
agreement or in this chapter.
C. The licensee fails to provide current, accurate as built plans and maps showing the location of all
facilities installed or constructed in the city.
Provided, however, a license shall not be revoked unless the licensee is given written notice of the
defect in performance and fails to cure the defect within sixty (60) days of the notice, except where
the city finds that the defection performance is due to intentional misconduct, is a violation of
criminal law, or is part of a pattern of violations where the licensee has already had notice and
opportunity to cure. (Ord. 1292 § 1, 2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 222/467
12.05.135: PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESS:
A. Any person desiring an encroachment permit pursuant to this section shall file an application with
the city, in the form prescribed by the city, together with that part of the nonrefundable application
processing fee established by council resolution. The full fee shall be paid on demand from the city
and shall be in an amount established by the department as necessary to recover all reasonably
related costs incurred by the city to review and process the application.
B. This encroachment permit shall not be construed to be a franchise or a license as that term is used
in Idaho statutes and the ordinances of the city of Payette, and is required in addition to the fiber
optic license required herein. (Ord. 1292 § 1, 2008)
12.05.140: REQUIRED INFORMATION FOR BOTH LICENSE AND PERMIT:
Applicants shall submit all of the applicable information listed in section 12.05.125 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1292 § 1, 2008)
12.05.145: SPECIAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR PERMIT:
In addition to the general terms and conditions for all encroachment permits listed above, permits
issued pursuant to this section shall also comply with the following conditions:
A. At the option of the city, the permittee may be required to construct conduits, ducts and associated
appurtenances such as pull boxes, which will become the property of the city upon completion of
construction, in lieu of payment of annual and/or permit fees. It is intended that fees be computed
as described in the fee resolution adopted by council and waived only to the extent of equal value
received by construction in kind. The city may, at its option, rent or sell to others the conduits,
duct(s) and other appurtenances which are determined to be in excess of its needs.
B. The permittee shall, without cost to the city, allow the use by the city of space in the then existing
conduits and subways for wires, fire alarms, police, traffic control and all other applicable municipal
purposes as determined by the license agreement with the city.
C. In addition to the indemnification required in the general encroachment permit terms hereinabove,
the permittee shall agree to indemnify, defend and save the city harmless from any losses,
expenses or lost revenues incurred by the permittee other than the reasonable cost of repair to the
permittee's cable and appurtenances damaged as the result of negligence by employees of the
city. (Ord. 1292 § 1, 2008)
12.05.150: APPLICATION APPROVAL:
Applications for an encroachment permit pursuant to this section shall be reviewed by such outside
expert consultants and city staff as deemed necessary by the city who shall approve, deny or
conditionally approve such applications unless the encroachment permit application was combined
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 223/467
with an application for a fiber optic cable license, in which event the city council may approve, deny or
conditionally approve the two (2) applications together. (Ord. 1292 § 1, 2008)
12.05.155: FEES, FIBER OPTIC CABLE:
In addition to the nonrefundable encroachment permit application processing fee which covers the
cost of reviewing and processing the application; the inspection fees which cover the cost of
inspection of the construction, work or installation to ensure it meets all city requirements; a fee to
recover all of the reasonable costs associated with construction, maintenance and operation of
permittee's facilities in the right of way, including, but not limited to, all reasonable costs associated
with damage caused to the right of way; persons subject to this permit are also required to obtain a
fiber optic cable license and thus will be required to pay the license application processing fee and
shall also pay an annual license fee established by resolution of the city council. This fee shall be
based on one of the following:
A. On the gross income from the business;
B. On the fair market value of the property to be used; or
C. Any other basis which the council determines is appropriate and in the best interests of the city.
The fee shall be paid annually in advance at the issuance of the permit and within thirty (30) days
of the anniversary date of the issuance of the permit. (Ord. 1292 § 1, 2008)
Chapter 12.06
SPECIAL EVENTS
12.06.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases defined in this section apply:
APPLICANT: The person, or group of people, who is or are the organizer(s) and with whom the
responsibility for conduct of the special event lies. The applicant signs the special event permit
application and all other documents relevant to the special event.
CITY CLERK: The city clerk of the city of Payette, Idaho, or his/her designee acting as the permitting
officer.
FEES: Charges assessed by the city for permitting, staffing, equipment use/rental, property use/rental,
cleanup, inspections involving the use of public property, public employees or public equipment
assessed to a special event and established within the special event permitting process.
PUBLIC STREET OR PLACE: Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway, public right of way, park, parking
lot, or other place owned in fee by the city, or in, on or over which an easement exists in the name of
or held by the city, or which exists for the benefit and use of the public.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 224/467
SPECIAL EVENT: Any event held on public or private property to which the general public is invited
with or without charge and which creates significant public impact through:
A. The attraction of crowds of over two hundred (200) people;
B. The necessity for street closures or use of other public property;
C. The required use of city equipment and/or services; or
D. Could reasonably be interpreted to cause significant public impact via disturbance, crowd,
traffic/parking or disruption of the normal routine of the community or affected neighborhood.
STREET CLOSURE: The deliberate or incidental blockage of all, or a portion of, a public street, a right
of way or a city owned parking facility to prohibit the flow of traffic or access of vehicles. (Ord. 1284
§ 2, 2007)
12.06.020: SPECIAL EVENTS PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a special event, with or without charge for admission, on
public or private property, or to cause a street closure, without first applying for and being granted a
special event permit for the specific special event or street closure. All permits issued pursuant to this
chapter are nontransferable and expire at the completion of the given special event. (Ord. 1284 § 2,
2007)
12.06.030: EXCEPTIONS:
Any governmental taxing district sponsoring or engaging in an activity or event upon its own property
or the property of another governmental taxing district, which activity or event is customary and
incidental to the primary purpose of that governmental entity, is exempt from the requirements of this
chapter. The use of a governmental taxing district's property by a nongovernmental entity does not
qualify as an exception under this section. (Ord. 1284 § 2, 2007)
12.06.040: STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF SPECIAL EVENTS PERMIT:
A. A special events permit shall be issued only to applicants when the following findings can be made:
1. The conduct of the special event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of
traffic contiguous to its venue;
2. The conduct of the special event will not require the diversion of so great a number of police
officers to properly police the venue and the area contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the city;
3. The conduct of the special event will not require the diversion of so great a number of
ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 225/467
occupied by the proposed special event and the area contiguous thereto;
4. The concentration of persons and vehicles at assembly points of the special event will not
unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas
contiguous to such assembly areas;
5. The conduct of the special event will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment
en route to a fire;
6. The conduct of the special event is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property,
or to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; and
7. The event is in the best interest of the public.
B. A special events permit shall be issued only to applicants who meet the following conditions:
1. The event shall not be of duration longer than four (4) days, and the organizer shall have applied
for no more than eight (8) events in a calendar year. Any application for exception to these time
limitations shall be submitted to the city council. The city council shall consider materials
provided by the applicant demonstrating that a significant public interest exists to warrant the
extension of time. The city council shall make findings pertaining to the extension of time and to
the findings set forth in this section.
2. The city clerk shall, in his/her discretion, find that adequate steps are provided for protection of
public property, including proof of the applicant having obtained general liability insurance
coverage in the minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) covering the city as an
additional insured, and compliance with administratively adopted requirements for providing
additional trash receptacles and/or dumpster, portable toilets, and security measures, which
requirement shall depend upon the nature and size of the event.
3. The applicant has agreed to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and its officers and
employees from any and all demands, claims or liability of any nature, caused by or arising out
of, or connected with the special event.
4. The applicant has paid fees as set by resolution of the city council for special events, including
per diem fees and security deposits.
5. The applicant has made no false statements or misrepresentations upon any present or former
application for special events permit.
6. The applicant has not violated any provisions of city, state, or federal laws, including the
provisions of this chapter, in conducting any previous special event.
7. The special event is not for an unlawful purpose.
8. The special event permit is subject to other applicable city, state, federal or other governmental
rules, regulations or laws. (Ord. 1284 § 2, 2007)
12.06.050: RIGHT OF APPEAL:
An appeal from any decision of any city official or employee made in the administration or
enforcement of this chapter may be made to the city council by filing a written appeal and fee with the
city clerk within fifteen (15) days following the date of the action or decision giving rise to the appeal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 226/467
Upon hearing the appeal, the city council shall consider the record, the decision of the city officer, and
the written appeal together with oral presentation by the appellant, the city officer or administrator, and
the applicant. The city council may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the city clerk. The city
council shall not substitute its judgment for that of the city clerk as to the weight of the evidence on
questions of fact. The council shall affirm the city clerk's decision unless the city council finds the
decision is: a) clearly erroneous; b) arbitrary, capricious or an abuse of discretion; or c) not supported
by substantial evidence in the record as a whole. The city clerk shall transmit a copy of the city
council's decision and findings to the appellant, the applicant and any other who has requested a copy
in writing. The fee for processing the appeal shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1284
§ 2, 2007)
12.06.060: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Criminal Liability: Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by fine and/or
imprisonment up to but not exceeding the maximum penalties set forth in Idaho Code section 50-
302, as amended. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense,
punishable as described in this section.
B. Civil Liability: Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken at law or in equity to prevent any
violation of the provisions stated in this chapter, to prevent any violation of these regulations, to
recover damages, to restrain, correct or abate a violation of this section and to prevent illegal
occupancy of public property. These remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described
above. (Ord. 1284 § 2, 2007)
Chapter 12.08
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL1
12.08.010: REQUIRED:
Every owner, tenant or occupant of any property located within the corporate limits is required to
remove the snow and ice from the sidewalk fronting such property or on which such property is
abutting. (Ord. 1434, 2017)
12.08.015: OBSTRUCTION OF A CITY SIDEWALK, STREET, EASEMENT, RIGHTOF-
WAY, OR OTHER PUBLIC WAY WITH SNOW OR ICE IS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to:
A. Plow, shovel or place snow removed from private property across or onto any public street or
public sidewalk.
B. Plow, shovel or place snow within twenty five feet (25') of a fire hydrant on the street side of the
fire hydrant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 227/467
C. Plow, shovel or place snow in such a manner that obstructs the view of a traffic regulatory sign
from any public or private street, alley or right-of-way.
Premises located on Main Street, between 2nd Avenue South and 3rd Avenue North, shall be allowed
to place snow removed from the public sidewalk in the center of Main Street. Snow shall be moved to
the center of Main Street in such a way as not to impede or cause obstruction to vehicular parking or
travel ways. Snow from parking lots shall not be moved into Main Street. (Ord. 1434, 2017)
Chapter 12.09
STREET DEVELOPMENT COST RECOVERY
12.09.010: COST RECOVERY:
Any person who is required to develop a street as a condition of receiving a building permit,
subdivision approval or other development request, for a period of fifteen (15) years after the
completion of the street, shall be allowed to recover a pro rata share of the cost of the street from any
landowner, builder or developer who obtains a building permit or who constructs a structure upon
lands which are served and abut upon the street. (Ord. 1168 § 1, 1999)
12.09.020: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION:
Upon completion of the street, the developer of the street shall present the city clerk, the city engineer
or their designee, a certificate of completion. The certificate shall set forth a description of the street,
addresses of abutting lots, the cost of the street and the cost per lot or the cost per frontage foot and
the names of the owners of adjoining lots who have participated in the cost of the construction. In the
event the city clerk, the city engineer or their designee has not received the certificate of completion
within ninety (90) days after completion, the developer shall forfeit the ability to recover development
costs allowable under this title. (Ord. 1168 § 1, 1999)
12.09.030: PRESENTATION OF AFFIDAVIT OF PAYMENT:
Any person or applicant attempting to obtain a building permit on a property which abuts upon a city
street which has been developed or improved by a prior developer, shall present an affidavit that he
has paid his pro rata share of the cost of street development which is attributable to the lot or parcel
upon which he is seeking a building permit. The city engineer shall review the affidavit and such other
information as he may require and determine the accuracy of the allocation of costs attributable to
each abutting lot. (Ord. 1168 § 1, 1999)
12.09.040: INELIGIBILITY FOR PERMIT UNTIL PRO RATA COSTS ARE PAID:
An applicant for a building permit who is served by a street which abuts against that applicant's lot,
shall not be allowed a permit unless that person shall present an affidavit from the original developer
that he has paid his share of the cost of street development which is attributable to the lot upon which
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 228/467
he is seeking a building permit. An applicant shall not be required to submit an affidavit if more than
fifteen (15) years have passed since the street was built or if the name of the applicant is included in
the original certificate of completion. (Ord. 1168 § 1, 1999)
12.09.050: DUTIES OF CITY CLERK:
If no affidavit of payment is filed with the application, the building official shall not issue a building
permit until the applicant has received a receipt of payment of the pro rata cost from either the original
developer, his assigns or the city clerk. The city clerk shall inform the applicant of the last known
address of the original developer and the applicant shall endeavor to obtain the required affidavit of
payment from the developer. In the event, after ten (10) days of receipt of the last known address of
the original developer, the applicant is unable to contact the developer and cannot obtain the required
affidavit of payment, the applicant can obtain a permit after the applicant first pays to the city the pro
rata cost for the property being developed. (Ord. 1168 § 1, 1999)
12.09.060: ADDRESS CHANGES AND FORFEITURE:
The original developer shall keep the city clerk informed of his address and of any changes of address
and it shall be the sole responsibility of the developer to keep the city clerk informed of an address
where applicants can contact him, or where any funds collected can be forwarded. In the event the
city is unable to forward funds or in the event the developer does not claim any funds for a period of
one year, any funds collected from an applicant shall forfeit and shall become a part of the city's
capital improvement fund. (Ord. 1168 § 1, 1999)
12.09.070: PREORDINANCE STREET CONSTRUCTION QUALIFIES FOR COST
SHARING:
Persons having constructed streets after January 15, 1998, may file with the city clerk a certificate of
completion as provided in section 12.09.020 of this chapter and the provisions of this chapter for a
building permit shall be effective on those streets already constructed. (Ord. 1168 § 1, 1999)
Chapter 12.12
DAMAGE TO STREETS1
12.12.010: VEHICLES WITH CLEATS, FLANGES OR LUGS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to move, drive or draw any threshing machine, tractor or other vehicle with
cleats, flanges or lugs on the wheels thereof, upon or across any paved or hard surfaced street, alley
or avenue of the city. (Prior code § 9-4-1)
12.12.020: IRRIGATING DITCHES; UNDERGROUND WATERWAYS OR SIPHONS
REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 229/467
All persons owning irrigating ditches that cross any of the streets or alleys of the city, or taking water
through any such ditch, shall be required to convey said water across the streets and alleys by means
of underground waterways or siphons. Said waterways or siphons shall be constructed in a substantial
and workmanlike manner, shall not be allowed to leak and flood the streets and alleys or cause muddy
places therein, and shall be placed a sufficient depth underground to allow the streets and alleys to be
leveled to the established grade. (Prior code § 9-4-2)
12.12.030: WATER SYSTEMS AFFECTING CITY RIGHTS OF WAY OR
NEIGHBORING PROPERTY OWNERS:
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person who controls, owns, maintains or uses any
ditch, waterway, waterworks or irrigation system to allow water from the system to overflow onto,
undermine, damage, sprinkle upon, or obstruct any street, lane, alley or neighboring property. Each
day such activity continues shall be deemed a separate offense provided that notice of the condition
has been given by an officer or agent of the city. (Ord. 1195 § 1, 2000)
12.12.040: NONCOMPLIANCE; DECLARED MISDEMEANOR; CITY CORRECTIVE
ACTION:
All persons who fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this chapter, after notice to do so has
been given, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and it shall be the duty of the city to put in the
waterway or siphon required by section 12.12.020 of this chapter, at the expense of the person who is
liable therefor, and to collect the same by suit in any court having jurisdiction thereof. (Prior code § 9-
4-4)
Chapter 12.16
PARKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY1
12.16.010: PARKS; PROHIBITED ACTS GENERALLY:
It is unlawful for any person to use threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language in any park in
the City; or to create any nuisance or disturbance; or to damage, scratch, cut, injure or deface any of
the buildings, fences, structures, or foul any of the fountains or any other improvements; or to cut or
injure the flowers or flowerbeds within such parks. No horses shall be allowed within the parks. Unless
otherwise designated by visual signs, no dogs shall be allowed in any City park. (Ord. 1259, 2006:
Ord. 861, 1977: Prior Code § 9-6-5)
12.16.020: PARKS; ASSEMBLIES; LICENSE REQUIRED; PROCEDURE:
A. It is unlawful for any person to be among an assembly of more than one hundred ninety nine (199)
persons within any public park in the City, unless a reservation for the general purpose of said
assembly has been issued permitting an assembly of a definite number of persons, which number
exceeds or equals the number actually present at the assembly.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 230/467
B. All applications for a reservation required under this section shall be made to City Hall which shall
issue a reservation for the requested area of a City park. The day before the assembly the
applicant will obtain signs from City Hall to be placed in the area that states the date and time of
the assembly and that the area has been reserved. The signs will be returned to City Hall after the
assembly has taken place. The reservation may be revoked at any time should City officials
determine that it would be in the best interest of the public welfare that said reservation be
revoked.
C. The reservation fee shall be set by resolution for each multiple of fifty (50) persons for which the
reservation is issued, and said reservation shall state generally the reason for the assembly and
the time and date it shall be effective. Nonprofit groups who provide proof of status are exempt
from the reservation fee.
D. Provisions contained elsewhere in this Code for the issuance of a reservation to allow assemblies
for a specific purpose shall control in those cases and take precedence over the provisions in this
section. (Ord. 1414, 2016)
12.16.030: PARKS; HOURS WHEN CLOSED:
The public parks shall be closed to the public between dusk and dawn the following day for each and
every day of the year, unless otherwise authorized by law; and it is unlawful to be within any public
park at a time it is closed. (Ord. 1277 § 1, 2007: Ord. 861, 1977: Prior Code § 9-6-5)
12.16.040: TREES OR SHRUBS; PLANTING, ALTERING OR REMOVING; PERMIT
REQUIRED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1177 § 3, 2000)
12.16.050: DEAD TREES OR PARTS THEREOF; REMOVAL REQUIRED WHEN
INJURIOUS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1177 § 3, 2000)
12.16.060: TREES INTERFERING WITH UTILITY LINES; TRIMMING RIGHT
GRANTED TO CERTAIN COMPANIES:
The right is given to the Mountain States Telephone and Telegraph Company and to the Idaho Power
Company to trim any and all trees the branches of which interfere with telephone or electric light wires
and cables without consulting with or obtaining permission from the owners of any adjoining property;
provided, however, that such trimming shall be done under the supervision of the City Administrator.
(Prior Code § 9-6-6)
12.16.070: TREES AND SHRUBS; PLANTING; COUNCIL PERMISSION REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 231/467
(Rep. by Ord. 1177 § 3, 2000)
12.16.080: DISEASES OR PESTS; ERADICATION OR DESTRUCTION BY OWNER
OR OCCUPANT:
(Rep. by Ord. 1177 § 3, 2000)
12.16.090: DISEASES OR PESTS; DECLARED NUISANCE; FAILURE TO
ERADICATE OR DESTROY; CITY ACTION:
(Rep. by Ord. 1177 § 3, 2000)
12.16.100: DISEASES OR PESTS; ERADICATION OR DESTRUCTION BY CITY:
(Rep. by Ord. 1177 § 3, 2000)
12.16.110: RIDING OF ANIMALS UNLAWFUL; DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
(Rep. by Ord. 1444, 2018)
12.16.120: OBJECTS GENERALLY; MOVING OR DEFACING UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to remove any building or other objects so as to injure or interfere with any
tree or shrub, statue, monument or other improvement standing in any street or avenue or public
place; or to place any advertisement, announcement or notice, or print, scratch, cut or mark the same,
upon any tree, shrub, statue, monument or other improvement situated in any street, avenue, highway
or public place within the corporate limits. (Prior Code § 9-6-3)
12.16.130: WILFUL VIOLATION DECLARED UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully violate any of the bylaws, rules and regulations governing the
public parks and grounds of the City. (Prior Code § 9-6-7)
Chapter 12.17
FENCES
12.17.010: FENCE REGULATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 232/467
A. It shall be unlawful to construct a fence in any front yard, side yard, back yard or in any open space
except as allowed by this chapter.
1. For purposes of this chapter, the word "fence" shall include fences, hedges, walls, berms or any
other structures designed to separate or isolate an open area or a building.
2. No fence shall be constructed adjacent to a public street which would interfere with the free
movement of pedestrian traffic over or along a public sidewalk.
3. No fence shall be installed, constructed, planted, created, maintained, or allowed on any city
right of way. If a fence or any structure is built upon or across any city easement or right of way,
the city may immediately remove the fence or structure. If the city allows a fence or other
structure to be built over a public easement or right of way, in the event it becomes necessary to
perform work upon that easement or right of way, the landowner shall be responsible for removal
of the structure to ensure access by a city crew.
4. Fences shall not be constructed of discarded plastic materials, fiberglass panels, wood paneling,
metal paneling, barbed wire, woven wire, hog wire, chicken wire, mesh wire, electric fencing
wire, rayon wire, concertina wire, or any single wire or woven wire or any hazardous or
dangerous material.
5. Fences located within a yard area in residential districts shall not exceed six feet (6') in height.
All fences within twenty five feet (25') of a front property line shall not exceed thirty six inches
(36") in height. For purposes of this chapter, a corner lot which abuts against two (2) intersecting
streets, shall be deemed to have two (2) front yards and all fences within twenty five feet (25') of
the street right of way shall not exceed thirty six inches (36") in height. Nothing herein shall
permit an obstruction of vision at an intersection as is prohibited in subsections A7 and A8 of this
section or as defined by Idaho Code.
6. Unless otherwise provided, fences located within the property boundaries in commercial or
industrial districts shall not exceed six feet (6') in height. In the case of security fences, when a
barbed wire top section is utilized, the six foot (6') maximum height limitation may be exceeded
by up to thirty inches (30") only by the barbed wire security top section. In no instance shall
barbed wire be used below the height of six feet (6'). Fences adjacent to residential areas must
be sight/site obscuring and shall not be allowed the use of a barbed wire security top section.
Property which is zoned as commercial or industrial, but which is being used for residential
purposes, shall adhere to the fencing restrictions as outlined in subsection A5 of this section. All
fences erected on a boundary or property line shall comply with vision clearance requirements
located at intersections, driveways and public roadways. Nothing herein shall permit an
obstruction of vision at an intersection as is prohibited in subsections A7 and A8 of this section.
7. Metal chainlink or woven wire fencing shall be permitted, provided such fencing:
a. Does not cross a public sidewalk.
b. Does not interfere with automobile operator's visibility along a public street.
c. Does not interfere with visibility at the intersection of a private drive and a public roadway or
create a blind spot.
d. Does not interfere with visibility at the intersection of public roadways.
e. Is no smaller than 111/2-gauge, but no larger than 9-gauge wire.
8. Wooden or vinyl fencing shall be permitted, provided such fencing:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 233/467
a. Does not cross a public sidewalk.
b. Does not interfere with automobile operator's visibility along a public street.
c. Does not interfere with visibility at the intersection of a private drive and a public roadway or
create a blind spot.
d. Does not interfere with visibility at the intersection of public roadways.
9. All fences permitted by this chapter shall be kept in good order and repair and shall not be
allowed to become rundown or in such a state of disrepair as to constitute a private or public
nuisance. No fence shall be built until a permit is first obtained from the city clerk or his/her
designee.
10. All fences permitted by this chapter shall be kept free of weeds and grasses exceeding eight
inches (8") in height.
11. In the event a fence interferes with direct and unrestricted access to a water meter, the
landowner at the landowner's expense, shall provide a remote reading device which device is
approved by the city or a "man" gate. In the instance a "man" gate is provided, it shall be clearly
marked indicating the presence of animals. In addition, no fence shall be built within thirty six
inches (36") of a fire hydrant.
12. No fence permitted by this chapter and constructed after its adoption shall be used as evidence
to establish a boundary line, unless said fence was placed upon a boundary line designated by a
licensed surveyor of the state of Idaho, after a survey has been conducted and the boundary line
established thereby. All expenses incurred in establishing said boundary shall be at the property
owner's expense. No permit issued by the city nor any representation made by a city employee
or a city official shall be used as evidence in establishing a property boundary.
13. A person who places a fence on a boundary line, or his successor or tenant, shall be solely
responsible for its maintenance and upkeep, but shall not acquire any rights to trespass on
adjoining lands to maintain the same, unless the fence has been set back at least three feet (3')
from the property line. Setting a fence back pursuant to this chapter in order that the same may
be properly maintained shall not be construed as forfeiting any property to adjoining landowners
in the event any suit is filed for taking by adverse possession or under a similar theory.
14. Any fence which is constructed in such a manner as to be in violation of this chapter, or any
fence which is allowed to become in violation after construction, shall be subject to removal in
accordance with the following terms:
a. Any fence which is being constructed in such a manner so that, upon completion, the fence
would violate this chapter, shall be subject to injunctive action.
b. Any fence which is constructed in violation of this chapter is a nuisance per se and shall be
subject to immediate removal by the city, if after ten (10) working days' notice sent registered
mail return receipt to either the landowner, a tenant or occupant of the premises, the violation
has not been eliminated or the fence removed.
c. Any fence which shall fall into a state of disrepair so as to constitute a public or private
nuisance shall be subject to repair or removal, if ten (10) working days after notice has been
mailed, as above, the condition has not been corrected.
d. Any fence which has been constructed in such a manner so that it obstructs the visibility of a
driver at an intersection on public roadway shall be subject to immediate removal, without
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 234/467
notice of any kind.
15. Should it be necessary to enforce any provisions of this chapter, all costs incurred shall be
borne by the property owner, tenant or occupant, jointly or severally. Costs shall include costs of
notice, removal, repair, cleaning, court costs and attorney fees. The costs and expenses shall
then be assessed against the property with the owner of the property responsible therefor.
16. Any individual whose property is affected by this section may, upon written application, apply to
the planning and zoning commission of the city for conditional use to allow a variation in the
height of any fence. The planning and zoning commission of the city may upon investigation
grant to the applicant the requested conditional use. Any affected party may appeal to the city
council. The granting of such permit shall continue with each successive owner provided the
original conditions are maintained as presented.
17. The terms of this chapter may be varied by a conditional use permit after public hearing by the
planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 1336, 2011: Ord. 1244 § 2, 2005: Ord. 1044, § 1, 1992)
Chapter 12.18
PAYETTE CITY TREE ORDINANCE
12.18.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the PAYETTE CITY TREE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1355, 2012)
12.18.020: DEFINITIONS:
ANSI A300: The "American National Standard for Tree Care Operations - Tree, Shrub and Other
Woody Plant Maintenance Standard Practices". This is a document offering basic performance
standards for tree pruning, published in 1995 by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or
the same as amended from time to time.
ANSI Z133.1: That certain safety standard regarding the planting and maintenance of trees in
proximity to utility lines as published by the American National Standards Institute, Inc., May 22, 2001
edition or the same as amended from time to time.
ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNER: Any person owning property adjacent to public right-of-way.
ALTERNATE HOST PLANT: One of two (2) kinds of plants on which a pest must develop to complete
its life cycle.
ARBORICULTURE: The cultivation of trees, including planting, pruning, removal or any other action
that affects the growth and maintenance of trees.
CITY: The City of Payette, Idaho.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR: Payette City Clerk and/or a designee of the Mayor and Payette City Council.
CITY FORESTER: Also referred to as Street/Parks Superintendent or the City Forester's designee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 235/467
COMMISSION: Payette Community Forestry Commission.
COMMUNITY FOREST: The sum of all trees and shrubs within the City of Payette.
COUNCIL: The Payette City Council.
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE: The area under a tree extending from the base of a tree in all directions to
an imaginary line ten feet (10') outside of the drip line or as determined at a preliminary site inspection
by the City Forester.
HAZARD/HAZARDOUS: Any tree, public or private, with visibly defined structural defects likely to
cause failure to all or part of the tree, and be a danger to public safety.
LICENSEE/APPLICANT: Any person or business performing tree care or pruning for a fee and/or
compensation within the City of Payette.
NOTABLE PRIVATE TREE: A private tree that may be classified as an addition to the Payette
community forest at the private owner's request.
PAYETTE COMMUNITY FORESTRY COMMISSION: As stated in section 12.18.060 of this chapter.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, company or organization of any
kind.
PEST: Any insect, disease or other organism harmful to trees.
PRIVATE TREE: Any tree (inclusive of roots within the critical root zone), within the community forest
that is not a public tree.
PRUNING: The practice of cutting tree limbs according to standards contained in ANSI A300.
PUBLIC NUISANCES: Any tree or part thereof (public or private) which, by reason of location or
conditions, constitutes a hazard to public safety as determined by the City Forester. Any tree or part
thereof (on public or private property) which obstructs the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic or which obstructs public street lighting or which because of its condition constitutes a threat to
any member of the public. Any tree or alternate host plant or part thereof (on public or private
property) which harbors pests which reasonably may be expected to injure or harm public trees.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any property owned by, dedicated to, or deeded to the public or for the public's
use. City parks, public rights-of-way and other publicly owned, controlled, leased or managed
properties are included in this definition. This definition excludes any Federal or State owned
properties except where otherwise provided by contract or law.
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY: Improved or unimproved public property owned by, dedicated to, or
deeded to the public or for the public's use, for the purpose of providing vehicular, pedestrian and
other public use. Such public property provides circulation and travel to abutting properties and
includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, landscaping, provisions for public utilities, cut and fill
slopes, and open public space. For purposes of this chapter, alleys are excluded from this definition.
PUBLIC SAFETY: The condition of being safe from bodily harm and/or property damage resulting
from tree conditions and/or failures while using public property.
PUBLIC TREE: Any tree (inclusive of roots within the critical root zone) whose trunk is located, partly
or in whole, on public property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 236/467
SHRUB: A multiple stemmed, woody plant whose height at maturity is between three feet (3') and
fifteen feet (15').
SUPERINTENDENT: The Superintendent of Public Parks for the City of Payette, Idaho. Also referred
to as the Payette City Forester.
TOPPING: "Rounding" or "heading back" or any other term that can be described as severe cutting
back of limbs within a tree crown to buds, stubs, or laterals not large enough to assume a terminal role
or as defined in ANSI A300.
TREE: Any woody plant, which is fifteen feet (15') or more in height at maturity, with a single or
multiple trunks, often unbranched for several feet above the ground and having a definite crown. (Ord.
1431, 2017)
12.18.030: FINDINGS:
Whereas the City finds trees are important elements of the environment which promote and protect
public health, safety, and general welfare of the community by providing:
A. A vital contribution to the aesthetic character of the community and the region's natural beauty.
B. Cost effective protection against severe weather conditions with cooling effect in the summer
months and insulating effect in winter.
C. Economic support of local property values.
D. Improved air and water quality with the absorption of pollutants, assimilation of carbon dioxide and
generation of oxygen, and the reduction of excessive noise and adverse impacts caused by noise
pollution.
E. A reduction of the adverse impacts of land disturbing activities such as runoff from impervious
surfaces, soil erosion, land instability, and sedimentation pollution.
F. Habitat, cover, food supply and corridors for a diversity of wildlife. (Ord. 1355, 2012)
12.18.040: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
This chapter establishes regulations and standards necessary to ensure that the City continues to
realize the benefits provided by the community forest. It is not intended to resolve or regulate disputes
over trees on private property that do not affect general public safety. This chapter is enacted to:
A. Promote the general welfare of the City by establishing and maintaining the maximum amount of
canopy coverage provided by trees for their functions as identified in section 12.18.030 of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 237/467
chapter.
B. Preserve and enhance the City's environmental, economic and social character with mature trees.
C. Protect public safety, health and welfare.
D. Encourage site and utility planning, building and development practices to prevent indiscriminate
removal or destruction of trees and avoid unnecessary disturbance to trees within the City and its
area of impact.
E. Maintain trees in a healthy, nonhazardous condition through application of tree care standards
contained in ANSI A300.
F. Establish and maintain appropriate species diversity and age classes in order to provide a stable
and sustainable community forest.
G. Establish a process by which trees are to be planted, pruned and removed.
H. Implement the goals and objectives of the City's Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 1355, 2012)
12.18.050: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to any public tree within the City and to those trees on private property that
violate the provisions of this chapter. The Payette Community Forestry Commission can add private
trees that are notable and/or special to the inventory of the community forest at the request of the
private property owner. Payette City will not incur any liability and/or expense in the maintenance of
these notable and/or special trees. Private trees must be maintained according to this chapter to
remain on the inventory of the Payette community forest. (Ord. 1355, 2012)
12.18.060: CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF A PAYETTE COMMUNITY
FORESTRY COMMISSION:
A. Commission Composition: A commission of five (5) members who will receive no salary shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council to serve three (3) year appointments
with staggered terms. A City Council member may be appointed to serve as a nonvoting Council
liaison. The City Administrator or designee shall serve as an advisor to the commission.
B. Commission Operation: At their first meeting, and at the first meeting of each fiscal year, the
commission shall elect a Chair, Vice Chair, and Secretary from within its membership, shall hold
regular public meetings as required by the Chair, and shall cause the Secretary to maintain a
written record of its deliberations and proceedings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 238/467
C. Commission Responsibility: The Payette Community Forestry Commission shall:
1. Be advisory in nature with the purpose of providing advice to the Mayor, City Council and City
Forester as to the preservation, protection and management of the Payette community forest, in
accordance with the intents and purposes of this chapter.
2. Organize, conduct and periodically maintain an inventory of trees and plantable areas on the
City rights-of-way, City parks, other public and School District 371-J properties. Notable private
trees may be added to this inventory at the request of the private property owner.
3. Prepare a management plan designed to maintain and improve the existing community forest
and develop long term goals for the community forest. The Payette Community Forestry
Commission shall present and recommend a proposed Community Forest Program to the Mayor
and City Council for approval. All provisions of the management plan pertaining to other public
properties and School District 371-J shall only be advisory.
4. Draft ordinances and policies for the protection of the community forest to be recommended to
the Mayor and City Council. These policies may also be recommended to other public entities,
i.e., Payette County and School District 371-J.
5. The commission will hear appeals from the licensee and/or certification applicants who are
aggrieved of some action or omission taking place pursuant to the license/certification
procedures of this chapter.
6. The commission will hear appeals from applicants and/or licensees who are aggrieved by the
granting or denial of a permit required by this chapter.
7. The commission will develop the "Payette Tree Standards Manual", implement educational
materials and programs addressing community forestry issues.
D. Coordination And Communication: The commission will coordinate its activities regarding public
trees by communicating with the City Forester by liaison through the Payette City Council.
E. Funding: The commission shall recommend an annual budget to the Mayor and City Council. The
commission is authorized to seek outside funding for commission projects as may be approved by
the City Council in accordance with budgetary procedures. (Ord. 1355, 2012)
12.18.070: ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF THE CITY FORESTER:
A. Administrative/Management Duties:
1. Develop, administer and maintain a community forestry management plan.
2. Administer a program of public outreach and education relating to community forestry and the
planting and care of trees.
3. Maintain a licensing program as set forth in section 12.18.110 of this chapter.
4. Establish and maintain an inventory of all public trees.
5. Maintain a community forestry budget to be contained within, but as a separate division of the
budget of the Payette Street/Parks Department. The City may expend funds to plant, maintain or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 239/467
remove trees in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
6. To facilitate the proper selection, planting and maintenance of trees in residential, commercial
and industrial developments within City limits and the area of impact. The City Forester shall
review and provide comment in development applications when such applications are submitted
to the City Planning and Zoning Commission.
7. Establish policies to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
B. Tree Maintenance Duties:
1. Order the pruning and removal of public trees to ensure public health, safety and welfare while
considering the health of the tree and other elements of the infrastructure.
2. Recommend trees as "public nuisances" as defined in section 12.18.020 of this chapter.
Abatement of public nuisances shall be completed as identified in section 12.18.200 of this
chapter.
C. Tree Protection Duties: To avoid creating public nuisances or damaging public trees, the City
Forester is authorized to require their protection (including the critical root zone) from construction
or other harmful practices. (Ord. 1431, 2017)
12.18.080: POWERS OF CITY FORESTER/CITY ADMINISTRATOR:
The City Forester and/or City Administrator shall provide support staff for the activities of the Payette
Community Forestry Commission as schedules allow. The City Forester and/or City Administrator are
authorized to carry out the tree related responsibilities set forth in this chapter, including enforcement
responsibility. In doing so, the city forester and/or city administrator are authorized to appoint or
designate others to carry out his/her responsibilities. (Ord. 1355, 2012)
12.18.090: INTERFERENCE WITH THE CITY FORESTER UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful and shall be a misdemeanor to interfere with the city forester, any Payette city
police officer, or Payette city code enforcement officer in the performance of their duties connected
with the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 1355, 2012)
12.18.100: UNLAWFUL PRACTICES PROHIBITED FOR PUBLIC TREES:
Public trees constitute an asset that belongs to every community resident. Public trees include all
trees, which grow on city owned, or city managed lands within the corporate limits of the city of
Payette. Pursuant to this chapter, it is hereby deeded unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this
chapter, punishable by misdemeanor criminal penalty or by appropriate civil remedy to do any of the
following to a public tree:
A. "Top" or "head back" a tree by the improper pruning or severe cutting back of limbs within a tree's
crown or the removal of the top portion of the trunk of a coniferous tree.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 240/467
B. To cut down, destroy or materially damage any public tree without the express authorization by the
city forester.
C. Attach devices or structures (i.e., tree houses or signs) to, on, or within trees on public property.
D. Dispose of or apply substances which are toxic to trees, within the proximity of the critical root zone
of trees on public property, whether such disposal or application is on public or private property.
E. Damage public trees through construction operations involving compaction of, excavation of, filling
of, or tilling of soils within the critical root zone of trees on public property, whether such activities
are on public or private property.
F. Damage a tree on public property by significantly pruning or disturbing the critical root zone whether
such disturbance takes place on public or private property.
G. Vandalize or otherwise harm a public tree by defacing or injuring the bark, limbs, roots or trunk by
cutting, burning, chopping, applying substances or other means of inducing harm to the shape or
vitality of the tree.
H. Remove or break cultural devices such as bracing, cabling, guying, implant capsules, irrigation,
stakes or protective devices for trees on public property.
I. Fail to immediately clean debris from public or private tree maintenance and/or removal so that
travel will not be impeded on sidewalks or streets. Cleanup of all debris from tree maintenance
and/or removal shall be completed within seventy two (72) hours of completed trimming and/or
removal work. The city forester and/or the department of public safety may require a timelier
cleanup.
J. Plant a tree species with unacceptable tree height or rooting system (based on the "Manual Of
Woody Landscape Plants" [Dirr, 1990] published by Stipes Publishing or Street "Tree Fact Sheets"
[1993] published by Pennsylvania State University College Of Agricultural Sciences), under a utility
line, within a utility easement, or in sidewalk planting strips or other parts of the public right of way.
The following trees are expressly prohibited for use as street trees within public street rights of way
or where they are within the zone of influence of adjacent public sidewalks (unless in accordance
with a landscape design approved by the city forester and by the community forestry commission):
1. Acer saccharum - silver maple.
2. Betula paperifera - paperbark birch.
3. Betula pendula - European white birch.
4. Fraxinus excelsior - European ash.
5. Ginkgo biloba - ginkgo (female tree).
6. Gledistia tricanthos - thorned honey locust.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 241/467
7. Juglans nigra - black walnut.
8. Populus species - poplars, aspen, cottonwood, etc.
9. Robinia pseudoacacia - black locust.
10. Salix species - willow species.
11. Ulmus species - elm species.
K. Plant trees under the following conditions or in the following circumstances (unless in accordance
with a landscape design approved by the city forester):
1. Within four feet (4') of any building or structure.
2. Within ten feet (10') of any fire hydrants or utility poles.
3. Within two feet (2') of an existing curb or sidewalk.
4. Within ten feet (10') of a public sanitary sewer or water line.
5. Within four feet (4') of a meter vault box.
6. Within twenty feet (20') of a stop or yield sign.
7. Within four feet (4') of a residential driveway.
8. Within six feet (6') of a commercial driveway.
9. Within ten feet (10') of an alleyway access.
10. Within twenty feet (20') of a streetlight standard.
L. Plant a tree within the "sight vision triangle" of controlled or uncontrolled intersections. The "vision
triangle" is defined as the triangular area formed by intersecting streets and roads protected from
vision obstruction by provisions of Idaho Code and this code.
M. Not to replace a public tree, which was removed unless otherwise authorized by the city forester.
N. Plant a public tree that is smaller than one and one-half inch (11/2") caliper for class I trees and two
and one-half inch (21/2") caliper for class II and class III trees. Class I trees are fifteen (15) to thirty
feet (30') in ultimate height and spread. Class II trees are thirty (30) to sixty feet (60') in ultimate
height and width. Class III trees are greater than sixty feet (60') in ultimate height. Ultimate height
is to be determined by reference to the "Manual Of Woody Landscape Plants" (Dirr, 1990) a copy
of which is maintained in the Payette City Hall.
O. Plant trees within sidewalks without providing tree wells with a minimum four foot by four foot
(4' x 4') (16 square foot) opening or plant trees in the right of way without providing protection of
the tree base, such as edging, mulch or arbor guards.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 242/467
P. Plant trees on public property which do not meet the minimum acceptable standards as established
by the American Association Of Nurserymen for stock true to name and type, which are bare
rooted, damaged, diseased or disfigured, which are not hardy for the Payette area or without
removing all nonbiodegradable wrapping around the root ball including twine, wire, baskets, rope,
treated or synthetic burlap.
Q. Plant, remove and deface a tree(s) as follows:
1. Attach any object to public tree(s).
2. Dig, trench, excavate or pile soil or any other materials within the critical root zone of any public
tree(s).
3. Approval from the city forester must be made prior to pruning or removal of any public tree on
private property, application for an encroachment permit (if necessary) must be made by the
property owner or private tree firm currently licensed as required in section 12.18.110 of this
chapter. (Ord. 1355, 2012)
12.18.110: PAYETTE CITY BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. A Payette city business license, which fee is set by resolution, is required for any person or
business performing tree care or pruning for a fee and/or compensation within the Payette city
limits. The Payette business license is to be renewed annually, fee set by resolution.
B. The licensee/applicant at the time of issuance and/or renewal of such business license shall furnish
to the city:
1. Evidence of public liability insurance with limits no less than five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) combined single limits for business and vehicular operation.
2. Evidence of workers' compensation insurance.
3. Evidence to satisfy section 12.18.130 of this chapter. (Ord. 1371, 2012: Ord. 1360, 2012: Ord.
1355, 2012)
12.18.120: COMPENSATORY PAYMENTS:
In the event any person removes, destroys or damages any public tree except as otherwise required
by law, that person shall be required to replace such tree with a tree(s) of equivalent dollar value on
public property, unless otherwise determined by the city forester. The value of the tree shall be
determined by the city forester in accordance with accepted plant appraisal methods as set forth in the
most recent edition of the "Guide For Plant Appraisal", published by the International Society Of
Arboriculture or the same as amended from time to time. If no suitable location exists in the vicinity of
the tree removed or if the replacement tree(s) is of lesser value, the person causing the tree to be
removed shall make a compensatory payment to the city of Payette equal to the difference in value
between the tree removed and any replacement tree(s). Any public tree that is determined by the city
forester to be damaged, but not sufficiently to justify its removal, shall be considered to be devalued.
The amount of devaluation shall be paid to the city by the person causing the damage. Compensatory
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 243/467
payments shall be paid into a fund established for that purpose and restricted to use for the
community forestry program. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city of Payette from negotiating
agreements with other governmental entities regarding penalties and compensatory payment for
removal, damage or destruction of public trees. (Ord. 1355, 2012)
12.18.130: CERTIFIED ARBORIST REQUIRED:
A. When the pruning of trees on public property is undertaken by utilities and/or professional tree care
operators (including any person or business performing tree care or pruning for a fee and/or
compensation), such work shall be done under the supervision of a person qualified as either a
certified arborist by the International Society Of Arboriculture; certification, by TCIA (Tree Care
Industry Association); or, an equivalent certification approved by the Payette community forestry
commission. Compliance with these standards shall require that the certified arborist visit the site
of the work to prescribe the pruning to be done and to actively monitor the pruning operation.
B. This requirement shall not prohibit an adjoining home or business owner from carrying out minor
pruning on public trees immediately adjoining his/her property as long as such minor pruning does
not alter the essential shape of the tree or does not violate any of the specific prohibitions
established by this chapter. (Ord. 1387, 2014: Ord. 1355, 2012)
12.18.140: REQUIRED CARE OF PRIVATE TREES:
Each landowner with private trees on his/her land is hereby legally responsible to carry out the
following duties concerning said trees:
A. Maintain trees and shrubs on private lands so they will not endanger the public or become
hazardous to public right of way, public utilities or other public property.
B. Control injurious pests by removing debris or trees harboring insects or disease from their private
real property or by using other legally approved methods to eradicate tree borne insects or
disease.
C. The community forestry committee is authorized to take such steps as necessary to protect the
community forest from actions or inaction regarding trees on private lands. Retention or neglect of
a tree on private lands which harbors insects or diseases which endangers the health or vitality of
the Payette community forest shall be deemed a violation of this chapter which shall be subject to
the remedies and penalties otherwise set forth herein. (Ord. 1355, 2012)
12.18.150: RECOMMENDED CARE OF PRIVATE TREES:
A. Persons or businesses licensed by the city and recognized as certified arborists should do
maintenance on private trees.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 244/467
B. Private property owners may adopt section 12.18.100 of this chapter for the maintenance of private
trees.
C. Private property owners should report any violations or omissions by licensed professionals
concerning the maintenance of private trees to the community forestry commission.
D. Nothing contained within this chapter shall prohibit a property owner from trimming, topping,
cutting, maintaining or pruning any tree located upon that person's property.
E. Nothing contained within this chapter shall be construed as requiring the city to maintain trees
which are on private property, or which are located on privately owned property but which are
within a street, alley, highway or public utility right of way or which have not been the responsibility
of the city prior to the passage of this chapter. (Ord. 1355, 2012)
12.18.160: REMOVAL OF PUBLIC TREES:
A. Trees on public lands shall not be removed by private individuals without the prior written
authorization of the Payette community forestry commission. The following criteria will be
considered:
1. Whether the tree is sufficiently diseased or is an alternate host of an injurious disease.
2. Whether the tree is harboring injurious insects or pathogens and may cause significant potential
danger to the Payette community forest.
3. The tree is dead or nearly dead and/or constitutes a public safety hazard.
4. The tree interferes with overhead utility lines and creates an irresolvable public safety hazard.
5. Any other criteria deemed to be in the public interest, such as, but not limited to, the destruction
of sidewalks.
6. The Payette forestry commission issues a declaration of public nuisance.
B. Replacement of a public tree shall be required when removal of a public tree occurs without
authorization from the Payette community forestry commission unless replacement would be
contrary to the public interest. Said obligation of replacement shall be additional to other sanctions
required by this chapter. Replacement may be required at a location different from the place of
removal. (Ord. 1355, 2012)
12.18.170: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
may be punished by a fine and/or imprisonment up to, but not exceeding, the maximum penalties
set forth in Idaho Code section 50-302, as amended. Each violation, including the removal of each
public tree, may be considered a separate violation. Should any person be found guilty in a court of
competent jurisdiction or otherwise plead guilty to an alleged violation hereof, the court may order
restitution if the Payette community forest is diminished or harmed as a consequence of such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 245/467
violation. Restitution recommendations shall not exceed the replacement or appraisal value
formulas for said damaged or eliminated tree(s) established by the "Guide For Plant Appraisal",
written by the council of tree and landscape appraisers, published by the International Society Of
Arboriculture. The community forestry commission shall recommend such restitution amount to the
prosecutor, utilizing said value formulas.
B. The city may undertake civil legal action in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek to enjoin
conduct which violates the provisions of this chapter, or to recover the reasonable costs of actions
deemed necessary to bring about compliance herewith. Said actions may also seek restitution for
damages and costs incurred to remedy the consequences of violation. (Ord. 1355, 2012)
12.18.180: LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION AND/OR DENIAL:
A. Upon recommendation of the Payette community forestry commission the city administrator may
suspend or revoke any license when the licensee commits one or more certain acts or omissions.
These acts or omissions shall include, but are not limited to:
1. Violation of any provision of the Payette city tree ordinance.
2. Knowingly combining or conspiring with another person by permitting one's license or
certification to be used by such other person, unless employed by the licensee.
3. Acting as an agent, partner, and associate or in any other capacity with another person in an
attempt to evade the provisions of this chapter.
4. Denial of a license or certification by noncompliance of sections 12.18.100 and 12.18.110 of this
chapter.
5. A complaint filed by a private tree owner and verified by the community forestry commission.
B. The licensee/applicant shall be notified in writing that the license has been suspended, revoked or
denied. This notice shall be by registered mail or personal service within seven (7) days after the
city administrator's action. The written notice shall specify the reasons for the action and inform the
licensee/applicant of his or her right to appeal the decision of the City Administrator to the City
Council. (Ord. 1355, 2012)
12.18.190: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
When a license is suspended, revoked or denied, the appeal procedure shall be as follows:
A. Upon receipt of such notice, the licensee/applicant may request an appeal hearing. The request
shall be in writing and submitted to the Administrator within fourteen (14) days from the date of
mailing or personal service of the Administrator's decision.
B. Upon receipt of a request for hearing by the licensee/applicant, the Administrator shall arrange a
time, date and place for the hearing within thirty (30) days before the City Council and shall notify
the licensee/applicant no less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 246/467
shall state that counsel may represent the licensee/applicant and that the hearing will be a public
meeting.
C. The Chair or designee of the Payette Community Forestry Commission shall present the reasons
for recommending the action taken. The licensee/applicant may be in attendance and/or may be
represented by counsel. The evidence presented by either party may consist of relevant physical
evidence and testimony. The City Council shall take the matter under advisement and shall notify
the licensee/applicant within fourteen (14) days from the date of the hearing, of its findings. (Ord.
1355, 2012)
12.18.200: ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES:
The following are the prescribed means of abating public nuisances under this chapter:
A. Any tree or alternate host plant or part thereof (public or private) declared to be a public nuisance
as set forth in the definitions of this chapter shall be pruned, removed or otherwise treated in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter. All costs for nuisance abatement shall be the
responsibility of the adjacent property owner or of any person claiming ownership thereof;
B. The City may cause a written notice to be personally served or sent by mail to the owner of the
particular property;
C. In the event the nuisance is not abated by the date specified in the notice, the City Clerk, City
Forester, City Street/Parks Supervisor, Street Supervisor or other authorized person is authorized
to cause the abatement of said nuisance. The reasonable cost of such abatement shall be charged
to the property owner upon which the tree is located or upon the immediately adjacent property.
Monies which have not been recovered through the City bill collection procedures may result in a
lien against the property or assessed on taxes as provided for in Idaho Code title 50. In addition,
the owner of the property upon which the nuisance is located may be subject to prosecution under
this chapter, or any other chapter of this Code or the Idaho Code for maintaining a public nuisance.
Nothing in this provision shall be construed to exempt any person from the requirement of
obtaining licenses under section 12.18.110 of this chapter;
D. The City Clerk, City Forester, Street Supervisor, Street/Parks Supervisor or other authorized person
is empowered to cause the immediate abatement of any nuisance if it is determined by the City
Forester or other authorized person to be an emergency or immediate hazard to public safety;
E. If the City Forester determines that disposal of the wood, branches and soil from removal or
pruning of a nuisance tree is required to complete abatement, such disposal shall be done in such
a manner to minimize the impact on other vegetation or members of the community. All costs
associated with the disposal of material from private trees shall be the responsibility of the property
owner. (Ord. 1431, 2017)
12.18.210: DEAD, DEFACED, BROKEN, DISEASED, AND DANGEROUS TREES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 247/467
Every dead, defaced, broken, dangerous, diseased, or untrimmed tree, within any public right-of-way
which has or may become a traffic hazard or a hazard to adjoining property and is so determined by
the City is hereby declared to be and to constitute a nuisance. It is the duty of every owner of any
premises in the City to have removed dead, defaced, diseased, broken or dangerous trees and to trim
trees located upon the public right-of-way between the property line and street travelway adjacent
thereto. (Ord. 1431, 2017)
Chapter 12.19
PAYETTE CITY GREENWAY
12.19.010: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the PAYETTE CITY GREENWAY CHAPTER. (Ord. 1226, 2003)
12.19.020: DEFINITION:
The Payette city greenway is property which is owned, operated or maintained by the city of Payette
and is located within the city of Payette, Idaho, for public use as a footpath which runs along the
Snake River and Payette River in Payette, Idaho. This definition includes any federal or state owned
properties which are included in the greenway. (Ord. 1226, 2003)
12.19.030: PROHIBITED ACTS RELATING TO GREENWAY PROPERTY:
No person shall:
A. Buildings Or Other Property:
1. Disfiguration And Removal: Wilfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or
remove, any building, bridges, tables, benches, railings, paving or paving material, water lines or
other public utilities or parts or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal, or have in his
possession any of the foregoing things or objects, or any part thereof.
B. Trees, Shrubbery And Lawns:
1. Injury And Removal: Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the
bark, or pick the flowers or seeds, of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach any rope,
wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass
areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
C. Wild Animals, Birds, Livestock, Etc.:
1. Hunting: Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, annoy, shoot or throw missiles at
any animal, reptile or bird nor shall he/she remove or have in his possession the young of any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 248/467
wild animal, or the eggs or nest, or young of any reptile or bird.
2. Feeding: Give or offer, or attempt to give to any animal or bird any tobacco, alcohol or other
known noxious substances.
3. Strays: No person shall allow any livestock to become a stray or estray. "Stray or estray" means
any livestock whose owner is unknown or cannot be located, or any livestock whose owner is
known but who permits livestock to roam at large upon the greenway. (Ord. 1226, 2003)
12.19.040: RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES:
No person in the greenway shall:
A. Hunting And Firearms: Use firearms of any description, or air rifles, spring guns, bow and arrows,
slings or any other forms of weapons potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety,
or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or any kind of trapping device;
or discharge, or have in his possession, any fireworks defined in title 8, chapter 20 of this code or
section 39-2602 of the Idaho Code; or shoot into greenway areas from beyond park boundaries;
provided that it shall be lawful for police officers while on duty to use and carry firearms.
B. Camping: Set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of camping, nor shall
any person bring onto the greenway any movable structure or special vehicle to be used, or that
could be used, for such purpose such as house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon, or the like.
C. Games: Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled
dangerous objects such as stones, arrows or javelins.
D. Horseback Riding: Ride a horse.
E. Motorized Vehicles: Operate a motorized vehicle, including, but not limited to, cars, trucks, vans,
snowmobiles, motorcycles and golf carts. Exception is hereby made for emergency or other duly
authorized vehicles. (Ord. 1226, 2003)
12.19.050: BEHAVIOR:
No person in the greenway shall:
A. Possess or consume any alcoholic beverage.
B. Permit or allow a dog or other domestic animal to enter or remain in the greenway except on a
leash and/or carried while leashed by such person owning or having the care, custody and control
of such dog or domestic animal. The owner or person having possession of any dog or other
domestic animal on the greenway shall remove any feces left by such animal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 249/467
C. Endanger the safety or health of any person by any conduct or act, including, but not necessarily
limited to, urinating or defecating in, on or upon the greenway, except when using an enclosed
bathroom facility authorized by the city.
D. Prevent any person from using the greenway, or any of its facilities, or interfere with such use in
compliance with this chapter and the rules and regulations applicable to such use.
E. Solicit or accost other persons for the purpose of begging or soliciting alms.
F. Operate or aid in the operation of private radios, stereophonic or sound amplification devices at a
greater operating level than seventy five (75) decibels measured at a distance of twenty feet (20')
from such radios or devices.
G. Enter, or stay upon, the greenway during times when the greenway is closed. The greenway shall
be closed one hour after sunset and shall not be open to the public until sunrise.
H. Litter, as defined by Idaho Code section 18-3906, which code section is adopted hereat.
I. Engage in any unlawful conduct or criminal activity or in any way commit a violation or breach of the
peace, as defined by Idaho Code and/or this code. (Ord. 1226, 2003)
12.19.060: MERCHANDISING, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS:
No person shall:
A. Vending And Peddling: Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he station or place any
stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. Exception is
hereby made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority of the
Payette city council.
B. Advertising: Distribute, leave or throw any advertising material, such as dodgers, handbills, circular
or like matter, or give away or otherwise distribute for advertising purposes any goods or wares.
C. Signs: Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any signs, plaques, advertisement or inscription
whatever, except plaques, tablets or signs of a size, design and location approved by the Payette
city council, recognizing or acknowledging donations or contributions to the greenway. (Ord. 1226,
2003)
12.19.070: CLOSED AREAS:
Any section or part of the greenway may be declared closed to the public by the Payette city council at
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 250/467
any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regularly and stated intervals (daily or
otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses. (Ord. 1226, 2003)
12.19.080: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Officials: Payette city police officers and duly authorized police officers from other jurisdictions, shall
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Ejectment: A police officer shall have the authority to eject from the greenway any person acting in
violation of this chapter. Any person ejected from the greenway shall leave promptly and peaceably
and shall not return to the greenway for any reason on the same calendar day of his ejectment.
C. Seizure Of Property: A police officer shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property,
thing or device in the greenway, or used in violations of this chapter. (Ord. 1226, 2003)
12.19.090: PENALTIES:
A person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding three hundred
dollars ($300.00) or be imprisoned in the Payette County jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months,
or be both so fined and imprisoned. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to limit city
employees or other authorized persons from performing their official or city authorized duties. (Ord.
1226, 2003)
Title 13
WATER, SEWERS AND PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapter 13.03
SOURCE WATER PROTECTION
13.03.010: PURPOSE:
A. The purposes of this chapter include:
1. Protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
2. Fostering economic well being derived from the availability of clean water.
3. Minimizing public costs related to remediation, treatment, or replacement of the community
water supply.
4. Avoiding private costs and economic dislocation as a result of pollution of the public water
supply.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 251/467
5. Providing effective and efficient means for processing administrative permits to implement this
chapter. (Ord. 1417, 2016)
13.03.020: DEFINITIONS:
Certain defined words and phrases shall have the particular meanings set forth in this section when
used within the text of this chapter or as particularly defined in IDAPA 58.01.08, "Idaho Rules For
Public Drinking Water Systems", adopted by the Idaho board of environmental quality and Idaho
legislature. All other words and phrases contained in this chapter shall be construed in light of their
typical meaning applied in the context of the purpose and intent set forth above and elsewhere herein.
AGRICULTURAL RUNOFF WASTEWATER: Water diverted for irrigation, but not applied to crops, or
runoff of irrigation water from cropland as a result of irrigation.
AQUIFER REMEDIATION RELATED WELLS: Wells used to prevent, control, or remediate aquifer
pollution, including, but not limited to, wells at superfund sites.
COMMUNITY PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM: A public water system (PWS) that serves at least fifteen
(15) service connections used by year round residents or regularly serves at least twenty five (25)
year round residents.
FACILITY: Any land use, business, or undertaking that is established, constructed, or modified to
serve a particular purpose for which potential issues may affect possible degradation of source water.
HAZARDOUS WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY: A hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal
facility that receives hazardous material as described in the code of federal regulations 40 CFR 260.1.
HAZARDOUS WASTE OR MATERIAL: Any waste or material that because of its quantity,
concentration, physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may:
A. Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible
or incapacitating reversible illness; or
B. Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed; or
C. Any material or substance designated as a hazardous or toxic substance defined by 40 CFR
261.3, or any material or substance designated as a hazardous or toxic substance by the state
of Idaho, acting through the Idaho department of environmental quality (DEQ) or any successor
agency.
IDAHO DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM RECORDS:
Geographic information system data concerning the location and environmental characteristics of
water sources for PWSs maintained on computer systems by DEQ or by those subject to DEQ
oversight.
INJECTION WELL: Any excavation or artificial opening into the ground used for or intended to be
used for injection of waters into the ground inclusive of all facilities so defined within the rules of the
Idaho department of water resources.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 252/467
NONTRANSIENT NONCOMMUNITY PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM: A PWS that does not meet the
definition of a community PWS and that serves at least twenty five (25) of the same persons over six
(6) months per year. Examples of nontransient noncommunity systems include schools, offices, and
businesses.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM (PWS): An integrated source and distribution system defined in Idaho
Code or regulation serving piped water for human consumption, if such system has at least fifteen (15)
service connections or regularly serves an average of at least twenty five (25) individuals at least sixty
(60) days out of the year, or as such definition may subsequently be modified by state law or
regulation. A PWS can be either a community PWS, a nontransient noncommunity PWS, or a
transient noncommunity PWS.
SANITARY LANDFILL: A solid waste disposal operation as defined by Idaho Code or regulation.
SOURCE WATER: Any aquifer, surface water body, or watercourse from which water is taken either
periodically or continuously by a PWS for drinking or food processing purposes.
SPECIAL DRAINAGE WELLS: Injection wells used for disposing of water from sources other than
direct precipitation. Examples of this well type include landslide control drainage wells, potable water
tank overflow drainage wells, swimming pool drainage wells, and lake level control drainage wells.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: Water discharged into the environment as a result of rain, melting snow, or
other precipitation.
TIME OF TRAVEL AREAS: Time of travel (TOT) is land area plotted based on the time required for a
particle of water to move from a specific point in the aquifer to a well or spring that serves as a source
for a PWS. TOT areas are those calculated or approved by DEQ professionals and maintained in
DEQ's public records.
TRANSIENT NONCOMMUNITY PUBLIC WATER SYSTEMS: A PWS that does not regularly serve at
least twenty five (25) of the same persons over six (6) months per year (e.g., tavern, restaurant with
less than 25 regular employees, motel, church, campground, state or federal park, a recreational
vehicle park, or highway rest area).
WELLHEAD: The upper terminus of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves, and other
attachments. (Ord. 1417, 2016)
13.03.030: SOURCE WATER PROTECTION OVERLAY DESIGNATIONS:
A. To protect source water from exposure to hazardous materials or practices that expose a well or
spring that supplies water to a PWS, the source water protection overlay (SWPO) designation
established pursuant to this chapter shall implement certain measures of protection for water
sources appropriate to the risk posed by particular conductor activities. An SWPO designation
shall be identified and configured to protect a well, spring, or surface water source from
vulnerability to pollutants within a calculated ten (10) year time of travel (TOT) area determined by
studies and mapping provided by DEQ. Original data concerning such studies can be obtained
from DEQ.
B. Source water protection overlay (SWPO) designations shall be depicted on a map of the city of
Payette that is designated as the official SWPO designation map. Each spring, well, or surface
water intake that serves as a source for a PWS shall be located on the SWPO map. The official
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 253/467
SWPO map of like date with the initial effective date hereof is hereby adopted as a component of
this chapter and as a complement to the zoning ordinance of the city of Payette. Each
subsequently identified PWS well, spring, or surface water intake shall hereby be automatically
added to the SWPO map with the well, spring, or surface water intake location identified by its
global positioning system coordinates, or by the same means that other wells, springs, or surface
water intakes are located within DEQ records concerning PWS wells, springs, or surface water
intakes as soon as DEQ studies concerning such PWS are complete. Even if a PWS well, spring,
or surface water intake is not depicted on the SWPO map, it shall nonetheless be subject to the
protection and limitations afforded by this chapter. No amendment of this chapter or map shall be
necessary to apply the requirements of this chapter to any PWS source. Corrective amendments
to the SWPO map can be made by administrative staff of the city of Payette upon a determination
of factual propriety. (Ord. 1417, 2016)
13.03.040: WELL PROTECTION TIERS; AUTHORIZATION, ESTABLISHMENT, AND
LIMITATIONS:
A. Establishment Of Wellhead Or Spring Related Vulnerability Tiers: Surrounding each PWS well or
spring shall be four (4) functional tiers that correlate with the vulnerability of a PWS well or spring
to contamination. Each tier shall be subject to the functional use and activity limitations prescribed
by the city of Payette zoning ordinance.
1. Wellsite Tier: The land that immediately surrounds the wellhead and having a radius of not less
than fifty feet (50') from the well, or as otherwise depicted in DEQ's PWS records, shall be
known and designated as the wellsite tier. Irrespective of the local land use zone applied within
the wellsite tier, uses permitted therein shall be limited to necessary public water supply
wellhead equipment, which may include pump houses, wellhead facility buildings, water storage
tanks, disinfection equipment, disinfection chemical storage, and approved landscaping. No
uses otherwise permitted by the underlying land use zone shall be permitted in the wellsite tier
unless approved by DEQ. The area encompassed by the wellsite tier shall include, at a
minimum, the land referenced above.
2. Inner Vulnerability Tier: The PWS inner vulnerability tier constitutes those lands located outside
the wellsite tier, extending outward to the inside boundary of the intermediate vulnerability tier.
The inside boundary of the intermediate vulnerability tier coincides with the outer limit of the area
determined to circumscribe the zero to three (3) year TOT area for community and nontransient
noncommunity PWSs, or a one thousand foot (1,000') radius for transient noncommunity PWSs
as determined by site specific DEQ evaluation. In addition to the land use standards made
applicable by the underlying land use zone and general restrictions supplied by the city of
Payette zoning ordinance, the land uses, physical installations, or conditions established by title
17, chapter 17.90 of this code shall be prohibited within the inner vulnerability tier as determined
within the applicable DEQ records for each PWS.
3. Intermediate Vulnerability Tier: The PWS intermediate vulnerability tier constitutes those lands
located outside the inner vulnerability tier, extending outward to the inside boundary of the outer
vulnerability tier. The inside boundary of the outer vulnerability tier coincides with the outer limit
of the area determined to circumscribe the three (3) to six (6) year TOT area as determined by
site specific DEQ evaluation. In addition to the land use standards made applicable by the
underlying land use zone and general restrictions supplied by the city of Payette zoning
ordinance, the land uses, physical installations, or conditions established by title 17, chapter
17.90 of this code shall be prohibited within the intermediate vulnerability tier as determined
within the applicable DEQ records for each PWS.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 254/467
4. Outer Vulnerability Tier: The outer vulnerability tier constitutes those lands located outside the
intermediate vulnerability tier extending outward to the outside boundary of the outer
vulnerability tier. The outside boundary of the outer vulnerability tier coincides with the outer limit
of the area determined to circumscribe the six (6) to ten (10) year TOT area as determined by
site specific DEQ evaluation. In addition to the land use standards made applicable by the
underlying land use zone and general restrictions supplied by the city of Payette zoning
ordinance, the land uses, physical installations, or conditions established by title 17, chapter
17.90 of this code shall be prohibited within the outer vulnerability tier as determined within the
applicable DEQ records for each PWS. (Ord. 1417, 2016)
13.03.050: DEMONSTRATION OF COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Any request for a building or zoning permit to the city of Payette that falls within a designated
vulnerability tier requires the applicant to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1417, 2016)
13.03.060: ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS:
A. All permit requests shall be in writing. The obligation to demonstrate compliance with the
requirements of this chapter shall lie with the permit applicant. Whenever any permit request calls
for proof of compliance, the administrator of this chapter shall maintain written records of the
compliance process from the point of initial application to its conclusion. All licenses which are
issued shall be granted by the city clerk or designee. The city clerk or designee shall grant or deny
the permit within thirty (30) days of the time it is filed with the city clerk. Whenever the city clerk or
designee denies a permit, they shall specify in writing:
1. The statutes, ordinances and standards used in evaluating the application;
2. The reason for the denial; and
3. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer or renewal
thereof.
B. Whenever an administrative authorization is required to demonstrate compliance with standards
established by this chapter or whenever an administrative authorization decision is appealed to the
city council of the city of Payette, written notice of the hearing shall be given to the entity(ies)
operating the public water supply(ies) within the regulatory distance called for pursuant to this
chapter. Any administrative determination shall comply with any procedural requirements
established by the city of Payette zoning ordinance and this chapter. Said determination shall be in
writing and shall state the basis in fact and law for the approval or denial of a permit. An applicant
is authorized to request reconsideration of any permit decision by the administrator, provided that
an affected PWS shall be notified of any such request and shall be allowed to participate in any
such proceedings. The permit applicant and affected PWS shall be promptly notified of the final
decision.
C. Any permit decision made by the administrator may be appealed by the permit applicant or the
PWS to the city council of the city of Payette. Any such appeal must be filed within twenty eight
(28) days of the mailing date of the final decision by the administrator and shall state the legal
basis therefor. The appellant, any opposing party, and the administrator shall be entitled to be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 255/467
heard by the city council. Any decision on appeal made by city council of the city of Payette shall
be in writing and shall state the facts and legal standards relied upon. (Ord. 1417, 2016)
13.03.070: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Failure to demonstrate compliance with applicable provisions of this chapter, failure to demonstrate
compliance with the city of Payette zoning ordinance, or express noncompliance with this chapter
shall constitute a violation of this chapter subject to a misdemeanor criminal fine of up to one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) per day of violation, six (6) months of incarceration per day of violation, or both
such fine and incarceration for each day that a violation continues. (Ord. 1417, 2016)
13.03.080: STATUS OF LAWFUL EXISTING FACILITIES:
Any lawful use existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter and characterized as a prohibited or
restricted use herein, shall be recognized as a lawful nonconforming facility. Any such nonconforming
facility may not be expanded or modified except as otherwise provided in the zoning ordinance and in
accordance with provisions of this chapter. Mitigation or preventive measures may be required as a
precondition for allowing modification or expansion of nonconforming facilities located within any
designated tier. (Ord. 1417, 2016)
Chapter 13.04
WATERWORKS
13.04.010: DEFINED:
"Waterworks" includes, but is not limited to, water mains, water tanks, wells, pump stations, treatment
facilities, service lines and meters for the transportation, storage or extraction of water by the city.
(Ord. 1088 § 1, 1994: Ord. 839, 1975: prior code § 3-3-8(A))
13.04.020: PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION; PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION
INFORMATION; ADOPTION OF CONSTRUCTION DESIGN STANDARDS:
Any person desiring to construct waterworks on or below any street or alley, or desiring to construct
any extension of the waterworks, in the city, shall first obtain from the city clerk a permit for such
construction upon application being filed with the city clerk. The application shall state the name of the
person applying, the approximate location of the waterworks, the legal description of the land or lots to
be serviced by the waterworks, and the owners of the said lots so served, together with the proposed
size and type of pipe to be laid and the approximate cost. Water mains shall be a minimum of eight
inches (8") in diameter, and all parts of the water system shall be constructed as defined in the city of
Payette design standards for public works construction. The supplemental construction design
standards are hereby adopted and incorporated into the ordinance codified in this chapter by
reference. A copy of the design standards are on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 1302, 2009:
Ord. 1288, 2008: Ord. 1190, 2000: Ord. 839, 1975: prior code § 3-3-8(B))
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 256/467
A. There shall be no private wells drilled within the city limits of Payette which supply domestic water
needs. Sand point or cased wells of fifty feet (50') or less in depth for irrigation purposes may be
drilled, but those wells shall comply with all Idaho department of water resources requirements,
shall not be connected to any structure to supply domestic needs nor connected to any structure
which is hooked into the city water system.
B. When any structure is located within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the city water system, after sixty
(60) days' written notice, the city may require the owner thereof, at the owner's expense, to hook
into the city water system. (Ord. 1221 § 1, 2003)
13.04.030: PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION; CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION
REQUIRED:
Upon completion, the person constructing the waterworks and the city engineer must file a certificate
of completion with the city clerk setting forth the location of the waterworks, the lots served, the owner
of said lots, and the cost per lot or the cost per front foot served by the waterworks. (Ord. 839, 1975:
prior code § 3-3-8(C))
13.04.040: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION:
A. Upon completion of the waterworks, the developer of the waterworks shall deliver to the city clerk,
the city engineer or their designee a certificate of completion. The certificate shall set forth a
description of the waterworks, addresses of abutting lots, the cost of the waterworks and the cost
per lot or the cost per frontage foot and the names of the owners of adjoining lots who have
participated in the cost of the construction. In the event the city clerk, the city engineer or their
designee has not received the certificate of completion within ninety (90) days after completion, the
developer shall forfeit the ability to recover development costs allowable under this title.
B. In the event a waterworks is already completed, a developer shall have ninety (90) days from the
date of this section to submit a certificate of completion or shall forfeit the right to recover costs
allowable under this title. (Ord. 1170, 1999: Ord. 839, 1975: prior code § 3-3-8(D))
13.04.050: PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION; OWNERS NOT PARTICIPATING IN COST;
NO SERVICE WHEN:
No person owning property which can be served by the waterworks who has not participated in the
construction costs or does not have an affidavit of payment as provided in section 13.04.060 of this
chapter shall be served by the waterworks or connect any building waterworks or house waterworks
thereto, unless a period of fifteen (15) years has elapsed from the date of the completion of the
waterworks or unless said person, after the completion of the waterworks, became a successor in
interest of the owner of the property who caused said waterworks to be constructed. (Ord. 1088 § 2,
1994: Ord. 839, 1975: prior code § 3-3-8(E))
13.04.060: PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION; CONNECTION; APPLICATION REQUIRED;
AFFIDAVIT OF PAYMENT REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 257/467
All persons desiring to connect to the city waterworks must make application to the city administrator
or the city clerk, and such application must be accompanied by an affidavit of payment from the
person constructing said waterworks that such land or person or owner has paid such pro rata charge
if such land description or name is not included in the original certificate of completion. If no affidavit of
payment is filed with the application, the city administrator shall not issue such permit until the
applicant has received a receipt of payment of the pro rata cost from either the original constructor, his
assigns or the city clerk. The city clerk shall inform the applicant of the last known address of the
original constructor and the applicant shall endeavor to obtain the required affidavit of payment from
the constructor. If, after ten (10) days, the applicant is unable to contact the constructor and cannot
obtain the required affidavit of payment from the constructor or his assign, the applicant can obtain a
permit to hook into the city waterworks; provided, that the applicant first pay to the city the pro rata
cost for the property being connected as set forth in the completion certificate.
The constructor shall keep the city clerk informed of his address and of any changes of address and it
shall be the sole responsibility of the constructor to keep the city clerk informed of an address where
waterworks applicants can contact him or any funds collected can be forwarded. In the event the city
is unable to forward funds or in the event the constructor does not claim any funds for a period of one
year, any funds collected from an applicant shall forfeit and shall become a part of the water fund.
(Ord. 1088 § 3, 1994: Ord. 839, 1975: prior code § 3-3-8(F))
13.04.070: PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION; PREVIOUSLY COMPLETED:
All persons having constructed waterworks prior to the effective date of the provisions codified in this
chapter may file with the city clerk a certificate of completion as provided in section 13.04.030 of this
chapter, and the provisions of this chapter for connection service, shall be effective on the waterworks
already constructed. (Ord. 839, 1975: prior code § 3-3-8(G))
13.04.080: CONSTRUCTION; APPLICABILITY TO CITY:
The provisions contained in this chapter shall apply in cases and instances where the city has
constructed or will construct waterworks. All references to construction of waterworks by private
persons shall include construction of waterworks by the city. (Ord. 839, 1975: prior code § 3-3-8(H))
13.04.090: WATER MAIN EXTENSION; AFFIDAVIT OF PAYMENT NOT REQUIRED:
An affidavit of payment of pro rata costs shall not be required for the extension of any water main.
(Ord. 839, 1975: prior code § 3-3-8(I))
13.04.100: USE; APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
Application for the use of water must be made at the office of the city clerk on printed forms furnished
for the purpose. Every such application must be made by the owner or tenant of the property to be
benefited, stating the lot and block on which it is to be used, accompanied by a fee which will be set
by resolution of the city council, and he must agree to conform to the rules and regulations established
from time to time as a condition for the use of water. (Ord. 1262 § 1, 2006: Ord. 952, 1984: prior code
§ 3-3-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 258/467
13.04.110: METERS; MEASUREMENT; PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE;
RELOCATION:
A. All water will be measured by means of a meter, the same to be placed on a service pipe at a point
between the mains and the house bibbs or other openings according to the directions of the
council; and all meters must be placed in a frostproof box or building, and the owner of the
premises shall be responsible for said meter and any damage that may occur to it as a result of
negligence or intentional acts on the part of the owner, his agents, invitees or permittees.
B. The owner shall not cause, permit, or allow access to the meter by city employees to be obstructed
by bushes, flowers, fences, other plant life or structures. In the event a meter is replaced,
maintained or repaired by the city, the city shall not be liable to the owner for damage to house
pipes, sidewalks, driveways, trees, bushes, flowers, fences, other plant life or structures resulting
from the excavation and work necessary in the maintenance, repair or replacement of the meter.
C. The city shall charge the actual time and material costs for the relocation of an existing meter
service at the owner's request. The estimated cost is payable in advance and will be adjusted upon
completion. (Ord. 1295 § 1, 2008: Ord. 896, 1979: prior code § 3-3-2)
13.04.120: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
(Rep. by Ord. 1354, 2011)
13.04.130: METER REQUIRED FOR EACH HOUSE OR PREMISES:
Water service pipes must be so arranged that the supply of water for each separate house or
premises shall be controlled by a separate stopcock placed within or near the line of the street curb,
the water supply to be measured by a meter, and the owner of the house or of the premises must pay
for all water used through such meter connection or connections for his use or the use of others to
whom it may be accessible. (Prior code § 3-3-4)
13.04.140: NECESSARY SHUTOFFS; CITY'S NONLIABILITY FOR EXPLOSIONS OR
COLLAPSES:
The water may at any time be shut off from the mains without notice for the purpose of making repairs,
extensions or other necessary purposes, and persons having boilers supplied by direct pressure from
the mains are cautioned against danger of explosion or collapses. The city shall not be responsible for
the safety of boilers on the premises of any water consumers. (Prior code § 3-3-5)
13.04.150: DEFECTIVE OR LEAKY FAUCETS; WITHDRAWAL OF WATER SUPPLY:
Water will not be furnished where there are defective or leaking faucets, closets or other fixtures and,
when such may be discovered, the supply will be withdrawn until the proper repairs are made by the
property owner. (Prior code § 3-3-6)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 259/467
13.04.160: TAPPING; SUPERVISION REQUIRED; VIOLATIONS DECLARED
MISDEMEANOR:
All tapping of mains must be done by the superintendent of waterworks or under his direct
supervision. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Prior code § 3-3-7)
13.04.170: STOPCOCKS AND WASTECOCKS REQUIRED:
Within the property line, a stopcock and wastecock, protected from frost, must in all cases be placed
so that service pipes on the property may be drained during freezing weather. Additional stopcocks
and wastecocks shall also be placed in sags and bends in the pipes when they cannot otherwise be
drained. The superintendent of waterworks shall refuse to turn on the water until the provisions of this
section are complied with. (Prior code § 3-3-9)
13.04.180: SERVICE PIPES; PROTECTION FROM FREEZING REQUIRED OF
OWNER:
The service pipes within any premises not owned by the city must be kept in repair and protected from
freezing at the expense of the owner thereof, who will be responsible for all damages resulting from all
leaks or breaks resulting from the negligence of the consumer. (Prior code § 3-3-10)
13.04.190: INSPECTION AUTHORITY OF DEPARTMENT OFFICERS AND
EMPLOYEES:
Officers and employees of the waterworks department shall have free access at proper hours of the
day to all parts of buildings on which water may be delivered from the city mains, for the purpose of
inspecting the conditions of the pipes and fixtures and the manner in which the water is used. (Prior
code § 3-3-11)
13.04.200: UNLAWFULLY TURNING WATER ON; FINE:
Should the owner or occupant of the premises turn on the water, or suffer or cause it to be turned on,
after it has been shut off at the curb cock, it will be turned off at the main and a fee set by resolution
must be paid before the same shall be turned on again. (Ord. 1371, 2012)
13.04.210: SPRINKLING; CITY'S RIGHT TO SUSPEND; PROCEDURE:
The city reserves the right, in case of shortage of water or for any other cause, to make an order
forbidding or suspending the use of water for sprinkling, and the water committee may, in its discretion
at any time, make such order by giving notice in one issue of a legal paper of the city; and, in the
event of there being no official newspaper, then by printed notices, delivered in person by someone
designated by the water committee, to the applicants for the use of said water. Any person violating
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 260/467
such order shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to fine, and the water shall be turned
off and shall not be turned on again until such charge is paid. (Prior code § 3-3-13)
13.04.220: SPRINKLING; DURING FIRES; VIOLATION DECLARED
MISDEMEANOR:
No person shall use any water for sprinkling during the progress of any fire in the city, and sprinkling
shall be immediately stopped when an alarm of fire is sounded in any part of the city and shall not be
begun until the fire has been extinguished. For any violation of the provisions of this section, said
person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 3-3-14)
13.04.230: UNLAWFUL ACTS GENERALLY; DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
It is unlawful for any person to open, close, turn on, interfere with, attach or connect with any fire
hydrant, stop valve or stopcock belonging to the city; or to disturb or damage any pipe, machinery,
tools or other property of the water system of the city; or to throw any substance into the reservoir or
water main belonging to the water system of the city; or to bathe in any reservoir; or to deface or
disturb or injure any buildings, lawns, grasses, plots, flowers, vines, bushes or trees belonging to or
connected with the water system; or, in any way, manner or means pollute the water or waters of the
water system. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Prior code § 3-3-15)
13.04.240: DISCRETION OF SUPERINTENDENT OR CLERK; SUBJECT TO
CONTROL OF WATERWORKS COMMITTEE:
In all cases wherein by this chapter any discretion is vested in the superintendent of the waterworks or
the city clerk, such discretion shall be subject to the control of the waterworks committee of the city.
(Prior code § 3-3-16)
13.04.250: STATEMENT OF WATER CHARGES; TURN ON CHARGE:
A. The city clerk shall furnish to each account holder or owner of property for which water service is
provided, or to his agent, on a monthly basis, a statement of the amount due for water for the
preceding month or up to the time that the meter has been read; and, if said account holder or
property owner neglects to pay his water charges within ten (10) days of the date of mailing of the
statement, his account shall be delinquent, and a charge as set by resolution shall be added to the
account ten (10) days after the account becomes due. The delinquent account holder or property
owner shall be notified by regular mail of this delinquency and, if the bill is not paid in full within five
(5) days after service of this notification, the right to water shall cease and terminate. The city may
require a utility fund deposit as set by resolution, as a condition of receiving water service again, if
the deposit has not previously been made, or if the same has been refunded.
B. In addition, the expense of turning the water on again, shall be set by resolution, or as may be
determined by the council, must also be paid.
Until such time that the payments are made, the person who applied for the use of the water at the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 261/467
premises to which water service was terminated because of nonpayment will not be entitled to any
water service at any other place or premises within the city.
C. All monthly meter charges for inactive accounts must be paid by the owner of the property upon
which the same is used and not by the tenants thereof.
D. At such time as any delinquency shall become inactive for a period of time exceeding ninety (90)
days, the city clerk, or a designee, is hereby authorized to collect delinquent payments by any legal
method as approved by the city attorney. (Ord. 1409, 2016)
13.04.251: PRETERMINATION HEARING; HEARINGS IN CASE OF DENIAL OF
WATER SERVICE:
(Rep. by Ord. 1332, 2011)
13.04.252: DELINQUENT CHARGES A LIEN ON PROPERTY:
(Rep. by Ord. 1378, 2013)
13.04.260: WATER CHARGES; DESIGNATED:
A. Water charges will be determined on a monthly usage basis calculated on the volumetric amount of
water passing through the city standard water meter, actual meter size, or number of living units
and/or spaces. The city's minimum standard is thereby set as a three-fourths inch by three-fourths
inch (3/4" x 3/4") water meter. The following rates are hereby established:
1. Single Occupant - Standard Meter:
The base water rate for a single city standard water meter is a per month fee set by resolution.
The volumetric rate for any water consumed is charged at a fee set by resolution per one
hundred (100) gallons of water used, rounded up to the next one hundred (100) gallons.
The monthly water rate is the addition of the base water rate and volumetric rate of a fee set by
resolution per one hundred (100) gallons of water used, rounded up to the next one hundred
(100) gallons.
2. Single Occupant - Nonstandard Meter:
The nonstandard base water rate is based on the size of the existing or requested new water
meter. This rate is determined by comparing the city's standard water meter orifice area to the
water user's requested water meter orifice area. This comparison would yield an adjustment
factor which is then multiplied to the previously defined base water rate. The nonstandard
monthly water rate is the addition of the nonstandard base water rate and volumetric rate of a
fee set by resolution per one hundred (100) gallons of water used, rounded up to the next one
hundred (100) gallons.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 262/467
TABLE A2.1 - ADJUSTMENT FACTORS
Water Meter Size Orifice Area Adjustment Factor
3/4 inch 0.44 sq. in. 1.0
1 inch 0.79 sq. in. 1.8
2 inch 3.14 sq. in. 7
4 inch 12.57 sq. in. 28
6 inch 28.26 sq. in. 64
3. Multiple Unit User: Where more than one dwelling, space, or like unit is using the same meter,
the following rates and basis for changes will apply:
a. The multi-unit base water rate will be calculated by multiplying the base water rate by the
number of units.
b. The multi-unit monthly water rate is the addition of the multiuser base water rate and
volumetric rate of a fee set by resolution per one hundred (100) gallons of water used,
rounded up to the next one hundred (100) gallons.
4. Water Delivery Charges: Water delivery charges to users outside the city limits will be computed
as set forth in subsections A1 through A3 of this section and multiplied by a factor of 2. (Ord.
1371, 2012: Res. 2011-06, 2011)
13.04.270: UTILITY ACCOUNT DEPOSIT; REQUIRED; PLACEMENT; REFUND:
A. From each owner, tenant or lessee of property, the clerk shall, before the city water, sewer, refuse
collection and other such monthly services are furnished, collect and receive a utility account
deposit of a fee set by resolution, which deposit shall be collected to secure the payment of all
charges thereafter billed to the utility account for the premises occupied by that individual. For
multi-unit dwellings and commercial units, the following rates apply:
Multi-living unit dwellings: A fee set by resolution per living unit.
Trailer courts: A fee set by resolution per space.
Restaurants: A fee set by resolution per unit.
Nonresidential units: A fee set by resolution.
B. All such deposits shall be placed in a fund known as the "utility account deposit fund". Upon
termination of services for any cause, the amount of the balance of the utility account for such
premises shall be transferred to the utility fund of the city and credited to the account, and the
balance of the account, if any, shall be refunded to the person making the deposit. If such refund
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 263/467
cannot be made within six (6) months because of the unknown whereabouts of the person making
the deposit, the balance of the deposit shall be placed in the water and sewer fund.
C. The utility fund deposit shall be refunded to the person making the deposit in the event all charges
billed for a continuous period of one year to said person for water, sewer, refuse collection and
other such monthly services have been paid within ten (10) days that said charges become due
and payable during said one year period. (Ord. 1371, 2012: Ord. 1295 § 3, 2008: Ord. 1039 § 1,
1992: Ord. 1008 § 1, 1990: Ord. 983 § 1, 1988: Ord. 862, 1977: prior code § 3-3-19)
13.04.280: CONNECTION FEE; TAP PIPE CHARGES:
A. A fee which will be set by resolution of the city council, shall be charged and collected by the city
clerk for each and every permit issued for connection to the city water mains and lines. In an
approved platted subdivision, if the developer has installed the water service line from the water
mains to the building lot, placed the meter box and lid at the proper height and location, installed a
backflow preventer yoke and fittings to facilitate meter installation, and provided the city with the
water meter for installation, there shall be no charge for installing the water meter. For all other
building lots, in addition to this permit fee, there shall be a charge which will be set by resolution of
the city council, for labor and service materials provided in putting in each tap pipe to connect the
same with the curb box and up to a one inch (1") meter, or the current cost of materials and service
and the actual cost of repairing the street after the installation of the tap pipe.
B. Each living unit shall be charged the permit fee. Multiple living units or multiple dwelling units which
share a common meter shall be charged an installation fee which shall be based upon the size of
the meter and the costs associated with its installation.
C. The water permit and tap fees to users outside the city limits shall be two (2) times the fees as
charged. (Ord. 1262 § 2, 2006: Ord. 1187 § 1, 2000: Ord. 1130 § 2, 1996: Ord. 1078 § 1, 1994:
Ord. 1061 § 1, 1993: Ord. 862, 1977: prior code § 3-3-20)
13.04.290: NONCOMPLIANCE; DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
Any person failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter relating to the waterworks or
water system of the city, and for violation by such person for which no provision has been made
elsewhere in this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 3-3-21)
13.04.300: INTERFERING, MOLESTING OR INJURING; DECLARED
MISDEMEANOR:
Any person who interferes with, molests or injures the waterworks system of the city, or any part
thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 3-3-22)
13.04.310: CONTAMINATING SOURCES; DISTANCE RESTRICTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 264/467
It is unlawful for any person to permit or allow the following contamination sources to exist within the
following minimum distances from any city water supply or city water well:
A. Building sewer: Fifty feet (50');
B. Septic tank: Fifty feet (50');
C. Disposal field: One hundred feet (100');
D. Seepage pit: One hundred feet (100');
E. Dry well: Fifty feet (50');
F. Cesspool: One hundred feet (100');
G. Livestock: Fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 865, 1977: prior code § 3-3-23)
13.04.320: WATER DELIVERY OUTSIDE CITY PROHIBITED:
No water obtained from wells owned or operated by the city shall be delivered outside the corporate
city limits. (Ord. 1206 § 1, 2001)
13.04.330: WATER CONSERVATION; USAGE CLASSIFICATIONS:
In the event that the individual who is charged with the responsibility of overseeing the city water
system, or the council commissioner in charge of the same, or the mayor determines that an
emergency exists which requires the reduction in the use of water for conservation purposes, any one
of those individuals shall have the authority to order certain classification of water users to reduce
consumption or stop consumption immediately.
Water usage shall be classified as follows:
Class A: Street cleaning and sweeping, filling of spray tanks for agricultural or residential uses.
Class B: Car washing in both commercial facilities and individual residence; water usage in swimming
pools.
Class C: Lawn irrigators.
Class D: Industrial and commercial users.
Class E: Restaurants and bars, social gatherings, fraternal organizations, domestic users outside the
city limits.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 265/467
Class F: All businesses including offices, post office, city hall.
Class G: Domestic use, fire supply, sewer treatment facility, all other users.
Uses shall be curtailed in each classification set forth above starting with classification A through G.
Before curtailing use in lower classification, all water users in the immediately preceding classification
shall be shut off. (Ord. 983 § 6, 1988)
Chapter 13.05
CROSS CONNECTIONS TO WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS
13.05.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health of water consumers by the control of actual
and/or potential cross connections. (Ord. 915, 1980)
13.05.020: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms shall mean:
BACKFLOW: The flow of nonpotable water, liquids, gases, or other foreign substances into the pipes
of a potable water system from any source or sources.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device to counteract back pressure or prevent back
siphonage.
CITY: The city of Payette, Idaho, or its authorized agent.
CONSUMER: Any person served by a public water system.
CONTAMINANT: Any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance or matter in water which
may be deleterious to health and/or quality of water.
CONTAMINATION: The entry into or presence in a public water supply of any substance which may
be deleterious to health and/or quality of the water.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any actual or potential connection or structural arrangement between a
public or a consumer's potable water system and any other source or system through which it is
possible to introduce into any part of the potable system used water, industrial fluid gas or substance
other than the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements,
jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices and other temporary or
permanent devices through which or because of which backflow can or may occur are cross
connections.
DEPARTMENT: The Idaho state department of health and welfare or an authorized representative of
the department of health and welfare.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 266/467
DIRECTOR: The director of the department of health and welfare or his designee.
HEALTH OFFICER: The Idaho department of health and welfare's district health officer, or other
authorized agent of the department.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: Any system or water supply including all mains, pipes, and structures
through which water is obtained and distributed, including wells and well structures, intakes and curbs,
pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or
severally, actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water to the general public for
human consumption or general domestic use.
WATER AND SEWER SUPERINTENDENT: A duly appointed person as designated by the city or his
designated agent. (Ord. 915, 1980)
13.05.030: CROSS CONNECTIONS:
No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or continued in use by the city unless
the water supply is protected by backflow prevention devices as may be required by this chapter and
section 1-8306 of the Idaho regulations for public drinking water. The installation or maintenance of a
cross connection which will endanger the water quality of the potable water supply of the city shall be
unlawful and is prohibited. Any such cross connection now existing or hereafter installed is declared to
be a public nuisance and the same shall be abated. The control or elimination of cross connections
shall be in accordance with this chapter and section 1-8306 of the Idaho regulations for public drinking
water, together with the latest edition of appropriate manuals of standard practice pertaining to cross
connection control approved by the department. The city shall have the authority to establish
requirements more stringent than state regulations if they deem that the conditions so dictate. The city
shall adopt rules and regulations as necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 915,
1980)
13.05.040: USE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
A. Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on any premises at the point on the premises where
the consumer connects to the public water supply system or within any premises where, in the
judgment of the city, the nature and extent of the activities, or the materials stored on the premises,
would present an immediate and dangerous hazard to health and/or be deleterious to the quality of
the water should a cross connection occur; even though such cross connection does not exist at
the time the backflow prevention devices shall be installed under the circumstances including, but
not limited to, the following:
1. Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless the quality of the auxiliary supply is in
compliance with state of Idaho title 1, chapter 8, Idaho regulations for public drinking water, and
is acceptable to the city;
2. Premises having internal cross connections that are not correctable, or intricate plumbing
arrangements which make it impracticable to ascertain whether or not cross connections exist;
3. Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross connections cannot be made
with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure that cross connections do not
exist;
4. Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 267/467
5. Premises, on which any contaminant is handled under pressure so as to permit entry in the
public water supply, or where a cross connection could reasonably be expected to occur. This
includes the handling of process waters and cooling waters;
6. Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled in such a way that if back
siphonage should occur, a serious health hazard might result;
7. The following types of facilities will fall into one of the above categories where a backflow
prevention device is required to protect the public water supply. A backflow prevention device
shall be installed at these facilities unless the city and department determine that no hazard
exists:
a. Sewage treatment plants;
b. Chemical or other industrial plants;
c. Agricultural chemical storage, formulations and distribution facilities;
d. Petroleum storage facilities;
e. Mortuaries;
f. Hospitals;
g. Piers and docks;
h. Laboratories;
i. Food processing plants;
j. Tank truck fill stations;
k. Car washes;
l. Other facilities specified by the director or the city.
B. The type of protective device required shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists.
1. In cases where testing and repair of mechanical devices is not possible, an air gap separation
shall be required.
2. An air gap separation or reduced pressure principal backflow prevention device shall be
required where the water system may be contaminated with sewage or other hazardous or toxic
substances which may have an effect on the health of the consumer.
3. A double check valve assembly, an air gap separation, or a reduced pressure principal backflow
prevention device shall be installed where the water system may be contaminated with a
substance which may be aesthetically objectionable but not hazardous to the health of the
consumer.
C. Backflow prevention devices required by this chapter shall be installed at the meter, at the property
line of the premises when meters are not used, or at a location designated by the city. The device
shall be located so as to be readily accessible for maintenance and testing, and furthermore,
where no part of the device will be submerged.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 268/467
D. Backflow prevention devices required by this chapter shall be installed under the supervision of,
and with the approval of, the water and sewer superintendent or his designee.
E. Any protective device required by this chapter shall be a model approved by the director. A double
check valve assembly or a reduced pressure principal backflow prevention device will be approved
if it has successfully passed performance tests of the University of Southern California engineering
center or other testing laboratories satisfactory to the city and the director. These devices shall be
furnished and installed by and at the expense of the customer.
F. Backflow prevention devices installed pursuant to this chapter shall be inspected and tested
periodically. Inspection and testing intervals shall be in conformance with time periods specified in
the city cross connection and backflow prevention program. Inspections, tests and maintenance of
backflow prevention devices shall be at the customer's expense. Whenever the devices are found
to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the customer's expense. Inspections, tests,
repairs and records thereof shall be accomplished under the city's supervision.
G. Failure of a customer to cooperate in the installation, maintenance, testing or inspection of
backflow prevention devices required by this chapter, and section 1-8306 of the Idaho regulations
for public drinking water, shall be grounds for the termination of water service to the premises, or,
in the alternative, the installation of an air gap separation or other device at the customer's
expense. (Ord. 915, 1980)
13.05.050: CROSS CONNECTION INSPECTION:
A. No water shall be delivered to any new facility cited in subsection 13.05.040A of this chapter within
areas served by city water until the same have been inspected by the city for possible cross
connections and been approved as being free of same.
B. Any construction for industrial or other purposes which are cited in subsection 13.05.040A7 of this
chapter, where it is reasonable to anticipate cross connections, or as determined by the director,
shall be protected by the installation of one or more backflow prevention devices at the point of
service from the public water supply or any other, location designated by the city.
C. Inspections shall be made periodically of all facilities cited in subsection 13.05.040A of this chapter
receiving water through the city's system, for the purpose of ascertaining whether cross
connections exist. Such inspections shall be made by the city. (Ord. 915, 1980)
13.05.060: INSTALLATION PERMITS:
If a cross connection control device(s) is found to be necessary, the owner of the property served must
apply to the city for a specific installation permit. (Ord. 915, 1980)
13.05.070: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 269/467
In the event an improper cross connection is not corrected within the time limit set by the city, or, in the
event the city is refused access to any property for the purpose of determining whether or not cross
connections exist, delivery of water to the property shall cease until the deficiency is corrected to the
city's satisfaction. In addition, the city may effect the necessary repairs or modifications at the expense
of the property owner and refuse delivery of water to the property until the cost thereof has been paid.
(Ord. 915, 1980)
13.05.080: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with, or resists the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations as adopted by the city to carry out
the provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall for each offense be punished by a fine in any sum not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00)
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord.
915, 1980)
Chapter 13.08
SEWERS
13.08.010: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be
as follows:
BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees
centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the
discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewers, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building walls.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of
disposal.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
EPA: The United States environmental protection agency.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL USER: Any user of the city's treatment works who is identified in the definition of
"industrial wastes" in this section.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: A. The liquid wastes from any nongovernmental user of publicly owned
treatment works identified in the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual", 1972, office of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 270/467
management and budget, as amended and supplemented under the following divisions:
1. Division A - agriculture, forestry and fishing;
2. Division B - mining;
3. Division D - manufacturing;
4. Division E - transportation, communications, electric, gas and sanitary services;
5. Division I - Services.
B. A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined that it will introduce primarily
segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER MONITORING STATION: The monitoring station required by the
USEPA and the city to determine the contribution of the industry to the public sewer system.
Monitoring equipment shall include composite refrigerated sampler, recording pH meter and recording
flow meter. The city shall provide plans and specifications for the construction of the station, cost of
the construction of the station shall be at the industry's expense. Maintenance and upkeep of the
station shall be at the industry's expense.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
ground water.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer over which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is
controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters
are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions
and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm water as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS: All facilities, including, but not limited to, sewer mains, lift stations, force mains,
any treatment facility or any temporary facility that is constructed for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 271/467
SEWER INSPECTOR: A superintendent.
SHALL/MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes
more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
STORM DRAIN (Sometimes Termed "Storm Sewer"): A sewer which carries storm and surface waters
and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
SUPERINTENDENT: The superintendent of sewage works and/or water pollution control of the city or
his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water,
sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
TC: A measurement of the total carbon content of the wastewater.
TOC: A measurement of the total organic carbon content of the wastewater.
TEMPORARY SEWAGE FACILITY: Any pump stations and associated force mains which are
anticipated to be replaced in the future by gravity flow sewage works. The city council shall be the
determinant of what sewage works are to be classified temporary.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 1088 §§ 4, 5, 1994: Ord. 908, 1980: Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.020: UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS:
It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or
animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. (Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.021: UNLAWFUL DISCHARGES:
It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.022: UNLAWFUL CONSTRUCTION:
Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.023: REQUIRED CONNECTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 272/467
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation
or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which
there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is
required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly
with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within ninety (90) days
after date of official notice to do so; provided, that said public sewer is within two hundred fifty feet
(250') of the owner's property line. The owner shall be obligated to provide reasonable maintenance of
said facilities. If said owner fails, neglects or refuses within said time period to comply with the
connections required by this section at such distances, under such regulations and in accordance with
such specifications as may be prescribed by the city, the whole costs of such connections shall be
assessed and collected against said property in the same manner as other city taxes. (Ord. 895,
1978)
13.08.024: SEWER CONNECTIONS OUTSIDE CITY PROHIBITED:
No subdivision, building, structure, dwelling unit, septic tank, septic system or sewer system which is
located outside the corporate city limits shall be connected to the city sewer system. (Ord. 1206 § 2,
2001)
13.08.030: WRITTEN PERMIT REQUIRED:
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
(Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.031: CLASSES OF PERMITS:
A. There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: one for residential and commercial service
and one for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his
agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the city. A residential or commercial building sewer permit and an industrial building
sewer permit fee will be set by resolution of the city council, and shall be paid to the city at the time
the application is filed. Each living unit shall be charged the permit fee.
B. The sewer permit fee to users outside the city limits shall be two (2) times the fee as charged.
C. Users may be exempt from paying the permit fee if the following conditions apply: A fee exemption
may apply if the user is replacing an existing sewer tap and prior tap is abandoned and inspected
by a member of the sewer department. (Ord. 1327, 2010)
13.08.032: COSTS OF INSTALLATION:
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 273/467
by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. (Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.033: SEPARATE SEWER LINES FOR EACH BUILDING OR BUILDING UNIT:
A separate and independent sewer line shall be provided for every building in both residential and
commercially zoned areas, and to each individual unit in any duplex, triplex or quadplex. Industrial
wastes shall enter the public sewer at as many points as are required by the industrial facility. Each
point of entry shall have an industrial monitor station at that point. Service lines shall be at least four
inches (4") in diameter. (Ord. 1199 § 1, 2000: Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.034: OLD SEWERS:
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on
examination and test by the city, to meet all requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.035: CONSTRUCTION TO COMPLY WITH RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be
used in excavating, placing of pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code and other applicable rules, regulations and
requirements of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials
and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF "Manual Of Practice
No. 9" shall apply. (Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.036: ELEVATION OF SEWER LINE:
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer. (Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.037: PROHIBITION AGAINST CONNECTING SEWER TO DRAINS:
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or
other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. (Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.038: CONNECTIONS TO COMPLY WITH CITY REGULATIONS:
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing code and other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures
set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF "Manual Of Practice No. 9". All such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 274/467
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the city before installation. (Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.039: NOTIFICATION OF CONNECTION:
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is
ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the superintendent or his representative. (Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.040: EXCAVATIONS TO BE GUARDED:
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights
so as to protect the public from hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. Excavations
shall be made in such a manner as to impede travel as little as possible and for such time periods as
the superintendent may direct. (Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.050: RESTRICTIONS AGAINST DISCHARGING CERTAIN WATER:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to
any sanitary sewer. (Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.051: DISCHARGE OF STORMWATER:
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the city. Industrial
cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the city to a storm
sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. (Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.052: DISCHARGES PROHIBITED:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters and
wastes to any public sewers:
A. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas;
B. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including, but
not limited to, cyanides in excess of two milligrams per liter (2 mg/l) or cyanide in the wastes as
discharged to the public sewer;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 275/467
C. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of
causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works;
D. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow
in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not
limited to: ashes, cinders, sand, suds, straw, shavings, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, entrails and paper
dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. (Ord. 993 § 1,
1989: Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.053: PROHIBITION OF DISCHARGING HARMFUL SUBSTANCES:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials,
waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the city that such wastes can harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or
can otherwise endanger life, limb or public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming this opinion
as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city will give consideration to such factors as to quantities
of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the
sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances
prohibited are:
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F)
(65°C);
B. Any water or waste containing fats, gas, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one
hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become
viscous at temperatures between thirty two (32) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F)
(0 and 65°C);
C. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage
grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the city;
D. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions,
whether neutralized or not;
E. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic
substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the city for such materials;
F. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such
concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the city as necessary, after treatment
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 276/467
of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of
jurisdiction of such discharge to the receiving waters;
G. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the city in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
H. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.0;
I. Materials which exert or cause:
1. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime
slurries and lime residues or of dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate;
2. Excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions;
3. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to
constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works;
4. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slug" as defined herein;
J. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the
sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the
sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements or other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters. (Ord. 993 § 3, 1989: Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.054: DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTES:
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers,
which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in sections
13.08.050, 13.08.051, 13.08.052, 13.08.053 of this chapter and which in the judgment of the city
may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters,
or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:
1. Reject the wastes;
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
4. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by
existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of section 13.08.059 of this chapter.
B. If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the
plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. (Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.055: GREASE INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 277/467
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary
for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by
the city and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (Ord.
895, 1978)
13.08.056: MAINTENANCE OF PRELIMINARY TREATMENT FACILITIES:
Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
(Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.057: MONITORING STATIONS:
When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall install an industrial wastewater monitoring station together with such necessary meters
and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. Such stations, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The station shall be installed by the owner
at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (Ord. 895,
1978)
13.08.058: ANALYSES OF WATERS:
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference
is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods
For The Examination Of Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the station provided. Sampling shall be carried out by an
approved composite sampling device. The composite sample shall be used to determine BOD and
suspended solids values. The pH values shall be taken from a continuous recording pH meter. Total
organic carbon values may be substituted for BOD values if the city so desires. A continuous
recording flowmeter shall be provided to monitor the flow. (Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.059: AGREEMENTS TO ACCEPT INDUSTRIAL WASTES:
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the city and industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength
or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial
concern. (Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.060: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF CITY EMPLOYEES:
The superintendent, water department supervisor, city engineer, or other duly authorized employees of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 278/467
the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the
purposes of inspection, observations, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The superintendent or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire
into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries
beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or
waterways or facilities for waste treatment, but shall be informed as to the nature of any substances
entering the city system. (Ord. 993 § 2, 1989: Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.061: WORK ON PRIVATE PROPERTIES:
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 13.08.060 of this
chapter, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for
injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage
to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or
property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the causing and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe
conditions as required in section 13.08.062 of this chapter. (Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.062: ENTERING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All
entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of
the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.070: SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES; DESIGNATED:
Owners or occupants of all premises (residential and commercial) now served by the sanitary sewer of
the city and of all premises to be furnished sewer service by the sewage collection system, except
industrial users, shall pay the rates specified as follows:
A. The monthly charge for city sewer service shall be determined by the amounts of city water
delivered to and discharged at the premises, and shall be collected at the following rates for each
meter service; however, in the event there is more than one "dwelling unit", as defined in section
17.08.010 of this code, connected to a water meter, then the charges shall be made and collected
for each dwelling unit by determining the average discharge per dwelling unit.
1. The minimum monthly charge shall be set by resolution plus a fee set by resolution per one
hundred (100) gallons discharged or fraction thereof. From the monthly minimum charge of each
user, the city treasurer shall place an amount set by resolution of that monthly charge into a fund
dedicated exclusively to the reconstruction or replacement of the city sewer system and plant.
This money shall not be used for anything other than the reconstruction and replacement of the
city sewer system and plant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 279/467
B. The monthly rates and charges for premises to which city water is not delivered or metered, shall
be set by resolution.
C. No charge shall be made for the month or months in which the city water service for such premises
had been discontinued, except that where city water is not furnished to any premises, no charge
will be made during the time the premises are vacant and no sewage is collected therefrom;
provided, that such period of time is not less than thirty (30) days and that notice of such vacancy
shall be given to the city clerk prior to such vacancy.
D. A fee as set by resolution per each one hundred (100) gallons, with a fee set by resolution per each
load, for emptying septic tank or cesspool pumping at the sewage treatment plant shall be
charged.
E. The rates and charges established in this section shall be subject to modification upon application
to the council by the owner or occupant in all cases where fees so established are unjust or
oppressive.
F. Sewer service charges to users outside the city limits will be computed as set forth in subsections A
and B of this section except that the cost shall be two (2) times the in city rates. (Ord. 1371, 2012:
Res. 2011-06, 2011: Res. 2009-05, 2009: Ord. 1272 § 1, 2006: Ord. 1262 § 4, 2006: Ord. 1112 § 2,
1995: Ord. 1082 § 2, 1994: Ord. 1058 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1008 § 1, 1990: Ord. 956, 1985: Ord. 895,
1978: Ord. 856, 1976: prior code § 4-3-13)
13.08.080: INDUSTRIAL CHARGES FOR LOADING OF SEWER SYSTEM:
Users shall be monitored and the fees shall be based on the loading the user discharges into the city's
sewer works. All charges are based on gallons of flow received daily, pounds of biochemical oxygen
demand received daily, pounds of total suspended solids received daily, and daily settleable solids
concentrations higher than seven milligrams per liter (7 mg/l). The charges shall become effective July
1, 1996. The charges shall be set by resolution.
A. Daily Peak Discharge Loading Limits:
BOD Maximum of 3,000 pounds
TSS Maximum of 3,000 pounds
Flow Maximum of 500,000 gallons
Settleable solids 7 mg/l
pH Not under 6 or over 9
B. Penalties: If any daily loading limit is exceeded, the user is subject to a one thousand dollar
($1,000.00) penalty for each violation. Every violation that occurs, being a separate and distinct
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 280/467
violation. Every day being an opportunity for more occurrences. (Ord. 1371, 2012: Ord. 1102 § 1,
1995: Ord. 1058 § 3, 1993: Ord. 895, 1978)
13.08.081: DETERMINING MAXIMUM PERCENTAGE OF PLANT CAPACITY:
(Rep. by Ord. 1058, 1993)
13.08.082: DETERMINING MAXIMUM DAY:
(Rep. by Ord. 1058, 1993)
13.08.083: DETERMINING COST OF MONTHLY SEWER SERVICE:
(Rep. by Ord. 1058, 1993)
13.08.084: WRITTEN CONTRACT MAY BE REQUIRED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1058, 1993)
13.08.090: SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES; PAYMENT PROCEDURE:
A. Fees shall be carried on the water bills, wherever applicable, and the water department is
authorized and directed to discontinue services to any premises, where the entire water and sewer
service bill is not paid, in the same manner that service is discontinued for nonpayment of water
bills.
B. All fees shall be paid by the person responsible for the same at the office of the city clerk within ten
(10) days after receipt of a statement and, if not paid, the same shall become delinquent, and a
charge as set by resolution shall be added to the account ten (10) days after the account becomes
due. For failure to pay such fees, the city may levy a special assessment against the premises in
such amount and in such manner as other special assessments are levied, and may foreclose the
same in the manner provided for in the foreclosure and collection of other special assessments.
C. In addition to the remedies provided herein, the city clerk shall add the charge per unit, which
amount shall be added to the account for each and every month the account is or remains
delinquent. (Ord. 1371, 2012: Ord. 1295 § 4, 2008: Ord. 1262 § 5, 2006: Ord. 1130 § 4, 1996: Ord.
993 § 4, 1989: Ord. 895, 1978: prior code § 4-3-14)
13.08.100: SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES; DISPOSITION OF MONIES:
All charges provided for in sections 13.08.070 and 13.08.080, of this chapter shall be set by a
resolution of the city council, and when collected, shall be placed in the utility fund of the city and paid
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 281/467
into the sewer fund of the city. All charges and expenses for operation and maintenance of sewage
system and the sewage treatment and disposal plant, and all payments required to be made, shall be
made from the sewer fund of the city. The council may, from time to time, establish within the sewer
fund a reserve for the operation, maintenance, replacement and depreciation of such works, and a
reserve for improvements to such works, and may authorize expenditures from such fund to such
purposes. (Ord. 1262 § 6, 2006: Ord. 895, 1978: prior code § 4-3-15)
13.08.110: SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES; EFFECTIVE UNTIL BOND DEBT
DISCHARGE:
(Rep. by Ord. 1130 § 5, 1996)
13.08.120: PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION; PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION
REQUIREMENTS:
Any person desiring to construct a sewer in, on or below any street or alley, or desiring to construct
any extension of the sanitary sewer system, in the city, shall first obtain from the city clerk a permit for
such construction upon application being filed with the city clerk. The application shall state the name
of the person applying, the approximate location of the sewer and the legal description of the land or
lots to be served by the sewer, and the owners of the said lots so served, together with the proposed
size and type of pipe to be laid and the approximate cost. (Ord. 895, 1978: Ord. 838, 1975: prior code
§ 4-3-3(B))
13.08.130: PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION; CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION:
Upon completion, the person constructing the sewer and the city engineer must file a certificate of
completion with the city clerk setting forth the location of the sewer, the lots served, the owner of said
lots, and the cost per lot or the cost per front foot served by the sewer. (Ord. 895, 1978: Ord. 838,
1975: prior code § 4-3-3(C))
13.08.140: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION:
A. Upon completion of any sewer line, the developer of the sewer line shall deliver to the city clerk, the
city engineer or their designee a certificate of completion. The certificate shall set forth a legal
description of the sewer line, addresses of abutting lots, the cost of the sewer line and the cost per
lot or the cost per frontage foot and the names of the owners of adjoining lots who have
participated in the cost of the construction. In the event the city clerk, the city engineer or their
designee has not received the certificate of completion within ninety (90) days after completion, the
developer shall forfeit the ability to recover development costs allowable under this title.
B. In the event a sewer line has already been completed, a developer shall have ninety (90) days from
the date of this section to submit a certificate of completion or shall forfeit the right to recover costs
allowable under this title. (Ord. 1169, 1999: Ord. 895, 1978: Ord. 838, 1975: prior code § 4-3-3(D))
13.08.141: DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 282/467
No drain or sewer pipe shall have an internal diameter of less than four inches (4") and all sewers and
drains shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the property they are intended to drain. The owners
of each and every parcel of real property within the city shall install backflow preventers or check
valves on the drains and sewers located on said owner's property. Failure on the part of any owner to
properly maintain the backflow preventer or check valve, or to cause such an installation to be made,
will relieve the city from all responsibility for any and all damages suffered by said owner as a result of
a backflow of sewerage onto said owner's real property and appurtenant structures. (Ord. 895, 1978:
Ord. 848, 1976: prior code § 4-3-8)
13.08.150: PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION; NO SERVICE FOR OWNERS NOT
PARTICIPATING IN COST:
No person owning property which can be served by the sewer who has not participated in the
construction costs or does not have an affidavit of payment, as provided in section 13.08.160 of this
chapter, shall be served by the sewer or connect any building sewer or house sewer thereto, unless a
period of fifteen (15) years has elapsed from the date of the completion of the sewer or unless said
person, after the completion of the sewer, became a successor in interest of the owner of the property
who caused said sewer to be constructed. In the event the property is served by a "temporary sewage
facility", an affidavit of payment is not required if fifteen (15) years has elapsed from the date of
completion of the facility or the facility is no longer being used. (Ord. 1088 § 6, 1994: Ord. 895, 1978:
Ord. 838, 1975: prior code § 4-3-3(E))
13.08.160: PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION; CONNECTION; APPLICATION REQUIRED;
AFFIDAVIT OF PAYMENT REQUIRED:
All persons desiring to connect to the city sewage works must make application to the city
administrator or the city clerk, and such application must be accompanied by an affidavit of payment
from the person constructing the sewer that such land or person or owner has paid such pro rata
charge, if such land description or name is not included in the original certificate of completion. If no
affidavit of payment is filed with the application, the city administrator shall not issue such permit until
the applicant has received a receipt of payment of the pro rata cost from either the original constructor,
his assigns or the city clerk. The city clerk shall inform the applicant of the last known address of the
original constructor and the applicant shall endeavor to obtain the required affidavit of payment from
the constructor. In the event, after ten (10) days of receipt of the last known address of the original
constructor, the applicant is unable to contact the constructor and cannot obtain the required affidavit
of payment from the original constructor or his assign, the applicant can obtain a permit to hook into
the city sewage works provided that the applicant first pay to the city the pro rata cost for the property
being connected as set forth in the completion certificate.
The constructor shall keep the city clerk informed of his address and of any changes of address and it
shall be the sole responsibility of the constructor to keep the city clerk informed of an address where
applicants can contact him, or any funds collected can be forwarded. In the event the city is unable to
forward funds or in the event the constructor does not claim any funds for a period of one year, any
funds collected from an applicant shall forfeit and shall become a part of the sewer fund. (Ord. 1088
§ 7, 1994: Ord. 895 1978: Ord. 838, 1975: prior code § 4-3-3(F))
13.08.170: PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION; PREVIOUSLY COMPLETED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 283/467
All persons having constructed sewers prior to the effective date of the provisions codified in this
chapter may file with the city clerk a certificate of completion as provided in section 13.08.130 of this
chapter, and the provisions of this chapter for connection service shall be effective on those sewers
already constructed. (Ord. 895, 1978: Ord. 838, 1975: prior code § 4-3-3(G))
13.08.180: EXTENSION; AFFIDAVIT OF PAYMENT NOT REQUIRED:
An affidavit of payment of pro rata costs shall not be required for the extension of any sewer. (Ord.
895, 1978: Ord. 838, 1975: prior code § 4-3-3(H))
13.08.190: PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION; INTERCEPTORS, MAINS OR LATERALS;
APPLICABILITY TO CITY:
The provisions contained in this chapter shall apply in cases and instances where the city has
constructed or will construct sewage works. All references to construction of sewage works by private
persons shall include construction of sewer interceptors, mains or laterals by the city. (Ord. 1088 § 8,
1994: Ord. 895, 1978: Ord. 838, 1975: prior code § 4-3-3(I))
13.08.210: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or the rules and regulations as adopted by the
city to carry out the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be punished in
accordance of the general misdemeanor laws of the state. (Ord. 992 § 6, 1989)
Chapter 13.09
DUMPING WASTES; REPORTS REQUIRED
13.09.010: NOTIFICATION; PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person, corporation or other entity shall dump, discharge, place, spill or discharge any
contaminant, hazardous waste, toxic waste, untreated sewage, raw sewage, pesticides, putricides,
herbicides, fungicides, insecticides, benzenes, naphtha, heavy metals, acids or bases, cyanide, lead,
mercury, grease, radioactive waste or petroleum products into the air, upon the ground, under the
ground, into any ditch, gully or stream or into the sanitary sewer system or into the storm drainage
system without first notifying and obtaining a permit from the city building official, the city clerk or a
properly designated city official. (Ord. 1046 § 1, 1992)
13.09.020: TIME LIMIT FOR NOTICE:
In the event any person, corporation or other entity shall place, spill or discharge any contaminant,
hazardous waste, toxic waste, untreated sewage, raw sewage, pesticides, putricides, herbicides,
fungicides, insecticides, benzenes, naphtha, acids, bases, cyanide, lead, mercury, grease, radioactive
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 284/467
waste or petroleum products into the air, upon the ground, under the ground, into any ditch, gully or
stream or into the sanitary sewer system or into the storm drainage system, that person or their agent
shall notify the city within two (2) hours of the spill. Notice shall be sufficient if given to the city building
inspector, fire chief, city clerk, mayor, police chief or council president. (Ord. 1046 § 1, 1992)
13.09.030: PENALTY FOR DUMPING:
Any person who dumps any substance in violation of section 13.09.010 of this chapter or fails to give
notice as required in section 13.09.020 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished
in accordance with the general misdemeanor statutes of the state of Idaho. (Ord. 1046 § 1, 1992)
13.09.040: PERMITTED DISCHARGES:
Homeowners who have obtained the necessary sewer hookup permits shall be permitted to discharge
standard residential effluent consisting of untreated human waste into the sewer system and shall also
be allowed to use EPA approved pesticides and herbicides manufactured for yard and garden care
without notifying city officials. Sections 13.09.010 and 13.09.020 of this chapter shall not apply to the
discharge, spilling or accidental release of gasoline where the discharge or release is less than twenty
five (25) gallons, occurs on an impervious surface which is sufficient to keep the gasoline away from
groundwater or soils and which release is wholly contained upon the releaser's premises. (Ord. 1046
§ 1, 1992)
13.09.050: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall mean:
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any material or substance designated as a hazardous substance by the
United States of America acting through the environmental protection agency, or any successor
agency, or any material or substance designated as a hazardous substance by the state of Idaho,
acting through the division of environmental quality or any successor agency.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS: Include, but are not limited to, motor oils, lubricating oils, gasolines,
diesels, engine cleaners, kerosenes or fuel oils, or any derivative or byproducts of petroleum products.
TOXIC WASTE: Any material or substance designated as a toxic substance by the United States of
America acting through the environmental protection agency, or any successor agency, or any
material or substance designated as a hazardous substance by the state of Idaho, acting through the
division of environmental quality or any successor agency. (Ord. 1046 § 1, 1992)
13.09.060: SPILLS; THREAT TO COMMUNITY; ACTIONS TAKEN:
In the event that the city determines that a spill of any product described in section 13.09.010 of this
chapter represents a threat to the citizens of the community, it may immediately undertake whatever
measures it deems necessary to clean up or contain the spill and charge all costs to the responsible
party or to the landowner where the spill or discharge occurred. (Ord. 1046 § 1, 1992)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 285/467
Chapter 13.10
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS REGULATIONS
13.10.010: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTWs)
and enables the city to protect public health and the environment in conformity with all applicable
local, state and federal laws relating thereto. This chapter provides for the regulation of users of the
POTW through the enforcement of administrative regulations. This chapter authorizes the issuance of
indirect discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; establishes
administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the
equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program described herein. This chapter does not
establish rates for sewer dischargers. Rates shall be established by the city in other chapter
enactments.
The objectives of this chapter are:
A. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will interfere with the normal
operation of the system or contaminate the resulting municipal sludge.
B. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which do not receive adequate treatment
and which will pass through the system into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be
incompatible with the system.
C. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the POTW.
D. To protect the public using and the personnel operating the POTW. (Ord. 1397, 2015)
13.10.020: PRETREATMENT PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the city's wastewater treatment plant superintendent, city clerk
or his designee shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1056,
1992)
13.10.030: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions contained in chapter 13.08 of this code shall apply to this chapter.
The following terms shall mean:
ACT: The clean water act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), as amended.
APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: For any specified pollutant, city prohibitive discharge
standards, city's specific limitations on discharge, state of Idaho pretreatment standards, or the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 286/467
national categorical pretreatment standards (when effective) whichever standard is appropriate or
most stringent.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY: The director in an NPDES state with an approved state pretreatment
program and the appropriate regional administrator in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an
approved state pretreatment program.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions in this
chapter. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control
plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1317)
which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR chapter 1, subchapter N.
CATEGORICAL USER: A user regulated by one or more of EPA's categorical pretreatment standards.
CITY: The city of Payette, a municipal corporation of the state of Idaho.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples
taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time.
COOLING WATER/NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product.
Cooling water may be generated from any use, such as air conditioning, heat exchangers, cooling or
refrigeration to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DOMESTIC USER (RESIDENTIAL USER): Any person who contributes, causes, or allows the
contribution of wastewater into the POTW that is of a similar volume and/or chemical makeup as that
of a residential dwelling unit.
EFFLUENT LIMITATION: Any restriction imposed by the city on quantities, discharge rates, and mass
or concentration of pollutants that are discharged by users into the POTW. Also referred to as a local
limit.
EXISTING SOURCE: For a categorical industrial user, an existing source is any source of discharge,
the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is
thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the act.
EXISTING USER: For noncategorical users an existing user is defined as any user that is discharging
wastewater prior to the effective date hereof.
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime basis without regard to
the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE: The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants into a POTW
from a source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the act.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE PERMIT (INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT,
DISCHARGE PERMIT): An authorization or equivalent control document issued by the city to users
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 287/467
discharging wastewater to the POTW. The permit may contain appropriate pretreatment standards
and requirements as set forth in this chapter.
INDUSTRIAL USER OR USER: Any nonresidential user with an indirect discharge of effluent into a
POTW by means of pipes, conduits, pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches,
surface water intercepting ditches and all constructed devices and appliance appurtenant thereto. This
term includes federal, state and local facilities as part of the regulated community, since such entities
are subject to federal pretreatment regulations.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting from any industrial, manufacturing,
trade or business process or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from
other sources, either: a) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations; b)
inhibits or disrupts sludge processes, use or disposal; or c) is the cause of a violation of the discharge
permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation or of the prevention of sewage
sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or
permits issued thereunder or more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of the clean water
act, the solid waste disposal act (SWDA), including title II, more commonly referred to as the resource
conservation and recovery act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA, the clean air act, and the toxic
substances control act.
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE INDUSTRIAL LOADING (MAIL): The estimated maximum loading of a
pollutant that can be received at the POTW headworks from all permitted industrial users and other
controlled sources without causing pass-through or interference.
MINOR INDUSTRIAL USER (MIU): A nonresidential user with an indirect discharge to the POTW
which does not meet the criteria as a significant industrial user or a significant connecting user, but
whose operation and discharge may warrant inspection to ensure compliance with discharge
prohibitions, pretreatment facility operation, spill prevention measures and pollution prevention
assistance.
NPDES: National pollutant discharge elimination system permit program as administered by the USA
EPA or state.
NEW SOURCE: A. Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a
discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed
pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the act, which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, and such building, structure,
facility or installation:
1. Is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
2. Totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants
at an existing source; or
3. Is constructed for production or wastewater generating processes which are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site, substantial independence being
determined by factors such as: a) the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the
existing plant; and b) the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 288/467
of activity as the existing source.
B. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than
a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation
meeting the criteria of subsection A2 or A3 of this definition, but otherwise alters, replaces or
adds to existing process of production equipment.
C. For purposes of this definition, construction is deemed to commence when:
1. The owner or operator of the facility has entered into a binding contractual obligation for the
purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified
without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not
constitute a contractual obligation herein; or
2. When the following are begun as part of a continuous on site construction:
a. Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or
b. Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation or removal of existing
buildings, structures or facilities, which is necessary for the placement, assembly or
installation of new source facilities or equipment.
NEW USER (NEW DISCHARGER): A new user is not a new source and is defined as a user that
applies to the city for a new building permit or any person or business that occupies an existing
building and plans to discharge wastewater to the city's collection system after the effective date
hereof.
OTHER WASTES: Decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, refuse, ashes, garbage, offal, oil,
tar, chemicals and all other substances except sewage and industrial wastes.
POTW: Any sewage treatment works owned and operated by the city and the sewers and conveyance
appurtenances discharging thereto, whether or not owned by the city. The term also means the city
since the U.S. environmental protection agency issues the NPDES permits to the city.
PASS-THROUGH: The occurrence of an indirect discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES
permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
pH: A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units.
POLLUTANT: Any substance discharged into a POTW or its collection system which is prohibited or
limited by any section of this chapter. This term includes dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial,
municipal and agricultural wastes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 289/467
PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amounts of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the
alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to
pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR STANDARDS: Prohibited discharge standards, categorical
pretreatment standards, local limits and/or BMPs established by the city.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGES (PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS): Absolute prohibitions
against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 13.10.040 of this
chapter.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE (SEPTAGE): Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment
facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property
damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
SEWAGE: Water carried human wastes or a combination of water carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
SEWER: Any pipe, conduit, ditch or other device used to collect and transport sewage from the
generating source.
SHALL: "Shall" is mandatory.
SIGNIFICANT CONNECTING USER (SCU): Any private, public or quasi-public reservation,
compound, district, government installation, industrial, commercial or domestic complex which
indirectly discharges to the POTW at single or multiple connection points to the city's sewer collection
system wastewater mixed with nondomestic wastewater. Upon determination by the wastewater
treatment plant superintendent, city clerk or designee that an SCU, as a result of the discharge of toxic
pollutants or high strength sewage as measured by BOD and TSS, causes or has the potential to
cause interference with the operation and maintenance of the POTW, including its wastewater
collection system, causes or has the potential to cause pass-through of pollutants to the receiving
waters, or causes or has the potential to cause interference with the treatment, disposal or beneficial
reuse of the POTW's sludge, or that contributes greater than five percent (5%) of the total flow
entering the POTW, the city may issue an indirect discharge permit to the SCU. Issuance of an
indirect discharge permit may not be necessary if the SCU is regulated by an EPA approved
pretreatment program.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU): A. All industrial users of the POTW subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter 1, subchapter N.
B. Any other industrial user that discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gpd
(gallons per day) or more of process wastewater to the POTW, excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater; contributes a process waste stream which makes up
five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity to the
treatment facility receiving the waste; or is designated as such by the city as defined in 40 CFR
403.12(a) on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential, either singly or in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 290/467
combination with other contributing industries, for adversely affecting the POTW's wastewater
collection and treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality or air
emissions generated by the system or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE: A. "Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits", defined
herein as those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of all of the measurements taken for the
same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined or described in this
chapter;
B. "Technical review criteria (TRC) violations", defined herein as those in which thirty three percent
(33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six
(6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or
requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined or described in this chapter multiplied by
the applicable factor (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants
except pH);
C. Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits or
narrative standard, that the city believes has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference, pass-through, or endangered the health and safety of city personnel or
the general public;
D. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the
environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent
such a discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone
contained in an indirect discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide within forty five (45) days after the due date, any required reports, including
baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
H. Any other violation(s), including a violation of BMPs, which the city determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the city's pretreatment program.
SLUG LOAD: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the
discharge standards in any section of this chapter or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature,
including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge.
TOXIC POLLUTANTS: Pollutants or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations
promulgated by the administrator of the environmental protection agency under section 307 (33 USC
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 291/467
1317) of the act.
UPSET: An exceptional incident in which a user unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of
noncompliance with the standards as set forth in subsections 13.10.040A, B, and sections 13.10.050,
13.10.060, 13.10.070 and 13.10.080 of this chapter due to factors beyond the reasonable control of
the user, and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance or careless or
improper operation thereof.
USER: See definition of Industrial User Or User.
WASTEWATER: Industrial waste, sewage or any other waste, including that which may be combined
with any groundwater, surface water or stormwater, that may be discharged to the POTW.
Whenever a reference is made to a rule, regulation, statute, code section, treatise, book, publication,
manual, standard, CFR, ordinance or any other regulatory requirement, that reference shall be to the
most updated or most recently amended version thereof. (Ord. 1399, 2015)
13.10.035: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
A. ASPP - accidental spill prevention plan.
B. BMP - best management practice.
C. BOD - biochemical oxygen demand.
D. CFR - code of federal regulations.
E. EPA - U.S. environmental protection agency.
F. gpd - gallons per day.
G. IDP - indirect discharge permit.
H. IU - industrial user.
I. LEL - lower explosive limit.
J. NPDES - national pollutant discharge elimination system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 292/467
K. POTW - publicly owned treatment works.
L. RCRA - resource conservation and recovery act.
M. NAICS - North American industrial classification system.
N. SIC - standard industrial classification.
O. SWDA - solid waste disposal act (42 USC 6901 et seq.).
P. TSS - total suspended solids.
Q. USC - United States Code. (Ord. 1397, 2015)
13.10.040: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
A. General Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any
pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through or interference. These general prohibitions
apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment
standards or any other federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
B. Specific Prohibitions: No user shall contribute or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly, any
of the following described substances into the wastewater collection system or treatment facilities:
1. Any wastewater having a pH less than five (5) or more than nine (9) or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel
of the system.
2. Any toxic and nontoxic pollutants including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or to exceed the limitation set forth in national
categorical pretreatment standards.
3. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be sufficient
either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in
another way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two (2) successive
readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point
in the system), be more than five percent (5%) nor any single reading over ten percent (10%) of
the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to,
gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes,
peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides and any other
substances which the POTW deems to be a fire hazard or a hazard to the system.
4. Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to,
waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit
(140oF) (60oC) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR section 261.21.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 293/467
5. Any solid or viscous substances which will or may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or
other interference with the operation of the wastewater system, such as, but not limited to:
grease, garbage with particles greater than one-eighth inch (1/8") in any dimension, animal guts
or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers,
ashes, cinders, sand, spent limestone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass
clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues,
and residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or
polishing wastes.
6. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will
cause interference or pass-through.
7. Any noxious or malodorous liquid, gases or solids which either singly or by interaction are
capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the
sewers for their maintenance and repair.
8. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a
quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
9. Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or treatment residues, sludges or scums
to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no
case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with
sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the act;
any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the
solid waste disposal act, the clean air act, the toxic substances control act or state standards
applicable to the sludge management method being used.
10. Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or other disposal system
permits.
11. Any substance with objectional color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not
limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
12. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
treatment plant resulting in interference; but in no case, wastewater with a temperature at the
introduction into the POTW treatment plant which exceeds one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit
(104oF) (40oC). If, in the opinion of the city, lower temperatures of such wastes could harm
either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the
receiving streams or otherwise endanger life, health or property; or constitute a nuisance, the
city may prohibit such discharges.
13. Any unpolluted water in excess of two thousand (2,000) gallons per day, including, but not
limited to, noncontact cooling water. See subsection D of this section.
14. Any wastewater at a flow rate and/or pollutant discharge rate which is excessive over a
relatively short time period so that there is a treatment process upset and subsequent loss of
treatment efficiency.
15. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as exceed limits established by the state or federal regulations.
16. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored
in such a manner that could result in their discharge to the POTW.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 294/467
C. Prohibitions On Storm Drainage And Groundwater: Stormwater, groundwater, rain water, street
drainage, subsurface drainage or yard drainage shall not be discharged through direct or indirect
connections to the wastewater collection system unless a permit is issued by the city. The city may
approve the discharge of such water only when no reasonable alternative method of disposal
and/or treatment is available.
If a permit is granted for the discharge of such waters into the sewer, the user shall pay the
applicable charges and fees and meet such other conditions as required by the city.
D. Prohibitions On Unpolluted Water: Unpolluted water, including, but not limited to, cooling water,
process water or blowdown from cooling towers or evaporative coolers shall not be discharged
through direct or indirect connection to the sewer unless a permit is issued by the city. The city
may approve the discharge of such water only when no reasonable alternative method of disposal
and/or treatment is available.
If a permit is granted for the discharge of such waters into the sewer, the user shall pay the
applicable charges and fees and meet such other conditions as required by the city.
E. Limitations On Point Of Discharge: No person shall discharge any substances directly into a
manhole or other opening into the sewer other than through an approved building sewer
connection unless a permit has been issued by the city. If a permit is granted for the discharge of
such waters into the sewer, the user shall pay the applicable charges and fees and meet such
other conditions as required by the city.
F. Septage Waste: No person shall discharge any septage waste into the sewer. Septage haulers who
comply with the licensing requirements of the city may deposit their septage at the site designated
by the city as a receiving facility.
G. Acceptance Of Groundwater From Cleanup Projects: Wastewater generated from the cleanup of
spills, leaking underground storage tanks, monitoring wells or other similar sources shall not be
discharged through direct or indirect connections to the sewer unless a permit is issued by the city.
The city may approve the discharge of such water only when no reasonable alternative method of
disposal and/or treatment is available. If a permit is granted for the discharge of such waters into
the sewer, the user shall pay the applicable charges and fees and meet such other conditions as
required by the city.
Each temporary discharge permit must be reviewed and reissued if the user wishes to discharge
past the original expiration date.
H. Additional Pretreatment Measure: Whenever deemed necessary, the city may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewaters be discharged
only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste
streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect
the POTW and to determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Grease,
oil and sand interceptors shall be provided for the proper handling of wastewater containing
excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required
for residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and
shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 295/467
inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user and at the user's expense. (Ord.
1399, 2015: Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.050: NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
A. National categorical pretreatment standards as promulgated and amended by the U.S.
environmental protection agency (EPA) pursuant to the act and found in 40 CFR chapter 1,
subchapter N, parts 405 through 471 are hereby incorporated and shall be enforceable by this
chapter.
B. The collection and testing of the wastewater shall be done in accordance with the newest edition of
the three (3) following publications:
1. "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And Wastewater" as published jointly by the
American Water Works Association, the American Public Health Associations and the Water
Pollution Control Federation.
2. American Society For Testing Materials, "ASTM Standards, Part 23, Water, Atmospheric
Analysis".
3. Environmental protection agency, water quality office, analytical control laboratory, "Methods For
Chemical Analysis Of Water Wastes".
C. The monitoring station shall contain a twenty four (24) hour composite sampler with refrigerator to
obtain a representative sample of the waste stream. The station shall also contain a pH and
temperature meter with recording chart capable of recording results twenty four (24) hours a day.
There shall be an accurate flow meter that records flow volume twenty four (24) hours a day.
D. Chlorine residual testing shall be done on site by city personnel. This shall be done from a grab
sample taken at the convenience of the city.
E. A composite sample shall be tested for five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand, total suspended
solids and settleable solids.
F. The city may require any SIU to install and maintain an explosion hazard meter. (Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.060: STATE REQUIREMENTS:
State requirements and limitations on discharges to the POTW shall be met by all users which are
subject to such standards in any instance in which they are more stringent than federal requirements
and limitations, or those in this chapter or other applicable ordinance(s). (Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.070: LOCAL LIMITS:
The city shall from time to time establish quantitative or other limitations where necessary to protect
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 296/467
against pass-through and interference and to provide for protection of the POTW, worker safety, public
health, or environment.
A. Substances And Quantities: In addition to national categorical pretreatment standards referenced in
section 13.10.050 of this chapter, no user shall discharge wastewater containing concentrations
(and/or mass limitations) of substances exceeding the following local limits:
Arsenic 0.05 mg/kg
Cadmium 0.01 mg/kg
Chromium (total) 0.05 mg/kg
Copper 1.00 mg/kg
Cyanide (total) 0.20 mg/kg
Fluoride 1.40 mg/kg
Lead 0.05 mg/kg
Mercury 0.002 mg/kg
Nickel 0.02 mg/kg
Silver 0.05 mg/kg
Zinc 5.00 mg/kg
Settleable solids 10 mg/l
Total chlorine residual 1 mg/l
pH Not less than 6 nor more than 9
Total fats, grease and oils 250 mg/l
B. Industry Specific BMPs: Where possible and appropriate, the city may establish and implement
industry specific BMPs (best management practices) in conjunction with or in lieu of numerical
local limits. Such BMPs shall be considered pretreatment standards and are fully enforceable
under this chapter.
C. Pollutant Specific BMPs: Based upon assessment of need and on a user specific basis, the city
may incorporate pollutant specific BMPs or concentration or mass limits into indirect discharge
permits. Wherever a user is subject to both a national categorical pretreatment standard and a
local limit for a given pollutant, the more stringent limit or pretreatment standard shall apply.
The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with users setting out special terms
under which they may discharge to the POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive
compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard or federal pretreatment requirement.
However, the user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 297/467
with 40 CFR 403.15 page 14 of 33 supplement no. 56. They may also request a variance from the
categorical pretreatment standard from the approval authority in accordance with 40 CFR 403.13.
D. Deadline For Compliance With Applicable Pretreatment Requirements: Compliance by existing
users covered by categorical pretreatment standards shall be within one year of the date the
standard is effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate standard. The
city shall establish a final compliance deadline date for any existing user not covered by
categorical pretreatment standards or for any categorical user when local limits for said user are
more restrictive than EPA's categorical pretreatment standards.
New source dischargers are required to comply with applicable pretreatment standards within the
shortest feasible time (not to exceed 90 days from the beginning of discharge). New sources shall
install and have in operating condition, and shall start up all air pollution control equipment required
to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Any indirect discharge
permit issued to a categorical user shall not contain a compliance date beyond any deadline date
established in EPA's categorical pretreatment standards. Any other existing user or a categorical
user that must comply with a more stringent local limit, which is in noncompliance with any local
limits, shall be provided with a compliance schedule placed in an indirect discharge permit to
ensure compliance within the shortest time feasible. (Ord. 1397, 2015)
13.10.080: DILUTION:
No user shall increase the use of potable or process water or, in any other way, attempt to dilute a
discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the
local limits or the national pretreatment standards. The city may impose mass limitations on users
which are using dilutions to meet the pretreatment standards or requirements of this chapter, or in
other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is deemed appropriate by the city. (Ord. 1056,
1992)
13.10.090: ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES:
A. Each user shall provide protection from the accidental discharge of prohibited or regulated
materials or substances established by this chapter. Where deemed necessary by the city, facilities
to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the
user's cost and expense. Significant industrial users are required to notify the city immediately of
any changes at its facility affecting potential for a slug load discharge. When required, an
accidental spill prevention plan (ASPP) showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this
protection shall be submitted to the city for review and approval before construction of the facility or
implementation of procedures. Each existing user shall complete and submit its ASPP within sixty
(60) days after notification by the city.
B. Each user shall implement its ASPP as submitted after such ASPP has been reviewed and
approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by the city shall
not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter.
C. Any user required to develop and implement an ASPP shall submit a plan which addresses, at a
minimum, the following elements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 298/467
1. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges.
2. Description of stored chemicals.
3. Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug discharge. Such
notification must also be given for any discharge which would violate any of the standards in
subsections 13.10.040A and B, section 13.10.050 and section 13.10.060 of this chapter.
Accidental spill or slug load notification instructions shall be posted in conspicuous places on the
user's premises advising employees whom to call.
4. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures
include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and
transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker
training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
D. Users shall notify the city wastewater treatment plant immediately upon the occurrence of the "slug
load", or accidental discharge of substances prohibited by this chapter. The notification shall
include location of discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume and
corrective actions. Any user who discharges a slug load of prohibited materials shall be liable for
any expense, loss or damage to the POTW, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the
city on account thereof under state or federal law. (Ord. 1397, 2015)
13.10.100: PRETREATMENT FACILITIES:
Users shall provide necessary wastewater pretreatment as required to comply with this chapter and
shall achieve compliance with all applicable pretreatment standards within the time limitations as
specified by appropriate statutes, regulations and ordinances. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, properly operated and maintained at the
user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities shall be submitted to the city for
review and must be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans
shall in no way relieve the discharger from the responsibility of modifying its facility or operations as
necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter. Within a
reasonable time after the completion of the wastewater pretreatment facility, the user shall furnish its
operations and maintenance procedures for the city to review. Any subsequent significant changes in
the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be accepted by the city prior
to the user's initiation of the changes. (Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.103: ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES:
Whenever deemed necessary, the pretreatment coordinator may require users to restrict their
discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewaters be discharged only into
specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from
industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW,
personnel operating the POTW, the public health or to determine the user's compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1397, 2015)
13.10.105: INTERCEPTORS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 299/467
Suitable and adequate grease and oil, or sand interceptors shall be provided for the proper handling
of wastewater containing grease, oil, sand or other substances prohibited by this chapter; except that
such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the city and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Such interceptors shall be provided, inspected, cleaned regularly in accordance with
established BMPs, and maintained in proper operating condition by the user and at the user's
expense. The introduction of chemical, bacterial, enzyme, or any other additive into an interceptor,
directly or indirectly, that causes interference with the normal operation of the unit or causes passthrough
of prohibited substances is prohibited. Interceptor maintenance and cleaning records shall be
maintained by the user and made available to pretreatment inspectors for review upon request. (Ord.
1397, 2015)
13.10.110: FEES:
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the payment of fees from users to the city's
wastewater disposal system to compensate the city for their costs associated with monitoring,
inspection, surveillance and laboratory analysis required by the federal pretreatment program.
Sewer system connection and service charges and fees are established by a separate ordinance.
B. Charges And Fees: If costs are incurred beyond normal operation through involvement with
noncomplying users, the city shall charge the noncomplying user for monitoring, laboratory
analyses, inspections and surveillance as required by federal pretreatment requirements and this
chapter.
C. Reimbursement: The city shall be reimbursed by all significant industrial users, significant
connecting users, developers or any other nonresidential users for all engineering costs incurred
by the city in reviewing sewer related matters associated with that user. (Ord. 1397, 2015)
13.10.120: WASTEWATER DISCHARGES:
It shall be unlawful to discharge sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes to any sewer within the
jurisdiction of the city, and/or to the POTW, without having first complied with the terms of this chapter,
or without having first obtained the city's approval of a compliance schedule submitted by the user.
(Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.130: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE DATA DISCLOSURE:
A. General Disclosure: All significant industrial and connecting users proposing to connect to or to
discharge sewage, industrial wastes and other wastes to the POTW shall comply with all terms of
this chapter.
B. Disclosure Forms: All significant industrial and connecting users shall complete and file with the city
a data disclosure form prescribed by the city. Existing significant industrial and connecting users
shall file data disclosure forms within sixty (60) days after notification by the city, and users shall
file a data disclosure form a minimum of thirty (30) days before connecting to the POTW. This data
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 300/467
disclosure form satisfies the requirement of the user baseline monitoring report as described in 40
CFR 403.12(b). The disclosure to be made by the user shall be made on written forms provided by
the city and shall include:
1. Disclosure of name, address and location of the user.
2. Disclosure of standard industrial classification (SIC) number according to the "Standard
Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau Of The Budget", 1972, as amended.
3. Disclosure of wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but not limited to, those
mentioned in this chapter, as appropriate, as determined by bona fide chemical and biological
analyses. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established
by the U.S. EPA and contained in 40 CFR, part 136, as amended.
4. Disclosure of time and duration of discharges, including copies of flow charts.
5. Disclosure of average daily and maximum daily wastewater flow rates, in gallons per day,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, of all regulated or manufacturing process
streams and other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of
40 CFR 403.6(e). All flows shall be measured unless other verifiable techniques are approved by
the city due to cost or nonfeasibility.
6. Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer
connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by size and location.
7. Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials
which are or may be discharged to the sewers or works of the city and a brief description of the
nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classification of the operations.
8. A statement regarding whether or not compliance is being achieved with this chapter on a
consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional pretreatment is required for the user to comply
with this chapter. The statement on compliance shall be certified to by a qualified professional
and reviewed and signed by an authorized representative of the user.
9. Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance activities will be required to
comply with this chapter, the user shall provide a compliance schedule consisting of a
declaration of the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment
and/or implementation of additional operational and maintenance activities.
a. The schedule will contain milestone dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to comply with the requirements of this chapter. Examples of such milestone dates which
the user may select include hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, executing
contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing construction and other
acts which may be necessary to achieve compliance with this chapter.
b. Under no circumstance shall the city permit a time increment of any single step directed
toward compliance which exceeds nine (9) months.
c. Not later than fourteen (14) days following each milestone date in the schedule and the final
date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the city, including no less than
a statement as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress represented by
that milestone date, and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of
progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction
to the approved schedule.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 301/467
10. All data disclosure forms shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user as defined
by 40 CFR 403.12(1), and when required by the city, a registered professional engineer.
11. Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production.
12. Type and amount of raw materials used, including chemicals used in process which may be
discharged to sanitary system (average daily and maximum daily).
13. List of environmental control permits held by or for the facility. The city will evaluate the
completeness of the data disclosure form furnished by the user and may require additional
information. The city may require inspection and sampling manholes and/or flow measuring or
recording and sampling equipment to assure compliance with this chapter. Within thirty (30)
days, after full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city shall notify the user of
the city's acceptance through the issuance of an indirect discharge permit, or rejection thereof.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be promptly returned to the
user with an explanation of necessary revisions. Any schedules or timetables submitted by the
user shall be subject to review and approval by the city. (Ord. 1397, 2015: Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.140: INDIRECT DISCHARGE PERMIT:
No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining an
indirect discharge permit. Significant connecting users may require an indirect discharge permit in
order to discharge wastewater into the POTW. Any violation of the terms and conditions of an indirect
discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the user or permittee to the
sanctions set out in this chapter. Obtaining an indirect discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of
its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any
other requirements of federal, state and local laws.
The city shall issue to each significant industrial user and to certain significant connecting users an
indirect discharge permit, which will be based on information in the data disclosure form and include:
A. Any fees and charges to be paid upon initial issuance.
B. Limits on the average and maximum wastewater pollutant concentrations, loadings or
characteristics.
C. Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations
and equalization.
D. Self-monitoring requirements, including flow monitoring frequency and method, sampling
frequencies, number, types and standards for tests.
E. Authorized points of discharge and regulated processes.
F. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 302/467
G. Compliance schedules.
H. Special conditions as the city may require, such as sampling locations or circumstances of a given
discharge.
I. Reporting requirements, including, but not limited to, notification of accidental spills, noncompliance
and discharge/ process changes.
J. Requirements for submission of special technical reports or discharge reports where same differs
from those prescribed by this chapter.
K. Any special agreements the city chooses to continue or develop between the city and SIU.
L. Standard conditions as apply to all significant industrial users and certain significant connecting
users.
Permits shall be issued for perpetual duration, subject to amendment of revocations provided in
this chapter. Under extraordinary circumstances, it may be issued for a stated period or may be
stated to expire on a specific date. Indirect discharge permits shall be issued for a specific time
period, not to exceed five (5) years. Each permit shall indicate an effective date and an expiration
date.
Indirect discharge permits are issued to specific users for a specific operation and are not
assignable to another user without prior written approval of the city or transferable to any other
location. Indirect discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of
business ownership. The indirect discharge permit issued to a particular user is void upon the
issuance of a new indirect discharge permit to that user. (Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.150: INDIRECT DISCHARGE PERMIT; EXTRAJURISDICTIONAL USERS:
Any existing significant connecting user located beyond the city limits required to obtain an indirect
discharge permit shall submit a permit application as outlined in sections 13.10.130 and 13.10.140 of
this chapter. New significant connecting users located beyond the city limits required to obtain an
indirect discharge permit shall also comply with sections 13.10.130 and 13.10.140 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.160: INDIRECT DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS:
A. Procedure: Users will be provided with a draft permit for their review and comment prior to permit
issuance. The user, or their designee, may petition the city to reconsider the terms of an indirect
discharge permit within twenty (20) days of the permit's issuance as follows:
1. The written petition must be filed with the city clerk within twenty (20) days of the permit's
issuance. Failure to submit a timely petition for reconsideration shall be deemed a waiver of the
right to appeal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 303/467
2. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the specific permit conditions objected to, the
reasons for this objection, and shall present alternative conditions to meet the intent of this
chapter.
3. The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.
4. The city clerk shall provide a written decision to the appealing party within ten (10) working days
from the date the appeal was filed. If the city clerk shall fail to respond within ten (10) working
days, the petition for reconsideration shall be deemed denied.
5. Decisions of the city clerk regarding the petition for reconsideration may be appealed to the city
water and sewer committee by filing a written request for appeal with the city clerk within fifteen
(15) days of the decision of the city clerk. The city water and sewer committee shall address the
appeal at its next scheduled meeting. The appealing party may appear and present evidence
and testimony at such meeting. The decision of the city water and sewer committee regarding
the petition shall be in writing.
6. The decision of the city water and sewer committee may be appealed to the city council by filing
a notice requesting appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written
decision.
B. Indirect Discharge Permit Modifications: The terms and conditions of an indirect discharge permit
may be subject to modification by the city at any time as limitations or requirements are modified or
other just cause exists. Any permit modifications which result in new conditions shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance as determined by the city. Other reasons for modification
include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or
requirements;
2. To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes or wastewater
since the time of permit issuance or the last modification;
3. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of
the authorized discharge;
4. To incorporate special conditions resulting from the issuance of a special order or an
enforcement action;
5. To correct typographical or other errors in the indirect discharge permit;
6. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city
personnel, or the receiving waters;
7. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
8. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge
permit application or in any required reporting; or
9. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR
403.13. (Ord. 1397, 2015: Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.170: INDIRECT DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 304/467
A. Request: A user, required to have an indirect discharge permit, shall submit a written request for
permit renewal at least sixty (60) days prior to permit expiration. The city shall then provide the
user with the necessary renewal forms and instructions. A user, whose existing indirect discharge
permit has expired and has submitted its renewal application request within the specified time
period, shall be deemed to have an effective indirect discharge permit until the city issues or
denies a new indirect discharge permit. A user, whose existing indirect discharge permit has
expired and who has failed to submit its renewal application request within the specified time
period, shall be deemed to be discharging without an indirect discharge permit.
B. Indirect Discharge Permit Revocation: Indirect discharge permits may be revoked for, but not
limited to, the following reasons:
1. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the data disclosure form or
subsequent permit renewal submittals.
2. Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
3. Tampering with monitoring equipment.
4. Failure to meet discharge limitations.
5. Failure to pay fines.
6. Failure to meet compliance schedules.
7. If the city has to invoke its emergency provisions.
8. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of an indirect discharge
permit or this chapter. (Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.180: STANDARDS MODIFICATIONS:
All national categorical pretreatment standards adopted by the U.S. EPA after the promulgation of this
chapter shall be enforceable by the city through this chapter. Where a user, subject to a national
categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted a data disclosure form as required by
section 13.10.130 of this chapter, the user shall file a data disclosure form with the city within one
hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment
standard by the U.S. EPA. In addition, any user operating on the basis of a previous filing of a
disclosure statement, shall submit to the city within one hundred eighty (180) days after the
promulgation of an applicable national categorical pretreatment standard, the additional information
required by subsections 13.10.130B3, B8 and B9 of this chapter. If deemed necessary by the city,
where the national categorical pretreatment standards are more stringent, the indirect discharge
permit will be modified to incorporate the more stringent standards. Any changes or new conditions in
this chapter shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. (Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.190: USER REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Final Compliance Report: Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance by the user
with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements set forth in this chapter or an indirect
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 305/467
discharge permit, or within ninety (90) days after commencement of the introduction of wastewater
into the POTW by a new user, any user subject to this chapter shall submit to the city a report
indicating the nature and concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in its
discharge, and the average and maximum daily flow in gallons. The report shall state whether the
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
what additional operation, maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into
compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be
signed by an authorized representative of the user, as defined by 40 CFR 403.12(1).
B. Periodic Compliance Reports:
1. Any user subject to a pretreatment standard set forth in this chapter, after the compliance date
of such pretreatment standard, or in the case of a new user, after commencement of the
discharge to the POTW, shall submit to the city at six (6) month intervals as prescribed in the
indirect discharge permit, unless required more frequently by the city, a report indicating the
nature and concentration of prohibited or regulated substances in the effluent which are limited
by the pretreatment standards hereof. In addition, this report shall include a record of all
measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows during the reporting period. Flows
shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement, provided however, where cost or
feasibility considerations justify, the city may accept reports of average and maximum flows
estimated by verifiable techniques.
2. Reports of users shall contain all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the
flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where required by the city. All
sample results shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling, and methods of analysis, and
shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and
expected pollutant discharges from the user.
3. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with 40 CFR, part 136 and amendments thereto.
Where 40 CFR, part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with sampling and analytical
procedures approved by the administrator of the U.S. EPA.
4. The frequency of monitoring by the user shall be prescribed within the indirect discharge permit.
At a minimum, users shall sample their discharge at least twice per year. If a user sampled and
analyzed more frequently than what was required in its indirect discharge permit, using
methodologies in 40 CFR part 136, it must submit all results of sampling and analysis of the
discharge as part of its self-monitoring report. (Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.200: MONITORING FACILITIES:
A. Each user shall provide and operate at the user's own expense, a monitoring facility to allow
inspection, sampling and flow measurement of each sewer discharge to the city. Each monitoring
facility shall be situated on the user's premises; except, where such a location would be impractical
or cause undue hardship on the user, the city may concur with the facility being constructed in the
public street or sidewalk area; provided, that the facility is located so that it will not be obstructed
by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling facility to
allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling and
measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at
the expense of the user. Where required by federal or state regulations, such monitoring facilities
shall be provided at the end of a process or production unit from which regulated toxic pollutants
are discharged.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 306/467
B. All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable
construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within one hundred
twenty (120) days of receipt by the user of the indirect discharge permit unless the city, for good
cause, extends the time period. (Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.210: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
A. The city shall have the right to enter the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of
this chapter, and any indirect discharge permit or order issued hereunder, is being met and
whether the user is complying with all requirements thereof. The user shall allow the city or its
representatives, upon presentation of credentials of identification, to enter upon the premises of
the user at all reasonable hours, including all hours of operation or discharging for the purposes of
inspection, sampling or records examination. The city shall have ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and
performance of any additional duties.
B. Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards
so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, pretreatment staff will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
C. The city shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices
as are necessary to conduct flow monitoring and sampling of the user's operations.
D. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the city
and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
E. Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to the user's premises shall constitute a violation of
this chapter. (Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.220: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, indirect discharge permits and
monitoring programs, and from POTW inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the
public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests, and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city, that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under
applicable state law. When requested and demonstrated by the user that the information furnished be
kept confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall
not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon
request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program,
and enforcement proceedings involving the user furnishing the information. Wastewater constituents
and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as
confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. Any such claim must be
asserted at the time of submission by clearly indicating the words "confidential business information"
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 307/467
on each page containing such information. If no claim is made at the time of submission, all
information will be available to the public. (Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.230: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Emergency Suspension Of Service And Revocation Of Indirect Discharge Permit: The city may,
after informal notice to the user, in writing, or in person, or by telephone, revoke the indirect
discharge permit and order the suspension of the wastewater treatment service to a user when it
appears to the city that an actual or threatened discharge: 1) presents or threatens an imminent or
substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons or substantial danger to the environment; or
2) threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW; or 3) additional discharge would cause
the city to exceed its NPDES permit limits. Any user notified of the city's suspension order shall
immediately cease all discharges. In the event of failure of the user to comply with the suspension
order, the city may immediately take all necessary steps to halt or prevent any further discharge by
such user into the POTW. The city shall have authority to physically cap, block or seal the user's
sewer line, whether on public or private property, in order to terminate service under this section.
The city shall have the right to enter upon the user's property to accomplish the capping, blocking
or sealing of the user sewer line. The city shall reinstate the wastewater treatment service upon
clear and convincing proof by the user of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge or
condition creating the threat as set forth above.
B. User Prohibited Conduct: A user shall not: 1) fail to report accurately the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of its discharge; 2) fail to report significant changes in wastewater constituents
or characteristics; 3) refuse reasonable access to the user's premises by representatives of the city
for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 4) violate the provisions of the indirect discharge
permit, the provisions of this chapter or any order of the city with respect thereto. The city may
seek any or all of the administrative, civil and criminal remedies or penalties provided in this
chapter, including termination of wastewater treatment service, against any user who violates any
of the foregoing prohibitions. The city may seek the issuance of a temporary or permanent
injunction, as deemed appropriate, for legal and/or equitable relief. The city reserves the right,
however, to take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city is
empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These
actions may be taken concurrently.
Issuance of a compliance order, administrative fines, penalties and/or cease and desist orders
shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against a noncompliance
user.
C. Notification Of Violation; Administrative Adjustment:
1. Whenever the city finds that any user has violated the prohibitions in subsection B of this
section, the city shall cause to be served upon such user a written notice either in person or by
certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, stating the nature of the alleged violation or
violations. The notice may also state what fine, penalty or other remedy the city will seek against
the user for such alleged violation or violations.
2. Within twenty (20) days of the date of receipt of the notice, the user shall respond, in writing, to
the city advising of its position with respect to the allegations. Thereafter, the user shall be given
the opportunity to meet with representatives, employees or agents of the city to ascertain the
veracity of the allegations, to establish a plan for the satisfactory correction of the violations and
preclusion of a recurrence thereof, and to apply the fine or otherwise comply with the penalty or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 308/467
remedy being sought by the city of the violation or violations. Submission of a response in no
way relieves the user for liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of written
notice of noncompliance from the city. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to
take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first
issuing a notice of violation.
D. Show Cause Hearing: Where the violation of subsection B of this section is not corrected by timely
compliance through the administrative adjustment procedures set forth in subsection C of this
section, the city may order any user which suffers or permits a violation of subsection B of this
section to show cause before the water and sewer committee or its designee why the proposed
enforcement action, which may include service termination, should not be taken. A written notice
shall be served on the user by personal service or by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the water and sewer committee
or its designee regarding the violation, the reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken, the
proposed enforcement action and directing the user to show cause before the committee or its
designee why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing
shall be served no less than ten (10) days before the hearing. Service of the notice may be made
on any agent, officer or authorized representative of a user. The information and evidence
presented at the hearing shall be considered by the committee or its designee, which shall then
enter appropriate findings of fact, conclusions of law and order with respect to the alleged
violations of the user. Appeal of such order may be taken within twenty (20) days by the user to the
city council, which may grant a hearing to take additional evidence or render its decision based
upon the record of the water and sewer committee proceedings. A show cause hearing shall not
be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against a noncompliant user.
E. Judicial Proceedings: Following the entry of any final order by the city with respect to the violation
by the user under this chapter, the city may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or
equitable relief in the appropriate local court to enforce the penalty or remedy imposed by the city
hereunder.
F. Enforcement Actions; Annual Publication: The city may publish annually, in the newspaper with the
largest daily distribution in the city, a list of those users which, during the twelve (12) months, were
in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards or other pretreatment
requirements. (Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.240: PENALTIES:
A. Civil Penalties: Any user who violates an order of the city, or who fails to comply with: 1) any
provision of this chapter; or 2) any regulation, rule or permit of the city issued pursuant to this
chapter, shall be liable to the city for a civil penalty. The amount of such civil penalty shall be not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Each day upon which a violation occurs
or continues shall constitute a separate violation. In the case of a monthly or other long term
average limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
Such penalties may be recovered by judicial actions commenced by the city as provided in
subsection 13.10.230E of this chapter. In addition, the city may commence an action to terminate
the user's wastewater treatment service. Election of one remedy shall not preclude the use of any
alternative remedy or combination of remedies.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 309/467
B. Recovery Of Costs Incurred By City: Any user who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or
who discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction or causes damage to or
impairs the city's wastewater disposal system shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss or
damage caused by such violation of discharge. The city shall charge the user for the cost incurred
by the city for any monitoring, surveillance, cleaning, repair or replacement work caused by the
violation of discharge, and for costs incurred by the city in investigating the violation and in
enforcing this chapter against the user, including reasonable administrative costs, fees for testing,
attorney fees, court costs and all expenses of litigation. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall
constitute a violation of this chapter, enforceable under the provisions of sections 13.10.230 and
13.10.240 of this chapter.
C. Falsifying Information: Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be
maintained pursuant to this chapter, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate
any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall, in addition to civil and/or
criminal penalties provided by state law, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be prosecuted and
punished accordingly.
D. General Criminal Penalties: Any user or person who knowingly violates any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be prosecuted and punished in accordance with
the misdemeanor criminal statutes of the state. (Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.250: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS; BYPASS
PROVISION:
Users may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements to be violated, but only if it is also for essential maintenance to assure efficient
operation. These bypasses are not subject to the following:
A. If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the city, if
possible at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass.
B. A user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards to the city within twenty four (24) hours from the time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written description shall contain:
1. Description of bypass and its cause.
2. Duration of the bypass, including the exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been
corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue.
3. All steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
C. Bypass is prohibited and the city may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
1. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 310/467
2. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment
facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been
installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance.
3. The user submitted notices as required under subsections A and B of this section.
D. The city may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the city
determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in subsection C of this section. (Ord.
1056, 1992)
13.10.260: RECORDS RETENTION:
All users subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve for no less than three (3) years, any records,
books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all summaries thereof, relating
to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or in behalf of a user in connection with its
discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative adjustment or
any other enforcement of litigation activities brought by the city pursuant hereto shall be retained and
preserved by the user until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with
respect to any and all appeals have expired. (Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.270: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision, paragraph, word or section of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words and sections shall not be affected and shall
continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.280: RIGHT OF REVISION:
The city reserves the right to amend this chapter to provide for more stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to the POTW where deemed necessary to comply with the objectives set
forth in section 13.10.010 of this chapter. (Ord. 1056, 1992)
13.10.290: CONFLICT:
All other chapters and parts of other chapters inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this chapter
are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict. (Ord. 1056, 1992)
Title 14
RESERVED
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 311/467
Title 15
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 15.04
BUILDING CODES1
15.04.010: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
The approved editions of the following nationally recognized codes, as adopted by the state of Idaho
or the Idaho building code, are adopted as the official building codes of the city of Payette:
A. The international building code, including all rules promulgated by the board to provide equivalency
with the provisions of the Americans with disabilities act accessibility guidelines and the federal fair
housing act accessibility guidelines.
B. The international residential code, parts I through IV and IX.
C. The international fire code.
D. The international energy conservation code.
The adopted versions of the foregoing codes shall be deemed superseded by successive versions
of such codes as they are adopted by the Idaho building code board effective on the date any such
codes are made effective by the Idaho building code board.
E. The uniform code for abatement of dangerous buildings.
F. The Idaho standards for public works construction, which may be referred to as the ISPWC for
short, in their current edition, and all future editions as they may become available.
G. Agricultural buildings are exempt from the building codes adopted herein but shall remain subject
to placement requirements established by zoning regulations. (Ord. 1338, 2011)
15.04.020: APPEALS BOARD TO BE CONSTITUTED BY PLANNING AND ZONING
COMMISSION:
The planning and zoning commission of the city shall constitute the appeals board, which is referred to
in the codes adopted by reference in section 15.04.010 of this chapter. (Ord. 843, 1976: prior code
§ 4-1-2)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 312/467
15.04.030: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The city administrator or other designated official of the city.
CODE: The international building code, 2009 current edition.
MUNICIPALITY: The city. (Ord. 1363, 2012)
15.04.040: BUILDING CODE; AMENDMENTS:
The building code as adopted and incorporated by reference in section 15.04.010 of this chapter is
amended as follows:
A. All electrical wiring shall conform to the requirements of the national electrical code, 1978 edition,
published by the National Fire Protection Association.
B. To supplement the wind design regulations contained in the building code as adopted, the following
tie down installations shall be required for mobile homes: approved tie downs capable of
withstanding a one hundred (100) pound load per linear foot for a singlewide mobile home;
approved tie downs capable of withstanding a two hundred (200) pound load per linear foot for a
doublewide mobile home.
C. Structures existing prior to 1978 in which there is work involving additions, alterations or changes of
occupancy shall be made to comply with the requirements of the current international building
code, chapter 34. (Ord. 1366, 2012)
15.04.041: BUILDING PERMIT; FINAL INSPECTION; USE PERMIT:
No building or other structure shall be constructed within the city until a building permit has been
obtained from the building official or building inspector. No occupancy or use shall commence until the
building official or inspector has conducted a final inspection and issued a use permit. (Ord. 1067 § 1,
1993)
15.04.042: BUILDING PERMIT; PREFABRICATED BUILDING OR STRUCTURE:
No mobile home, trailer house or other prefabricated building or structure shall be placed in the city
until a building permit has been obtained from the building official or building inspector. (Ord. 1067 § 2,
1993)
15.04.043: BUILDING PERMIT FEE; PREFABRICATED BUILDING OR STRUCTURE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 313/467
The building official or building inspector shall charge a fee as set by resolution for the building permit
for any mobile home, trailer house or other prefabricated building or structure. (Ord. 1371, 2012)
15.04.050: BUILDING PERMIT; ISSUANCE PREREQUISITES; FINAL INSPECTION:
A. Prior to the issuance of a building permit by the building inspector, the applicant for the building
permit must provide the following:
1. A diagram showing the dimensions of the lot upon which the building is to be constructed;
2. The proposed location of the building upon the lot, together with a detailed drawing of the
proposed foundation and framing;
3. The dimensions of the building;
4. The distance of the centerline of the adjoining streets from the fronting boundary line of the lot;
5. The location of the existing sewer and water facilities intended to be utilized;
6. The elevation of the existing sewer facilities, elevation of curbs and gutters relative to the top of
the proposed foundation for the building; location of curb and gutter;
7. The elevation of the centerline of the adjoining streets at the intersection of the extension of all
boundary lines of the lot, which elevation is relative to the top of the proposed foundation for the
building;
8. Fees for water and sewer hookup.
B. The line and grade of the street shall have been established prior to the time the applicant submits
the application for the building permit, and the proposed location of the building and relative
elevation of the sewer facilities shall be first approved by the city water superintendent.
C. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, either acceptable curbs and gutters shall have been
constructed, or an amount equal to one and one-half (11/2) times the estimated cost of
construction of curbs and gutters shall have been deposited with the clerk. The mayor, city clerk,
city engineer, or their appointed agent, may authorize an exception in a specific instance or
instances where curbs and gutters are impossible or impractical to construct. Conditions can be
imposed which shall require a developer to make the improvements which have been waived at
some time in the future when construction of the improvements are practical. Said sums shall be
forfeited in the event the construction of curbs and gutters was not completed by the applicant as
of the date of final inspection of all the construction for which the building permit was issued; it
shall be refunded to the applicant if the construction of curbs and gutters was completed as of said
date. It is not intended that this section shall make any other provision in this code less restrictive.
D. If the application for a building permit is for any construction other than a single-family dwelling,
duplex, or outbuildings in a residential district, no building permit shall issue until there has been
compliance with the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 314/467
1. Submitting a plan for approval to the fire department showing the following: location of existing
hydrants, and proposed locations of new hydrants; size of water mains; standpipe location and
size; type of sprinkling systems, if required;
2. Submitting a plan for approval to the water and sewer department showing the following:
location of water and sewer mains, elevation of existing sewer facilities, the quantity and
pressure of water to be delivered through mains;
3. Submitting a plan for approval to the street department showing the following: curb and gutter
specifications, surface water drainage, size of drains, final collection point of surface water,
location and size of sidewalks;
4. Submitting the plans mentioned in subsections D1, D2, and D3 of this section, to the city
engineer for approval along with plans for irrigation water source and systems, parking facilities
and drainage thereof, street design, grade, alignment, surfacing and base; and then submitting
all of said plans to the planning commission for approval, and then to the city council for
approval, and finally to the building official for approval.
E. After an applicant has complied with this section, and all reviewed and approved plans have been
submitted to the building official, the building official is to act upon the application within three (3)
days.
F. After a building permit is issued, and construction has commenced, there shall be no permanent
occupancy of the building until after final inspection and approval of construction by the building
official, nor shall permanent electrical power be supplied to the building until after final inspection
and approval by the building official. (Ord. 1261 § 2, 2006: Ord. 924, 1981: Ord. 877, 1978: prior
code § 4-1-4)
15.04.060: BUILDING PERMIT; REQUIRED PRIOR TO FURNISHING OF UTILITIES:
No utility service, including, but not limited to, electrical power, natural gas, telephone, water and
sewer, shall be provided upon premises where construction is intended to be performed, unless a
building permit has already been issued for said construction. (Prior code § 4-1-5)
15.04.061: UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS;
AMENDMENTS:
The uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings is amended by the addition of the
following subsection (201.01) to section 201, chapter 2:
The building official or his/her designee is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this code.
The building official or his/her designee shall have the power to render interpretations of this code and
to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of its
provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and
purpose of this code.
The uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings is amended by the addition of the
following subsection (19) to section 302:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 315/467
Whenever any building or structure shows thirty three percent (33%) or more damage or deterioration,
and said condition is allowed to exist for more than six (6) months before the same is placed back into
a usable state in conformity with this code, or before the premises upon which it is, or was, located is
placed back into substantially the same condition it had been in prior to original construction.
(Ord. 1341, 2011: Ord. 930, 1982)
15.04.070: EXPIRATION DATE ON BUILDING PERMITS; PROVIDING FOR
RENEWAL OF PERMITS; EXEMPTING PUBLICLY FUNDED PROJECTS:
A. Any building permit issued by the building official shall be valid for a period not to exceed one
hundred eighty (180) days. All work contemplated to be done in accordance with the permit shall
be completed within the one hundred eighty (180) day period.
B. If any portion of the project is completed at the time of expiration, the building official is authorized
to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods of not more than one hundred
eighty (180) days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause
demonstrated. The additional extensions shall be good for a period of one hundred eighty (180)
days.
C. Any projects which are publicly funded shall be exempt from the one hundred eighty (180) day
period.
D. Any portions of any existing chapters which are in direct conflict with this chapter are hereby
repealed insofar as the conflict exists.
E. If any portion of this chapter is found to be unenforceable or unconstitutional for any reason, the
remaining portion of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1366, 2012)
15.04.080: NEW CONSTRUCTION ALONG SUBSTANDARD ROADS:
No building permits for new construction shall be issued along any street within the city limits so long
as the street does not have sufficient right of way for the installation of curbs, gutters, sidewalks and
utilities. This requirement may be waived for any building permit applicant who dedicates sufficient
street "right of way", as defined in the city subdivision ordinance or state statutes, over and along their
property so that if a similar dedication is made by a landowner on the other side of the street, the
street right of way would be a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from each side of the centerline. (Ord.
1099 § 1, 1995)
15.04.090: EXISTING PLATTED SUBDIVISIONS:
This restriction shall not apply to any existing platted subdivision which has heretofore been accepted
by the city. An assessor's plat shall not be considered a platted subdivision. (Ord. 1099 § 1, 1995)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 316/467
15.04.100: BUILDING PERMIT VIOLATION FEE:
If a building permit is not obtained before construction commences, in addition to the cost of the
building permit, an additional fee equal to the cost of the building permit shall be assessed. (Ord.
1375, 2013)
Chapter 15.06
REBAR REQUIREMENTS
15.06.010: REBAR REQUIREMENTS IN FOOTINGS AND FOUNDATIONS:
On any residential construction where conventional footings or foundations are poured, in addition to
any other requirements set by Payette city ordinances or by the adopted version of the international
building code (IBC) or the international residential code (IRC), the following requirements shall apply:
There shall be two (2) pieces of #4 rebar embedded horizontally the entire distance of the footings and
suspended at least three inches (3") above the bottom of the pour. There shall be two (2) pieces of #4
rebar embedded horizontally the entire distance of the foundation. In the foundation, one of the two (2)
pieces of the horizontal rebar shall be placed approximately three inches (3") below the top of the pour
and the other piece of horizontal rebar shall be placed approximately three inches (3") above the
bottom of the pour. Number 4 rebar shall be embedded vertically on six foot (6') centers the entire
length of the foundation and shall extend from the bottom of the foundation to the top of the
foundation. The vertical rebar in the foundation shall be tied to the horizontal rebar in the foundation.
The requirement for placement of horizontal and vertical rebar shall apply in all footings and all
foundations which are poured under or along the perimeter of any structure or which are poured to
support interior walls or exterior projections. (Ord. 1382, 2014)
15.06.020: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY:
In addition to any criminal penalties provided for in the enacting ordinance, the building official may
issue a stop work order on any project which is not in compliance with this chapter and may refuse to
withdraw or lift the stop work order or may refuse to allow work to proceed until all existing work is
inspected and conforms to city requirements. (Ord. 1382, 2014)
Chapter 15.08
PLUMBING CODE1
15.08.010: PLUMBING DEFINED:
"Plumbing", as used in this chapter, means and includes the process of installing in a building the
pipes to provide the water supply, apparatus for control and handling, fixtures and appliances to
receive waste and surplus water, the soil waste drain for removal of waste or surplus water, traps to
prevent sewer air from entering the occupied portion of the building, ventilating pipes to protect the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 317/467
trap seals, and generally all work usually and customarily done by plumbers and drain layers. (Prior
code § 4-2-1)
15.08.020: CONNECTING AND SUPPLY LINES; REQUIRED MATERIALS:
All connecting lines running to sewers shall be laid with soil pipe, cement, vitrified tile or other
approved material. All domestic water supply lines laid under concrete shall be copper. (Prior code
§ 4-2-4)
15.08.030: INSTALLATION OR ALTERATION; SKETCH AND PERMIT REQUIRED:
No plumbing within the city shall be installed, replaced, altered or changed until a sketch of the
proposed work is submitted to the building inspector who shall issue a permit for the proposed
plumbing; provided, that the plan thereof conforms with the plumbing code and other restrictions set
forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 4-2-5)
15.08.040: INSPECTIONS REQUIRED:
A. No plumbing installed or altered in the city shall be used for domestic or commercial purposes until
the same has passed the following inspections by the building inspector:
1. Inspection 1 shall be made before the roughing in work is covered. "Roughing in", as used in
this section, means and includes the time in the installation of plumbing when all sewers, drains,
vents and cleanouts, and hot water and cold water piping to all fixtures, both open and
concealed work necessary to properly fulfill the sanitary provisions of this code, have been
installed.
2. Inspection 2 shall be made at the time when the plumbing is ready for use.
B. Such inspections shall be requested by the person doing said plumbing and, upon failure to request
the first inspection before the roughing in is covered, the building inspector shall require the
opening of the walls or parts of the structure necessary for his complete inspection of the
plumbing. (Prior code § 4-2-6)
15.08.050: NONCONFORMING WORK:
If the building inspector finds plumbing which does not comply with the provisions of this chapter in
any installation or remodeling of plumbing, he shall then give the plumber or person doing the
plumbing notification thereof in writing, requiring the correction of the defects found and, until such
defects are cured, that said plumbing not be used, as provided by this section; and during the time of
the curing of such defects, the building inspector shall place a red tag on the supply line valve or other
prominent place upon the water supply line of said premises, stating that such plumbing is not
approved for domestic or commercial use. Upon completion of the corrections required or upon final
approval of plumbing installations or repairs, the building inspector shall issue a certificate of
inspection containing a statement to the effect that said plumbing has been found to comply with this
chapter, and shall place a blue tag on the supply line valve or other prominent place on the water
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 318/467
supply line of said premises stating that said plumbing is approved for domestic and commercial use.
(Prior code § 4-2-7)
15.08.060: VIOLATION DECLARED MISDEMEANOR:
Any person who engages in the trade, business or calling of a plumber without a permit, as provided
by section 15.08.030 of this chapter, or who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Prior code
§ 4-2-8)
Chapter 15.12
HOTELS1
15.12.010: DEFINED:
"Hotel" means every building maintained or advertised as a public lodging house, or every building
where more than six (6) rooms are provided for sleeping accommodations. (Prior code § 5-10-1)
15.12.020: FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT; FIRE CHIEF OR OTHER OFFICER TO
SPECIFY:
The fire chief or other officer designated by the governing body shall survey each hotel and specify
suitable fire detecting devices or extinguishing appliances which shall be provided. (Prior code § 5-10-
2)
15.12.030: FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT; MAINTENANCE:
Fire protective or extinguishing systems or appliances which have been installed in compliance with
any permit or order, or according to any provisions of this title, shall be maintained in operative
condition at all times, and it is unlawful for any owner or occupant to reduce the effectiveness of the
protection so required. (Prior code § 5-10-3)
15.12.040: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the fire chief and the health officer, or other officers so designated by the
governing body, to make periodic and regular inspections of every hotel and to make regular reports to
the governing body of such hotel or hotels concerning regulations imposed by this title. (Prior code
§ 5-10-4)
15.12.050: REGISTER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 319/467
A register shall be maintained at every hotel and each guest shall be required to register his name and
home address. The date of arrival and departure shall be clearly indicated and the register shall be
maintained for a period of at least one year following registration. The register shall be open for
inspection to any authorized person. (Prior code § 5-10-5)
Chapter 15.16
MOTELS1
15.16.010: CONSTRUCTION; PERMIT REQUIRED:
Before the construction of a motel is started, an application for a permit for such construction shall be
submitted to the city clerk. The clerk shall present such application to the governing body for its
approval. Only after approval of the governing body shall a permit for construction of a motel be
issued. (Prior code § 5-9-1)
15.16.020: SERVICE STATIONS; DISTANCE RESTRICTION:
Automobile service stations shall be located no closer than fifty feet (50') to any motel. (Prior code § 5-
9-2)
15.16.030: PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENT:
Each unit of a motel or tourist court shall be provided with an assigned parking space entirely on the
premises. (Prior code § 5-9-3)
15.16.040: MINIMUM SPACE AND ROOMS REQUIRED:
The minimum space for each unit shall be twelve feet by twenty feet (12' x 20') and shall contain one
full bath, toilet facilities, dressing compartment and sleeping room. (Prior code § 5-9-4)
15.16.050: CONFORMANCE TO CODE STANDARDS:
The plumbing, heating and ventilation components shall meet all local fire, plumbing and building code
requirements. (Prior code § 5-9-5)
15.16.060: MOTEL OR TOURIST COURT; REQUIRED APPLICATION
INFORMATION:
Each application for a motel or tourist court shall be submitted with a complete plan, including the plot
plan and adjacent buildings, parking arrangement and driveways, unit sizes, plumbing and heating
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 320/467
layout, accessory uses, materials to be used, front and rear elevations, and architectural design. (Prior
code § 5-9-6)
15.16.070: REGISTER:
Every operator of a motel shall maintain a register in which each guest shall register his name, home
address and license number of the vehicle in which he is traveling. The date of his arrival and
departure shall also be recorded. Such register shall be available to any authorized person inspecting
the motel and shall be preserved for a period of not less than one year. (Prior code § 5-9-7)
Chapter 15.24
GARAGES
15.24.010: DEFINITIONS:
GARAGE: A building in which are housed, for rent, care, demonstration, storage or sale, self-propelled
vehicles or other wheeled machines containing in the tanks thereof flammable liquids for fuel or
power; also all parts of the building and all adjoining structures or buildings not cut off by an unpierced
firewall.
PRIVATE GARAGE: All automobile garages or shelters housing not more than three (3) motor
vehicles. (Prior code § 4-6-1)
15.24.020: PROHIBITED LOCATIONS; PARTITIONING REQUIRED FOR SHARED
USE:
A. No garage shall be allowed or kept in any building used for a school, place of detention or
assembly, hotel, apartment, tenement or lodging house, or within thirty feet (30') of any school,
place of detention or assembly.
B. Any building erected or remodeled as a garage and occupied in part as an office building,
manufacturing establishment warehouse or store shall have such parts entirely cut off from the
portion used as a garage by unpierced firewalls at least twelve inches (12") in thickness. Such part
used as a garage shall have fireproof floors, ceiling and walls, and the portion used other than a
garage shall have adequate means of exit independent of that used for the garage. (Prior code
§ 4-6-2)
15.24.030: FIREPROOFING REQUIREMENTS:
All garages erected after the effective date of the provisions codified in this chapter, except as
specified as private garages, shall be of fireproof construction, and the walls, ceiling, roof and floors
shall be smooth and of concrete, brick or other approved incombustible material. (Prior code § 4-6-3)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 321/467
15.24.040: BUILDINGS REMODELED FOR USE AS GARAGE; FIREPROOFING:
No building of other than fireproof construction shall be remodeled for use as a garage, unless the
same is made to comply with all of the requirements given in sections 15.24.020 and 15.24.030 of this
chapter. (Prior code § 4-6-4)
15.24.050: USE AND CARE OF FLOORS:
Where buildings are being used for garage purposes, in which wooden floors exist, sufficiently large
and fluid tight metallic drip pans shall be placed under all motor vehicles, and all floors shall be well
cleaned and mopped each day with a strong alkali or other nonflammable grease solvent solution.
(Prior code § 4-6-5)
15.24.060: TO BE KEPT CLEAN; RECEPTACLES FOR COMBUSTIBLE
MATERIALS:
All garages must be kept clean. Grease soaked, oil soaked or paint soaked rags, waste or other
combustible material of like character shall be kept in metallic receptacles having tightfitting covers.
(Prior code § 4-6-6)
15.24.070: DRAIN OR WASTE MAIN CONNECTIONS TO SEWER SYSTEM; TRAP
REQUIREMENTS:
There shall be no direct connection between any garage, waste basin, sink, floor drain or waste and
any sewer system or house drainage. All such drain or waste mains to a sewer system shall have
intercepting grease, oil and inflammable liquid traps which shall completely separate such substances
from water and sewage and allow their removal. Such traps shall be properly ventilated. Grease, oil
and other like substances taken from such traps shall be removed and disposed of in a manner
satisfactory to the chief of the fire department. (Prior code § 4-6-7)
15.24.080: REPAIR WORK PROHIBITED WHERE:
No repairs of any kind shall be made in any basement or subbasement garage, and no repairs shall
be made in any private garage; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall prevent a person
from making repairs on his own vehicle in his own private garage. (Prior code § 4-6-8)
Chapter 15.28
SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
15.28.010: UNIFORM SIGN CODE; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Pursuant to authority set out in the Idaho Code, the city of Payette does hereby adopt by reference the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 322/467
1997 edition of the uniform sign code, as published by the International Conference of Building
Officials, together with any appendices thereto, and such later editions as may be published. The
uniform sign code is adopted as the sign code of the city and it shall regulate the erection,
construction, enlargement, alteration and maintenance of the signs in the city and shall provide for the
issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor. Three (3) copies shall be kept on file in the
office of the city clerk and is made a part of this section by reference in the same manner as though
set out in full verbatim. Provided, however, that if any sections of this chapter should conflict with any
provision of the uniform sign code, that provision contained within this code shall prevail. (Ord. 1161
§ 1, 1999: Ord. 944, 1983: prior code § 4-4-1)
15.28.020: UNIFORM SIGN CODE; AMENDMENTS:
The sign code, as adopted and incorporated by reference in section 15.28.010 of this chapter, is
amended as follows:
A. Subsection 3 of section 303 is deleted.
B. Section 1401 of the uniform sign code shall read as follows: "No temporary sign shall exceed one
hundred (100) square feet in area. Temporary signs of rigid material shall not exceed twenty four
(24) square feet in area or six feet (6') in height, nor shall any such sign be fastened to the ground.
Temporary signs may remain in place for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days, unless otherwise
allowed or permitted by the legislative body."
C. Table 4-B is amended in its entirety to read as follows: "Clearance less than eight feet (8'), no
projection permitted; clearance of eight feet (8'), one foot (1') projection permitted; clearance of
nine feet (9') or more, no restriction on projection except that the sign shall not project within two
feet (2') of the curbline."
D. Table 4-C is modified to provide the following maximum thickness allowed for signs projecting more
than five feet (5'): six foot (6') projection, maximum thickness one foot six inches (1'6"); seven feet
(7') projection, maximum thickness one foot (1'); projection of eight feet (8') or more, maximum
thickness six inches (6"). (Prior code § 4-4-2)
15.28.030: SIGNS OVER SIDEWALKS OR STREETS; TRUTH IN ADVERTISING
REQUIREMENT:
No permanent signs shall be erected, constructed, placed, permitted or maintained over or across any
portion of the sidewalks or streets within the municipality, unless the sign accurately, correctly, and
continuously advertises and represents to the public the existing use or business of the real property
adjoining the street or sidewalk over or across which the sign is located. (Prior code § 4-4-3)
15.28.040: SIGNS OVER SIDEWALKS OR STREETS; REMOVAL REQUIRED FOR
NONCOMPLIANCE:
All occupants, tenants, owners and agents of owners of real property within the municipality are
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 323/467
required to remove all signs not complying with the requirements of section 15.28.030 of this chapter.
(Prior code § 4-4-4)
15.28.050: SIGNS OVER SIDEWALKS OR STREETS; NONCOMPLIANCE;
NOTIFICATION OF OWNER; ACTION BY CITY:
The city administrator or other duly authorized representative is authorized and empowered to give
actual notice to the owner, agent of the owner, tenant or occupant of real property to comply with
sections 15.28.030 and 15.28.040 of this chapter; provided, however, if actual notice is not possible,
the city administrator shall give written notice by registered mail, addressed to said owner, agent of
owner, tenant or occupant at his last known address. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any such
owner, agent of owner, tenant or occupant to comply with said sections 15.28.030 and 15.28.040 of
this chapter, the designated official is authorized and empowered to pay for and employ labor for the
removal of the sign. The amount of the reasonable value of services rendered in removing the sign,
plus accrued interest computed thereon at the legal rate from the date of completion of said work, if
not paid within thirty (30) days after actual notice is given to the owner, agent of owner, tenant or
occupant of the real property that the sign has been removed, shall be declared delinquent and be
certified to the tax collector of the county by the clerk, and shall be placed by the county tax collector
upon the tax roll and collected in the same manner and subject to the same penalties as other city
taxes. (Prior code § 4-4-5)
15.28.060: SIGNS OVER SIDEWALKS OR STREETS; VIOLATION DECLARED
MISDEMEANOR; SEPARATE OFFENSES:
A. The failure, neglect or refusal of a tenant, occupant, owner or agent of the owner to comply with
sections 15.28.030 and 15.28.040 of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor.
B. Each and every ten (10) days any owner, agent of the owner, tenant or occupant fails, refuses, or
neglects to comply with the provisions of sections 15.28.030 and 15.28.040 of this chapter shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense, and each of such separate offenses shall be punishable
as a misdemeanor. (Prior code §§ 4-4-6, 4-4-7)
15.28.070: NONACCESSORY OR OFF PREMISES SIGNS:
A. Definition: Nonaccessory or off premises signs are signs which are not related to the property upon
which they are located, or to the activities being conducted thereon. Nonaccessory off premises
signs include large general advertising signs known as billboards and signs advertising an off site
business.
B. New Signs: No new nonaccessory, off premises, general advertising signs of the billboard category
are allowed. Existing billboards may be allowed to relocate if the new site is approved based upon
the findings and criteria set forth in this section. Existing nonaccessory off premises signs of the
billboard category may be replaced structure for structure.
C. Equivalents: An existing, single faced sign, may be proposed at a new location as a double faced
sign on a single sign structure. An existing double faced billboard sign cannot be relocated as two
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 324/467
(2) single face signs. Applications for billboard sign relocation must reflect the size of the sign that
is being replaced or relocated. V-shaped, double face billboard signs shall be considered a single
sign structure as long as the angle between the sign faces does not exceed thirty five degrees
(35o).
D. Prohibited Signs: There shall be no permits issued for any new off premises signs or billboards for
any property within the Payette city limits. Existing off premises signs or billboards shall be allowed
to continue subject to the following set out limitations. Those signs or billboards may be moved
within the city limits.
E. Distance And Spacing Requirements:
1. No off premises sign may be moved to within one thousand feet (1,000') in any direction of
another off premises sign.
2. In addition to finding that a proposed off premises sign complies with all general requirements
and spacing regulations as described in this chapter, the commission must make all of the
following findings in permitting such a sign:
a. The location and placement of the sign will not endanger motorists or pedestrians and does
not cause undue distraction to traffic on the adjacent street or impede views at street or
railroad intersections.
b. The sign will not cover or blanket any prominent view of a structure or facade of historical or
architectural significance.
c. The sign will not obstruct view or uses of adjacent building to side yards, front yards or to
open space.
d. The sign will not distract, intrude upon or negatively impact the visual quality of a public open
space such as a public recreation facility, square, plaza, courtyard and the like.
e. The sign is compatible with building heights of the existing neighborhood and does not impose
a foreign or inharmonious element to an existing skyline.
f. The sign's lighting will not cause hazardous or unsafe driving conditions for motorists and will
not glare, reflect or spill onto adjacent business or residential areas.
F. Directional Off Premises Signs:
1. A directional off premises sign is one that identifies a premises not located on the same property
as the sign and gives directional information to the reader to the off site location.
a. Such a sign may be freestanding or flush wall mounted. It may or may not be illuminated.
b. A directional off premises sign shall not be constructed until the builder has first obtained a
conditional use permit for the sign.
G. Moving Signs: No nonaccessory, off premises, general advertising signs of the billboard category
may be moved without first obtaining a conditional use permit from the planning and zoning
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 325/467
commission. No sign which is permitted by this section shall be constructed without first obtaining
a building permit from the city building official. (Ord. 1339, 2011: Ord. 1265 § 1, 2006)
Chapter 15.32
HOUSE NUMBERING1
15.32.010: DECIMAL SYSTEM ADOPTED:
The decimal system of numbering houses and buildings is adopted. (Prior code § 9-5-1)
15.32.020: AVENUES:
A. To all that portion of avenues lying between the west boundary line of the city and Second Street,
two hundred (200) numbers shall be assigned.
B. Beginning at Second Street, calling it 200 and running in an easterly direction, one hundred (100)
numbers shall be assigned to each block.
C. On all avenues, all even numbers shall be placed on the south side of said avenues and the odd
numbers, alternating, shall be placed on the north side of said avenues. (Prior code § 9-5-2)
15.32.030: STREETS:
A. Beginning at Center Avenue, calling it zero, all streets running north and south from Center Avenue
shall be assigned one hundred numbers to each block.
B. On all streets running north from Center Avenue, all even numbers shall be placed on the east side
of said streets, and the odd numbers alternating shall be placed on the west side of said streets.
C. On all streets running south from Center Avenue all even numbers shall be placed on the west side
of said streets and the odd numbers alternating shall be placed on the east side of said streets.
(Prior code § 9-5-3)
15.32.040: UNIFORMITY:
A. While one hundred (100) numbers are allotted to each block, the division of numbers to the
frontage thereof shall be one number to each fifteen feet (15') or such other even part of a lot or
block frontage as shall, in the judgment of the engineer, be deemed most advisable, the intention
being to preserve as nearly as possible a general uniformity in numbering throughout the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 326/467
B. Blocks approximately double the ordinary frontage shall contain two hundred (200) numbers and, in
all undivided tracts of land intervening between land laid out in blocks, the lines of streets shall be
considered as crossing in regular continuation of streets adjoining additions.
C. For convenience of numbering in unplatted sections of the city, each three hundred seventy five
feet (375') shall be termed a block. (Prior code § 9-5-4)
15.32.050: CONFLICTS, MISTAKES OR IRREGULARITIES; ADJUSTMENT BY
ENGINEER:
In all cases of mistake or conflict in numbering, or where some special arrangement is necessary in
consequence of the irregularity of streets or avenues or want of uniformity in the size of blocks, the
city engineer shall direct and make the proper adjustment in accordance with the spirit and intention of
this chapter. (Prior code § 9-5-5)
15.32.060: ASSIGNMENT BY ENGINEER; DESIGNATION CERTIFICATE
AVAILABLE ON DEMAND:
The engineer shall assign to each house its proper number and, upon application shall deliver, free of
charge, to the owner or occupant thereof a certificate designating the number. (Prior code § 9-5-6)
15.32.070: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT:
It is made the duty of every owner, occupant or agent of all buildings, upon all of the streets and
avenues of the city upon which a system of numbering has been adopted, to number their buildings in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 9-5-7)
15.32.080: MATERIAL, SIZE AND PLACEMENT OF NUMBERS:
All numbers shall be of aluminum, white metal or nickel plated metal, or may consist of gilt lettering on
the inside of a glass transom or door. All numbers shall be distinctly legible and at least three inches
(3") in height. All such metallic figures shall be posted conspicuously over or upon the front door of the
building of which the same are to be attached. (Prior code § 9-5-8)
Chapter 15.33
ADVERTISING ON BENCHES ON CITY RIGHTS OF WAY
15.33.010: LICENSE FEE:
Individuals and/or businesses may apply for a license to advertise on benches which are placed on
the city rights of way. The cost for the annual license for the advertising space shall be set by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 327/467
resolution. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year the license was issued. (Ord. 1371,
2012)
15.33.020: LICENSE RENEWAL:
Upon expiration of the license, an applicant on a waiting list shall have the first option to receive a
license for advertising space for the next term. If there are no other applicants that want to use the
bench for advertising, the licensee currently advertising on the bench shall have the option of
renewing their license to advertise for another year. If the current licensee does not want to renew
their license, the bench advertisement will be painted over and left blank. (Ord. 1126 § 1, 1996)
15.33.030: BENCH MAINTENANCE; NATURE OF ADVERTISING:
During any term which a licensee is using a bench for advertising purposes, the licensee shall be
responsible for all maintenance, repairs and upkeep on the bench. The licensee's advertising shall be
painted or done by a professional sign painter, shall be in good taste and shall contain no defamatory,
obscene or off color language, characters or symbols. If a bench is in disrepair or faded and the city
notifies the licensee of this condition, the licensee shall have thirty (30) days in which to repair and/or
paint the bench or forfeit the remainder of the term of advertising and fall to the end of the list for those
wanting to advertise on the bench. (Ord. 1126 § 1, 1996)
15.33.040: LOCATION OF BENCHES:
The city shall control the location and/or placement of the benches. (Ord. 1126 § 1, 1996)
15.33.050: TERMINATION OF LICENSE:
In the event of a breach of the licensee's agreement or a dispute of any kind, the city may terminate
the license agreement and take any action with regard to the bench as the city deems appropriate.
(Ord. 1126 § 1, 1996)
Chapter 15.36
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
15.36.010: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city of
Payette, Idaho. (Ord. 972 § 1, 1987)
15.36.020: FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 328/467
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal insurance administration in a scientific and
engineering report entitled the "Flood Insurance Study For The City Of Payette, Idaho", dated August
15, 1983, with accompanying flood insurance maps is hereby adopted by reference and declared to
be a part of this chapter. The flood insurance study is on file at the Payette city hall, 700 Center
Avenue, Payette, Idaho. (Ord. 972 § 2, 1987)
15.36.030: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions
of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person
who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisoned for not more than ninety (90)
days, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city of Payette, Idaho, from taking such other lawful action
as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 972 § 3, 1987)
15.36.040: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed
restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord.
972 § 4, 1987)
15.36.050: INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: a) considered as minimum
requirements; b) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and c) deemed neither to limit nor
repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 972 § 5, 1987)
15.36.060: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map
(FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet (3'); a clearly defined channel does not
exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and, velocity flow may be evident. AO is
characterized as sheet flow and AH indicates ponding.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one
percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Designation on maps always includes
the letter A or V.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 329/467
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. Also referred to as the "100-year flood". Designation on maps always includes the letters A
or V. (Ord. 972 § 5, 1987)
15.36.070: LIMITATION ON LIABILITY OF CITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur
on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will
be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city,
any officer or employee thereof, or the federal insurance administration, for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 972
§ 6, 1987)
15.36.080: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT; REQUIRED:
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of
special flood hazard established in section 15.36.020 of this chapter. The permit shall be for all
structures, including manufactured homes, and for all development, including fill and other activities.
This requirement shall not apply to open shelters, open fences and recreational equipment not
contained in a building, pole barns and pole type structures which are open on all sides to an
elevation of at least one foot (1') above the base flood elevation. Prior to constructing buildings or
engaging in activities which are exempt from the requirements of this chapter, a person requesting an
exemption shall first provide a certification that such construction or use will not alter the base flood
elevation. This certification must be provided by a registered professional engineer licensed in the
state. (Ord. 1090 § 1, 1994: Ord. 972 § 7, 1987)
15.36.090: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT; APPLICATION:
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the building official and may
include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is
required:
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed;
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for
any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in subsection 15.36.140C of this
chapter; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 330/467
D. Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development. (Ord. 972 § 8, 1987)
15.36.100: BUILDING OFFICIAL TO ADMINISTER:
The building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or
denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. Duties of the building
official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have
been satisfied.
B. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from
those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
C. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the
floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of subsection
15.36.150A of this chapter are met.
D. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 15.36.020 of this
chapter, the building official obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer sections
15.36.140 and 15.36.150 of this chapter.
E. Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood insurance study or required as in
section 15.36.120 of this chapter, obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and
whether or not the structure contains a basement.
F. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
1. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level); and
2. Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in subsection 15.36.090C of this chapter.
G. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.
H. Notify adjacent communities and the (state coordinating agency) prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the federal insurance administration.
I. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so
that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 331/467
J. Make interpretations where needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in section 15.36.110 of this chapter.
(Ord. 972 § 10, 1987)
15.36.110: APPEAL BOARD:
A. The appeal board as established by the city of Payette, Idaho, shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
B. The appeal board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision or determination made by the building official in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to
the district court of the third judicial district of the state of Idaho, in and for the county of Payette, as
provided by statute.
D. In passing upon such applications, the appeal board shall consider all technical evaluations, all
relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owner;
4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
6. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or
erosion damage;
7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management
program for that area;
9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 332/467
E. Upon consideration of the factors of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the appeal board
may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
F. The building official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the
federal insurance administration upon request. (Ord. 972 § 10, 1987)
15.36.120: VARIANCES:
Conditions for variances shall be as follows:
A. Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is
for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the
base flood level, providing subsections 15.36.110D1 through D11 of this chapter have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on
the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to
the procedures set forth in this section.
C. Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon:
1. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant;
3. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public as identified in section 15.36.110 of this chapter, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
F. Variances as interpreted in the national flood insurance program are based on the general zoning
law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and
do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily
address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the
flood elevations should be quite rare.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 333/467
G. Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser
degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry floodproofing, where it can be determined that such
action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria except subsection A
of this section, and otherwise complies with section 15.36.130 of this chapter.
H. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be
permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost
of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation. (Ord. 972 § 11, 1987)
15.36.130: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION:
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:
A. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement of the structure.
B. All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground
anchors (reference FEMA's "Manufactured Home Installation In Flood Hazard Areas" guidebook
for additional techniques).
C. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility
equipment resistant to flood damage.
D. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and
practices that minimize flood damage.
E. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities
shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
F. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration
of floodwaters into the system.
G. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
H. On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from
them during flooding.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 334/467
I. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
J. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
K. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
L. Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another
authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed
developments which contain at least fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less).
M. Where elevation data is not available either through the flood insurance study or from another
authoritative source, applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed
construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment
and includes use of historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where
available. Failure to elevate at least two feet (2') above grade in these zones may result in higher
insurance rates. (Ord. 972 § 12, 1987)
15.36.140: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in
section 15.36.020 or subsection 15.36.110D of this chapter, the following provisions are required:
A. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation.
B. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
1. A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
2. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade.
3. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or devices provided that
they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
C. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base
flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 335/467
1. Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
2. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy.
3. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this
subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and
plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in subsection 15.36.100F of
this chapter.
4. Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for
space below the lowest floor as described in this section.
5. Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums
will be based on rates that are one foot (1') below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building
constructed to the base flood level will be rated as 1 foot below that level).
D. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH and AE
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home
is at or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system in accordance with the provisions of subsection 15.36.130B of this chapter.
(Ord. 972 § 13, 1987)
15.36.150: FLOODWAYS:
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 15.36.020 of this chapter are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other
development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided
demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions.
Where base flood elevations have been provided but floodways have not, this section should read
as follows:
The cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more
than one foot (1') at any point. (Ord. 972 §§ 14, 15, 1987)
15.36.160: SHALLOW FLOODING AREAS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 336/467
Shallow flooding areas appear on FIRMs as AO zones with depth designations. The base flood depths
in these zones range from one to three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist, or
where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
usually characterized as sheet flow. In these areas, the following provisions apply:
A. New construction and substantial improvements of residential structures within AO zones shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade of the
building site, to or above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth
number is specified).
B. New construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures within AO zones shall
either:
1. Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade of the
building site, to or above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth
number is specified); or
2. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely floodproofed to or above that
level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. If this method is used, compliance shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect as in subsection 15.36.140C3 of this
chapter.
3. Require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and
away from proposed structures. (Ord. 972 § 16, 1987)
Chapter 15.37
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
15.37.010: CREATED; ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby created and established a historic preservation commission which shall consist of
seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council.
Members of the commission shall be appointed with due regard to the proper representation of such
fields as history, architecture, urban planning, archeology and law. Initially two (2) members shall be
appointed for a term of one year, two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years and
three (3) members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. Thereafter all appointments shall
be made for a term of three (3) years, the members of said commission being eligible for
reappointment. If a vacancy occurs, the mayor with the consent of the council shall appoint a member
to fill the unexpired term. The members of the commission shall serve without pay but shall be
reimbursed by the city for preapproved necessary expenses incurred in connection with their duties.
The members of the commission shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council and may be
removed for any reason. A city council member may be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the
council to serve as a nonvoting council liaison. The city administrator or a designee shall serve as an
advisor to the commission. (Ord. 1407, 2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 337/467
15.37.020: ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS; RULES; MEETINGS:
At their first meeting, the appointed commissioners shall elect officers who shall serve for terms of one
year. The commission may establish any rule necessary for the orderly conduct of its business. All
meetings of the commission shall be open to the public and subject to the open meeting laws of the
state of Idaho. The commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings and actions. (Ord.
1240 § 1, 2005)
15.37.030: POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION:
The commission shall be authorized to:
A. Conduct a survey of local historic properties and landmarks;
B. Recommend contracting with the state or federal government, or any agency of either, or with any
other person, firm, corporation, or organization, to accomplish the purposes of this chapter;
C. Cooperate with the federal, state and local governments in the pursuit of the objectives of historic
preservation;
D. Participate in the conduct of land use, urban renewal and other planning processes undertaken by
the county, the city or any other entity;
E. Recommend ordinances and otherwise provide information for the purposes of historic preservation
to the city;
F. Promote and conduct an educational and interpretative program on historic properties within the
jurisdiction of the city; and
G. Apply for grants and any other aid which may be available from any public or private source. (Ord.
1240 § 1, 2005)
Title 16
SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 16.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
16.04.010: PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 338/467
In order to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of present and future residents, and
to bring about a coordinated and efficient development of the city, the following regulations for the
subdividing of land within the city are adopted. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-15-1)
16.04.020: APPLICABILITY:
A. The regulations codified in this title shall apply to all subdivisions and development within the
corporate limits of the city, or within the area of city impact as established by ordinance, including
the following:
1. The dividing of any lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more tracts, lots or parcels for
transfer of ownership or building development;
2. The dedication of any street or alley through or along any tract of land;
3. Any division or resubdivision of a lot or parcel into sublots except as provided in subsection B of
this section.
B. The regulations codified in this title shall not apply to any of the following:
1. A readjustment of lot lines as shown on a recorded plat which does not reduce the area,
frontage, width or depth of each building site below the minimum prescribed by any city
ordinance or any covenant pertaining to said plat nor create any new lots.
A duly recorded or filed record of survey that conforms to Idaho Code title 55, chapter 19 shall
be required for any lot line adjustment or adjustment of property boundaries between two (2)
adjacent parcels. Such record of survey shall be filed both with the Payette County recorder and
the city of Payette. In addition to the requirements of Idaho Code 55-1906, the certificate of
surveyor shall be included on the record of survey. The survey shall also contain the original lot
line(s), the adjusted parcel lines, the square footage of the adjusted parcels, correct street
names, footprint(s) of all existing building(s) (with dimensions shown from the adjusted line), a
note giving the zone standard in effect for the area or as specifically approved and a certification
and signature of the city engineer verifying that the record of survey complies with state law, title
55 of the Idaho Code and with this title.
The adjustment of the property boundaries shall not reduce either parcel below the minimum
prescribed by any applicable city ordinance or as specifically approved, nor violate setback
requirements. The record of survey shall so contain all existing easements of record.
Accompanying the record of survey shall be a new property description of each adjusted parcel.
The adjusted property boundary between the parcels shall be marked at each endpoint, angle
point, and where the adjusted boundary changes direction, with monuments that conform to the
provisions of Idaho Code 54-1227. The city engineer shall verify compliance with this section
prior to the record of survey being filed with the Payette County recorder.
2. A division of land into parcels of five (5) acres or more designated to be used solely for
agricultural purposes, and which does not involve any new street dedication other than
dedications widening existing streets.
3. An allocation of land in the settlement of an estate of a decedent or a court decree for the
distribution of property thereunder. Provided however, that any development of any lands divided
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 339/467
as a result of the settlement of an estate of a decedent or a court decree for the distribution of
property shall conform to all requirements of this code.
4. The exceptions contained in subsections B1, B2 and B3 of this section are from the review and
approval requirements of this code only. Surveys must still be prepared in accordance with these
regulations and filed with the county recorder. A copy of any plat, amended plat or correction or
survey plat must also be provided to the city engineer, city clerk. (Ord. 1337, 2011)
Chapter 16.08
DEFINITIONS
16.08.010: GENERALLY:
For the purposes of this title, the following definitions shall apply:
ALLEY: A minor public way providing secondary access at the back or side of a property.
CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer shall give lines and grades of all existing streets and alleys within
the city limits. He shall give the grades and lines of all new sidewalks and the grades and levels for
roads, ditches, culverts or drains for surface drainage; and he shall assist the council and any of their
committees in any and all such works.
COMMISSION: The planning and zoning commission of the city.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The comprehensive plan for the city officially adopted by the council.
COUNTY ENGINEER OR SURVEYOR: That registered engineer appointed by the county board of
county commissioners.
COUNTY RECORDER: The office of the county recorder.
CUL-DE-SAC: The turnaround space located at the terminus of a dead end street.
DEDICATION: The setting apart of land or interests in land for use by the public. Land becomes
dedicated when accepted by the council as a public dedication, either by ordinance or entry in the
official minutes of the council.
DEVELOPER: An individual, corporation, firm, group or other legal entity which undertakes the
subdividing of a lot, tract or parcel of land for the purpose of transfer, ownership or development,
including the dedication of streets or changes in street or lot lines.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not
limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations located within the area of special flood hazard.
EASEMENT: A grant of the right to use land for specific purposes.
FLAG LOT: A lot that sits behind another lot, with a narrow entry point at a public street. Also known
as a "key" lot.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 340/467
HIGHWAY: A street designated as a highway by the state or federal agency responsible therefor.
LOT: A portion of a recorded subdivision or a property defined by metes and bounds intended as a
unit for transfer of ownership or for development.
NATURAL DRAINAGE COURSES: Any natural channel of a stream, river, canal or other watercourse,
whether containing water year round or not.
OWNER: An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, or other lawful entity
having sufficient proprietary interest in land to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings
under the regulations of this title.
PLAT, FINAL: A plan of a subdivision, dedication or any portion thereof prepared for filing and
recording by the county recorder and containing those elements and requirements set forth in this title.
A final plat, upon its being filed and recorded by the county recorder, shall be known as an authorized
plat, subdivision or dedication.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: A plan of a proposed subdivision or dedication, containing the elements and
requirements set forth in this title.
A. "Plat, correction" means a plat which is prepared for the purpose of correcting lot boundaries, to
resolve errors in mapping, vacancies, overlaps and errors in surveys, descriptions or to correct
some other error in a final plat.
B. "Plat, amended" means a plat which is prepared to reflect alterations or changes in boundaries,
lot sizes, lot divisions, numbers of lots, streets, easements, rights of way or other changes in a
platted parcel or platted subdivision.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS: The standard specifications for public works of the city officially
adopted by the council and including all subsequent amendments thereto.
STREET: Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, place, viaduct, easement for access, or
other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway; or a street or way shown in a plat
heretofore approved pursuant to law, or approved by official action and includes the land between
street lines, whether improved or unimproved and may include pavement, shoulders, gutters,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the right of way. "Street" also means a thoroughfare
which has been dedicated or granted to the public and accepted by proper public authority, or a
thoroughfare not less than fifty feet (50') wide which has been made public by right of use and which
affords the principal access to the abutting property, and provides vehicular circulation.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A street with a high level of traffic mobility and a low level of access to land.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street designated with the primary purpose of carrying traffic from local
streets to other collector streets and arterial streets.
STREET, DEAD END: A street connecting to another street at one end only and not having provisions
for vehicular turnaround at its terminus.
STREET, LOCAL: A street intended to provide access to lots and serve the needs of a neighborhood.
STREET, LOOP: A minor street which forms a loop and returns to the same street from which it
originated. A street forming a connection between two (2) other streets is not considered a loop.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 341/467
STREET, PARTIAL: A dedicated right of way that provides only a portion of the required street width.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into more than one part for the purpose of
transfer of ownership or for the construction of improvements thereon.
UTILITIES: The installation for conducting water, sewage, gas, telephone, cable television or
electricity and similar facilities providing service to and used by the public. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: Ord.
1071 §§ 1, 2, 3, 1994: prior code § 11-15-2)
Chapter 16.12
DESIGN STANDARDS
16.12.010: GENERALLY:
In order that the subdivision of land within the jurisdiction of the city will contribute to the development
of safe, convenient and attractive residential, commercial and other areas, and will advance the public
welfare, the commission and council in reviewing and acting upon any subdivision plat shall ensure
that full consideration and weight is given to the following:
A. The intent and design of the proposed plat shall be in accordance with the provisions of the
comprehensive plan.
B. Street patterns in residential neighborhoods shall be designed to create areas which discourage
through traffic while being readily accessible to adjacent arterial street.
C. In the subdivision of land along arterial and collector streets, the block length shall be increased so
as to limit driveway or other vehicular access while being compatible with good design and a
reasonable use of land.
D. Street intersections in residential areas may be of a "T" rather than a "+" design wherever such
design will not unduly restrict a free movement of traffic.
E. All natural drainage courses shall be left undisturbed or be improved in a manner which will
improve the hydraulics and ease of maintenance of the channel.
F. Buffer strips controlling access to arterial and collector streets shall be required. The buffer strip
shall be a minimum of fifteen feet (15') in width, including the sidewalk, a privacy fence or berm
and landscaping. The landscaping shall comply with the definition of "landscaping" in section
17.08.010 of this code. The fence shall be vinyl, chainlink with privacy slats or cedar. If cedar is
installed, it shall have steel posts and an oil stain which shall be restained every five (5) years. The
landscaping and fence or berm area shall be maintained by the homeowners' association.
Subdivision entrances onto an arterial or collector street shall be landscaped. The landscaping
shall complete the radius on both sides of the entrance extending to the terminus of the fenced or
bermed area and may include an entrance island. The landscaping shall have a sign naming the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 342/467
subdivision and comply with section 17.08.400 of this code. The landscaping, sign and entrance
area shall be maintained by the homeowners' association.
G. The city may require that sites for public improvements such as well locations or pump houses be
dedicated within a subdivision.
H. The city may require the dedication of land for open space or recreational purposes that directly
benefits the residents of the subdivision.
I. All subdivisions shall be designed so that all stormwater is contained on site in accordance with the
requirements of the Idaho department of environmental quality and Idaho department of water
resources. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-15-6(A))
16.12.020: BLOCK REQUIREMENTS:
No block shall be longer than six hundred sixty feet (660') nor less than two hundred fifty feet (250')
between street intersections, and each block shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of
lots except as provided in section 16.12.030 of this chapter or by a special exception approved by the
city council. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-15-6(B))
16.12.030: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot area, dimensions and minimum street frontage shall be as established by the city zoning
ordinance.
B. For corner lots, a property return with a radius of not less than twenty feet (20') shall be provided;
however, a larger radius may be required when, in the opinion of the city engineer, such is
necessary to serve an existing or future need.
C. Flag or key lots shall be considered only through the variance process.
D. Side lot lines shall be at approximate right angles or radial to the street line unless a variation from
the rule will provide a more desirable street and lot plan. Any variation shall be reviewed by the city
engineer and presented to the city council for approval.
E. Double frontage lots are prohibited except where a showing is made that unusual topography or
other conditions make it impossible to meet the standard lot requirement. A variance may be
granted by the city council.
F. Except as otherwise provided in this code, the minimum area of a corner lot shall be not less than
eight thousand (8,000) square feet and must have a minimum street frontage of seventy five feet
(75').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 343/467
G. Except as otherwise provided in this code, the minimum area of an inside lot shall be not less than
six thousand (6,000) square feet with a minimum street frontage of sixty feet (60'). (Ord. 1219 § 1,
2002: Ord. 1071 §§ 7, 8, 1994: Ord. 905, 1980: prior code § 11-15-6(C))
16.12.040: STREET REQUIREMENTS:
A. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the
comprehensive plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets,
topographic conditions, public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the
proposed uses of the land served.
B. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the city council may
require frontage streets, reverse frontage streets or similar treatment for the purpose of creating
desirable neighborhood character and enhancing the movement of traffic.
C. The city council may require a street along a railroad right of way suitable for the appropriate use of
the intervening land.
D. There shall be provided rights of way of such width in no case to be less than those defined in the
comprehensive plan for the city; provided, however, that the width of said rights of way shall in no
case be less than the following:
1. Regional arterial route: One hundred feet (100') and up.
2. Collector street: Seventy feet (70') to ninety feet (90').
3. Local street: Sixty feet (60').
E. Street grades shall be such as to provide for the safe movement of traffic in all weather and for
adequate drainage of streets. Street grades, whenever feasible, shall be not less than three-tenths
percent (0.3%) and not more than fifteen percent (15%).
F. In general, partial street dedications shall not be permitted; provided, however, that the council may
accept a partial street dedication when such street forms the boundary of the property being
subdivided and, in addition, is shown on the comprehensive plan, or is designated by the city
council as an arterial or collector street, or is otherwise officially designated as of major importance
as a present or future trafficway, or when such other conditions or restrictions exist or are imposed
by the city council so that the eventual completion of such street to its full required right of way is
assured. When a dedicated partial street exists adjacent to the property to be subdivided, the other
portion may be platted within such subdivision.
G. A street ending in a cul-de-sac may be permitted; provided, that the maximum length for such a
street shall be four hundred feet (400') as measured from the entrance to the center of one
turnaround. All turnarounds shall have a minimum radius of fifty feet (50') at the property line and
not less than forty five feet (45') at the curbline.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 344/467
H. Dead end streets shall not be permitted with the exception that such streets terminating at the
boundary of a subdivision may be approved when such a street and its extension is shown on the
comprehensive plan or when, in the opinion of the city council, the future extension of such a street
is feasible and necessary to the proper development of the city street pattern. A temporary cul-desac
shall be constructed at the end of a dead end street.
I. The maximum length of a loop street shall be one thousand feet (1,000') and a loop street over this
length, though otherwise meeting the definition of a loop street, shall be required to conform to the
standards of a local street in its subdivision type; provided, however, that a loop street of up to one
thousand two hundred feet (1,200') in length containing frontage of no more than twenty four (24)
building lots may be permitted.
J. Streets shall be designed and laid out in order to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and
no street shall intersect any other street at less than seventy degrees (70o).
K. Where any street deflects an angle of ten degrees (10o) or more, a connecting curve having a
minimum radius of three hundred feet (300') for arterial and collector streets and one hundred fifty
feet (150') for local streets may be required by city council.
L. Proposed streets which are a continuation of an existing street shall be given the same name as the
existing street. New streets which are not a continuation of an existing street shall not be given
names that are the same or similar, either in spelling or pronunciation, to existing streets within the
city or in the impact area. The developer shall obtain all street names within the proposed
subdivision from the planning and zoning commission before submitting same to the city council for
final approval.
M. Street trees where provided shall be of the variety, size and location approved by the council, shall
not create a sight restriction and comply with title 12 of this code. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: Ord. 905,
1980: prior code § 11-15-6(D))
16.12.050: ALLEY REQUIREMENTS:
A. Alleys may be required at the rear of all business lots and shall be at least twenty feet (20') in width.
Alleys, when provided in residential blocks, shall be not less than twenty feet (20') in width.
B. At the intersection of two (2) alleys, the corners of the abutting property shall be provided with a
property line return having a radius of not less than twenty feet (20').
C. Except under unusual circumstances, alleys shall not terminate in a dead end and in no case shall
a dead end alley be accepted unless turnaround facilities are provided to the satisfaction of the city
council. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: Ord. 905, 1980: prior code § 11-15-6(E))
16.12.060: EASEMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 345/467
Easements shall be provided for drainage, utilities or other public service as follows: front yard, ten
feet (10'), side yard, six feet (6') and rear yard, ten feet (10'). Rear yard easements may be omitted if
an alley of sufficient width to accommodate a utility easement exists in the rear of the lot. (Ord. 1219
§ 1, 2002: Ord. 1071 § 3, 1994: prior code § 11-15-6(F))
16.12.070: STREET SIGNS:
The purchase and installation of all street signs and posts for traffic control, informational purposes
and notification to the traveling public shall be the responsibility of the developer. This requirement
includes stop signs, street name signs and all other signs required by and in accordance with the
standards of the Idaho department of transportation. Street signs and posts shall be approved by the
city prior to installation. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: Ord. 1063 § 1, 1993)
16.12.080: STREETLIGHTS AND POLES:
A. As a part of any development or any subdividing, the purchase and installation of streetlights and
poles shall be the responsibility of the developer. The streetlights and poles shall conform to city
standards and be compatible with Idaho Power Company connection standards. The positioning
and placement of the lights shall be determined by the city. The streetlights and poles shall be fully
operational before acceptance of these lights by the city. All residents may be subject to a monthly
streetlight fee.
B. Streetlight poles shall be of a metal manufacture and shall meet the requirements of ASTM
standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs, luminaries, and traffic signals as
published in 1985 by the American Society for Testing and Materials for loading, wind shear and
strength, utilizing one hundred (100) watt high pressure sodium (HPS), General Electric cobra
heads and lamps. The mounting height shall be twenty five feet (25') with a minimum burial depth
of five feet (5'), making the pole length thirty feet (30') in total. All steel or aluminum seamless
poles shall be used and shall meet or exceed the specifications for both pole and accompanying
concrete, steel reinforced base as specified in standard drawing number 1. There shall be a six
foot (6') mast arm and cobra type fixture for residential street intersections. The developer shall
obtain an electrical permit from the state of Idaho and pay all inspection fees. The developer shall
indemnify and save harmless the city of Payette from any and all defects that may occur in the
materials furnished and the workmanship for a period of one year after the date of acceptance by
the city. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: Ord. 1143 § 1, 1997: Ord. 1063 § 2, 1993)
16.12.090: OPTIONAL DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
As a condition of approving any request for subdivision approval, the city council may require a
developer to build or improve to city standards any or all streets connecting the proposed subdivision
to collector streets or any streets outside of the subdivision which would have additional traffic flow
resulting from the proposed subdivision. In addition to requiring off site street improvements, the city
may require a developer to provide full width streets around the outer boundaries of the development
with recovery rights through latecomer's agreements, and the city may require a developer to provide
off site sewage lines capable of handling the additional loading, may require a developer to loop water
lines, and may require the developer to set aside property in the subdivision to accommodate storm
drainage, future street alignment, children's play areas, well development areas, fire stations or other
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 346/467
areas which may be needed for orderly and planned development. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: Ord. 1193,
2000)
Chapter 16.13
MODEL HOMES
16.13.010: PRECOMPLETION MODEL HOMES ALLOWED:
Before a subdivision is completed, a developer may be issued a use permit by which the developer is
allowed to construct one model home. That model home shall be used exclusively as a demonstration
unit, a model to show prospective buyers or as a sales office for surrounding homes located within the
subdivision. The home shall be landscaped and surrounding streets and lots shall not be allowed to
become a source of dust. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: Ord. 1136 § 1, 1996)
16.13.020: PLACEMENT OF MODEL HOME:
The home shall be placed within two hundred feet (200') of an active fire hydrant and adjacent to a
graveled or paved roadway. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: Ord. 1136 § 1, 1996)
16.13.030: RESTRICTIONS ON MODEL HOME:
A model home shall be built in accordance with and subject to all zoning and subdivision ordinances,
regulations and any agreements between the developer and the city. The home shall not receive an
occupancy permit, shall not be occupied as a residence nor shall it be offered for sale until all public
improvements are completed and accepted by the city. At the time of sale, the model home shall be
used as a residence and any use for any other purpose shall cease. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: Ord. 1136
§ 1, 1996)
16.13.040: REVOCATION OF USE PERMIT:
In the event of any violation of any provision of a use permit which has been issued to allow
construction of a model home, the permit can be revoked by the building inspector, the planning and
zoning administrator or the city clerk. In the event a use permit is revoked, any use associated
therewith shall cease immediately. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: Ord. 1136 § 1, 1996)
16.13.050: APPEAL:
A decision to revoke a use permit may be appealed to the planning and zoning commission. Any
decision of the planning and zoning commission may be appealed to the city council. A decision of the
city council shall be final. Any person appealing to the planning and zoning commission or to the city
council may be represented by counsel. At either the commission or council level the reviewing body
may affirm, reverse in whole or in part any decision rendered at the lower level. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002:
Ord. 1136 § 1, 1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 347/467
16.13.060: OCCUPANCY PERMIT:
No home in any subdivision may be occupied until a final inspection has been completed by the
building inspector and an occupancy permit has been issued. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: Ord. 1136 § 1,
1996)
16.13.070: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with the misdemeanor
statutes of the state of Idaho. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: Ord. 1136 § 1, 1996)
Chapter 16.16
PLATS GENERALLY
16.16.010: REQUIRED WHEN:
A plat shall be drawn for each subdivision of land and submitted to the commission and council as
provided in this chapter and chapters 16.20 and 16.24 of this title. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code
§ 11-15-4(A)(1))
16.16.020: OFFICIAL FILING CONTINGENT UPON APPROVAL; RECORDING OF
SALES REQUIRED:
A. No plat or description of any land subdividing shall be filed in the office of the county recorder until
the same has been acted upon by the commission and approved by the city council in preliminary
and final plat form as required in chapters 16.20 and 16.24 of this title.
B. No building permits shall be issued for any plat until the same has completed all public
improvements in the subdivision's public improvement agreement and until the final plat has been
recorded in the office of the county recorder. No lots shall be sold from any plat until the same has
been recorded in the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 1276 § 1, 2007: Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior
code § 11-15-4(A)(2))
16.16.030: PLACEMENT ON PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION'S AGENDA:
Each plat submitted for preliminary approval shall be placed on the commission's agenda only after
fulfilling the appropriate requirements on the regulations set forth in this title. (Ord. 1374, 2013)
16.16.040: APPLICATION FORMS; CERTIFICATION BY DEVELOPER:
Any application for a preliminary plat or subdivision approval, or total or partial vacation of an existing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 348/467
subdivision, dedication of a street, grant of a right of way or easement for the benefit of the public shall
be made on forms obtained from the city engineer or city clerk, and the accuracy of the data provided
thereon certified thereto by the developer. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-15-4(A)(4))
16.16.050: PRELIMINARY PLAT; FILING AND REVIEW FEES:
At the time of submission of a preliminary plat, there shall be paid to the city clerk a fee set by
resolution together with a fee set by resolution per lot preliminary plat review. This fee structure shall
also include plats in the impact area. (Ord. 1371, 2012)
16.16.060: FINAL PLAT/CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS; FILING AND REVIEW FEES:
Upon submission of the final plat of the area, or any part thereof, there shall be paid to the city clerk a
fee set by resolution together with a fee set by resolution per lot final plat/construction drawings
review. (Ord. 1371, 2012)
16.16.070: COUNCIL CHECKING AND INSPECTION OF DRAWINGS AND
CONSTRUCTION; FEES:
All preliminary plats, final plats, and construction drawings shall conform to all applicable standards as
adopted by or as set out in this code. During development, a developer shall employ an independent,
unrelated, certified construction inspector to provide full time construction inspection. Construction
inspection shall be provided during all phases of construction. At any time during construction, at the
developer's expense, the city shall have the authority to disqualify and replace any inspector, if the city
finds any reasonable cause to believe that the inspector is not adequately performing his duties. Upon
completion of the development, the developer and the construction inspector, shall provide the city
with certified, as built, construction drawings which depict the actual placement of the improvements in
the development and with certification that those improvements comply with the standards as adopted
by or as set out in this code. The as built drawings shall show location measurements for valves,
manholes, service connections and service stub out lines. Copies of the results of all soil compaction
tests, water purification tests, water line integrity tests, sewer line integrity tests, other approved
integrity tests and the inspector's daily logs shall be provided to the city engineer or city clerk upon
request but in no event less than weekly. No preliminary plat, final plat nor any construction drawings
shall be filed, recorded nor deemed accepted until presented to and approved by the city council.
(Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: Ord. 1139 § 1, 1997: Ord. 905, 1980: Ord. 874, 1977: prior code § 11-15-
10(C,D))
Chapter 16.20
PRELIMINARY PLATS
16.20.010: SUBMITTAL OF PRELIMINARY PLATS AND DATA; REVIEW BY
ENGINEER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 349/467
A. At the time the filing of an application for approval of the preliminary plat, the developer shall submit
to the city engineer the plans and data as required in chapter 16.12 of this title.
B. The city engineer shall review said plans and data as submitted or modified and, within fifteen (15)
days, advise the developer in writing as to the general compliance or noncompliance with these
regulations as well as other city codes, requirements or policies that may apply to the plans
submitted. The city engineer's fees shall be paid by the developer.
C. At such time the plans and data are submitted for a preliminary plat, the city engineer and city clerk
shall draft a public improvement agreement for city council and developer review. The agreement
shall be a written commitment concerning the use or development of the subject parcel and outline
the development improvements required. The required improvements shall comply with this
chapter, city of Payette development standards and requirements of the state of Idaho. The city
council and developer shall sign and comply with the agreement as a condition of plat approval.
(Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: Ord. 1185 § 1, 2000: prior code § 11-15-4(B))
16.20.020: FILING OF COPIES; SUBMITTAL OF TITLE REPORT OR ACCEPTABLE
ALTERNATIVE:
A. Any owner desiring to subdivide land within the city shall file with the city engineer seven (7) copies
of the preliminary plat as required, together with a letter requesting that the preliminary plat be
placed on the commission's agenda for consideration. Such preliminary plat shall contain
preliminary engineering design.
B. In making application, the owner shall submit the current title report or such other evidence as is
acceptable to the city engineer. If the applicant is other than the owner, a notarized letter of
agreement signed by the owner approving the application shall be required in addition to the
current title report. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-15-4(C)(1, 2))
16.20.030: REROUTING OF DRAINAGE COURSE OR IRRIGATION FACILITIES;
EVIDENCE OF CONSENT REQUIRED:
In the event the preliminary plat requires the rerouting of drainage courses or irrigation facilities, the
developer shall furnish documentary evidence of consent to the rerouting signed by all interested
districts or owners. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-15-4(C)(3))
16.20.040: PREPARATION; SUBMITTAL TO PLANNING AND ZONING
COMMISSION WHEN:
The developer shall prepare a preliminary plat and such other supplementary material as may be
required to indicate to the planning and zoning commission the general objectives of the subdivision.
The developer shall submit, to the city engineer, seven (7) copies of the preliminary plat at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the planning and zoning commission meeting at which time the preliminary
plat will be considered. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-15-4(C)(4))
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 350/467
16.20.050: REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATIONS BY AGENCIES:
A. The applicant shall transmit one copy each of the preliminary plat to the following agencies with a
letter of transmittal requesting the agency to review and return to the city engineer with comments
and recommendations no later than fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled public hearing. The
applicant shall provide verification of delivery of the plat to each agency. The city engineer may
request recommendations from such other agencies as he may deem necessary:
1. Payette Independent School District;
2. Payette county zoning commission;
3. Electric company;
4. Gas company;
5. Communications companies;
6. Irrigation district appropriate to area being platted;
7. Southwest district 3 health department;
8. Cable television company;
9. State highway (if said plat abuts);
10. Fire chief;
11. Natural resources conservation service;
12. Post office.
B. If no written recommendation from any agency listed in subsection A of this section is received
within fifteen (15) days after such notification, the approval of the preliminary plat by such agency
will be considered to be granted. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: Ord. 905, 1980: prior code § 11-15-4(C)(5))
16.20.060: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION ACTION:
A. The planning and zoning commission shall approve, approve conditionally or disapprove the
preliminary plat within forty five (45) days of the date of the regular meeting at which said plat is
first considered. If the commission makes an unfavorable recommendation, or recommends
conditional approval, the reasons for such action shall be provided in writing, signed by the
chairman of the planning and zoning commission, and shall be attached to one copy of the plat
and transmitted to the applicant.
B. If no action is taken by the commission at the end of said forty five (45) days, a favorable
recommendation shall be forwarded to the council unless stipulation for additional time is agreed to
by the applicant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 351/467
C. Upon the planning and zoning commission's recommendation, the plat, together with a complete
copy of commission findings, shall be transmitted to the city council and notice of this action shall
be sent to developer. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-15-4(C)(6))
16.20.070: CITY COUNCIL ACTION:
A. The city council may act upon the planning and zoning commission recommendation at its next
regular meeting following receipt of the recommendation report. The developer, at his request,
shall be entitled to at least one continuance of consideration until the next regular meeting of the
city council.
B. At the city council hearing, the city council shall hear testimony of the developer and any witnesses
appearing on his behalf, and the testimony of representatives of the planning and zoning
commission and any witnesses in its behalf, and any person who approves the developer's
proposal.
C. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall base its findings upon the testimony produced
before it and, within fifteen (15) days, declare, its findings. It may sustain, modify, reject or overrule
any recommendations of the planning and zoning commission, or may remand the matter back to
the planning and zoning commission for further study. The city council may make such findings as
are not consistent with the provisions of state law and/or of this code.
D. The time limits for acting on the preliminary plat, as specified in this section and section 16.20.060
of this chapter, may be extended by mutual consent of the developer and the city council or
planning and zoning commission, as the case may be. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: Ord. 905, 198O: prior
code § 11-15-4(C)(7))
16.20.080: SCALE; REQUIRED INFORMATION:
A. Preliminary plats shall be drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" =
100'), except it may be smaller by approval of the city engineer and shall show the following:
1. The scale, north point and date;
2. The name of the proposed subdivision;
3. The name and address of the owner of record, the developer and the engineer, surveyor or the
person preparing the plat;
4. The names, with locations of intersecting boundary lines, of adjoining subdivisions, and the
location of the city limits if falling within or immediately adjoining the tract;
5. The land contours with appropriate vertical intervals referenced to datum and at intervals
acceptable to the engineer; provided, however, that where authorized by the engineer, contour
data may be provided in the form of elevations at street intersections and in drainage channels;
6. The location of existing buildings, water bodies or courses, and the location of dedicated streets
at the point where they adjoin and/or are immediately adjacent, provided that actual measured
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 352/467
distance shall not be required;
7. The boundaries of the tract, as determined by a legal survey area of the tract, the proposed
location, approximate grade, right of way width and pavement width of streets and alleys, the
proposed location and width of easements and setback lines, proposed lot lines, the radius of all
curves and approximate lot dimensions;
8. The existing zoning boundary lines defining the proposed use of all portions of the subdivision;
9. The proposed street names and system of numbering lots and blocks;
10. The location, approximate size and proposed use of all land intended to be dedicated for public
use or reserved for the use of all property owners within the proposed subdivision;
11. The location, size and type of sanitary and storm sewers, irrigation lines and facilities, water
mains, culverts and other surface and subsurface structures existing within or immediately
adjacent to the proposed subdivision; and the location, layout, type and size of any proposed
water mains and storage facilities, sanitary mains and laterals, storm sewers, irrigation lines and
facilities, culverts and drainage structures, street improvements and any other proposed utilities;
12. A drainage and grading plan that shows on site drainage facilities as required by the city.
B. In addition to the information required by subsection A of this section, a preliminary plat of the
proposed subdivision shall be submitted at a scale no smaller than one inch equals two hundred
feet (1" = 200'). Said plat shall show the location of the proposed subdivision referenced to existing
or proposed arterials and collector streets and to government section lines, the size and location of
all proposed streets and roads, all lots drawn to scale, the numbering of all lots and blocks, and the
names, if available, of all streets. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-15-5(A,B))
Chapter 16.24
FINAL PLATS
16.24.010: PREPARATION; FILING; ACCOMPANYING PRINTS:
A. After the approval or conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the developer shall prepare a final
plat which is consistent with the preliminary plat as approved.
B. The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with chapter 13 of title 50 of the Idaho Code and with
the provisions set forth in this title. The city engineer shall review and confirm the final plat for
compliance. The final plat may be scheduled for city council review at the next regularly scheduled
meeting.
C. Such final plat, when submitted, shall be accompanied by three (3) sets of prints of the plans and
(complete) construction specifications for all proposed improvements as required by chapter 16.28
of this title, and one eleven by seventeen (11 x 17) copy of the final plat. (Ord. 1373, 2013: Ord.
1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-15-4(D)(1))
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 353/467
16.24.020: FILING; TIME CONSTRAINTS:
A. Filing on the final plat shall be made within one year after action by the city council on the
preliminary plat.
B. Failure to file a final plat within one year after action by the city council approving the preliminary
plat shall cause all approvals of the preliminary plat to be voided; provided, however, that upon
application of the developer, the city council may grant an extension for reasonable cause of the
one year period for a time not exceeding ninety (90) days. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-
15-4(D)(2))
16.24.030: REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATIONS BY AGENCIES:
A. To ensure that the final plat is consistent with the preliminary plat, the applicant shall transmit one
copy of the final plat to each of the agencies listed in section 16.20.050 of this title with a letter of
transmittal requesting the agency to review and return to the city engineer with comments and
recommendations no later than twenty (20) days prior to the scheduled public hearing. The
applicant shall provide verification of delivery of the plat to each agency. The city engineer may
request review by such other agencies as he may deem necessary.
B. If no written recommendation from any agency to which a copy is transmitted is received within ten
(10) days, the approval of the final plat by such agency will be considered to be granted. (Ord.
1219 § 1, 2002: Ord. 905, 1980: prior code § 11-15-4(D)(4))
16.24.040: CITY COUNCIL ACTION:
The city council, at its next meeting following receipt of the final plat application shall consider the final
plat and any proposed variations from the preliminary plat. The final plat shall be subject to all rules,
requirements and regulations in effect at the approval stage of the preliminary plat. The city council
may approve the final plat as presented or require changes in addition to those presented. Once
approved, a recorded mylar shall be submitted to the city of Payette. (Ord. 1373, 2013)
16.24.050: ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC DEDICATIONS:
At the time of approval of the final plat, the city council shall accept offers of dedication to the public
shown thereon and shall, as a condition precedent to the acceptance of any streets or easements,
require that the developer, at its option, either improve or agree to improve the streets and easements
in accordance with standards established under chapter 16.28 of this title. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior
code § 11-15-4(D)(7))
16.24.060: SCALE:
The final plat shall be drawn at such scale and contain on the front lettering of such size, including
reference to dedication and affidavit of survey, as to enable the same to be placed upon a single sheet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 354/467
eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24") in size, with no part thereof nearer to the edge of
said sheet than one inch (1"), and shall be in full accordance with provisions of the state law, chapter
13 of title 50 of the Idaho Code. The reverse of said sheet shall not be used for any portion of the
drawing but may contain written matter as to dedication and other information. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002:
prior code § 11-15-5(C)(1))
16.24.070: CONTENTS:
The final plat shall clearly show the following:
A. Primary control points, approved by the city engineer, or a description and ties to such control
points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referenced.
Such primary control points must include either a section corner, quarter section corner, or
meander corner according to government survey;
B. Location and description of monuments;
C. Tract boundary lines, property lines, lot lines, and right of way lines of streets, easements and other
rights of way with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs and center
angles of all curves;
D. Names and locations of adjoining subdivisions;
E. Names and right of way width of each street or other right of way;
F. The length of all lot lines dimensioned in feet and decimals thereof, and the value of all required true
bearings and angles dimensioned in degrees, minutes and seconds; or customary units applicable
at the time of filing. Units must be consistent throughout the project and must physically match
adjoining properties even when systems of units are different;
G. The location, dimensions and purpose of all easements;
H. The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire subdivision and the lots numbered
consecutively throughout each block, with areas to be excluded from platting marked "reserved" or
"not a part";
I. The outline of any property, other than streets or alleys, which is offered for dedication to public use
fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings, with the area marked "public" and showing the
proposed use;
J. A title which shall include the name of the subdivision, name of the city, county and state, and the
location and description of the subdivision referenced to section, township and range;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 355/467
K. Scale, north arrow and date;
L. Location, width and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within the proposed
developments and other important features, such as the general outline of the following: existing
buildings, watercourses, power lines, telephone lines, railroad lines, any existing easement,
municipal boundaries, section lines and restrictive covenants as required or assured;
M. Certification by a professional engineer or surveyor preparing said plat certifying to the accuracy of
the survey and plat shall appear on the front of said plat;
N. Certification by the owner, including dedication of all streets, rights of way and any sites for public
use and grant on any existing or proposed easements;
O. Certification and signature of the county engineer (surveyor) verifying that the accuracy of the
survey complies with the requirements of state law;
P. Certification and signature of the city engineer verifying that the final plat complies with state law,
title 50 of the Idaho Code and with this title;
Q. Certification and signature of the city clerk verifying city council approval of the final plat and
acceptance of streets, alleys, easements and public land dedications. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior
code § 11-15-5(C)(2))
16.24.080: DEVELOPMENT OF FINAL PLAT:
Within five (5) years of approval of the final plat, fifty percent (50%) of the public improvements shall
be completed. If, after five (5) years from the date of approval fifty percent (50%) of the public
improvements have not been completed, the final plat shall be rendered null and void. No building
permits shall be issued and no public improvements shall be permitted without approval of the city
council. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002)
Chapter 16.26
SHORT PLATS
16.26.010: SHORT PLAT PROCEDURES:
A. The purpose of the short plat is to allow the creation of up to three (3) parcels without being subject
to the procedural provisions of the preliminary and final plat regulations of this title and to provide a
simplified administrative procedure for processing the division of three (3) or less divisions of land.
A record of survey, application and fee, set by resolution of the city council, shall be required.
Every division of land for the purpose of sale, lease or transfer into three (3) or fewer lots, tracts or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 356/467
parcels within the city, where no new public dedications are required, may proceed in compliance
with this section.
1. No short plat shall create more than three (3) new parcels.
2. No property involved in a short plat shall be involved in a subsequent short plat for a period of
five (5) years from the recording date of the previous record of survey for a short plat.
3. No new public or private street dedication, excluding widening of an existing street, shall be
involved.
4. No new public utility main lines shall be extended within the right of way to property involved in a
short plat.
5. All resulting parcels must conform to the minimum requirements of all existing land use
regulations including the adopted zoning ordinance.
6. All existing remaining buildings shall meet all applicable zoning requirements regarding allowed
uses and parking and shall comply with the setback requirements of the existing zone as
measured from any parcel boundary being created by this process.
a. Any setback that was legally nonconforming prior to the short plat may remain as a legal
nonconforming setback, provided the legal nonconforming setback is not altered by the short
plat and will not create a fire hazard or a public nuisance.
b. Any building not meeting the required setback that is to be partially or completely demolished
or moved shall be either demolished or moved prior to the approval of the short plat.
c. If required parking is provided by means of a permanent shared parking agreement, a note on
the face of the survey must list the total required and provided parking for all parcels to which
the shared parking provisions of the shared parking agreement applies. A shared parking
agreement shall be provided prior to approval and recorded upon approval.
d. If required access is provided by means of a permanent easement or shared access
agreement, a note on the face of the survey must describe in detail the location and size of the
easement or shared access location. An access easement or shared access agreement shall
be provided prior to approval and recorded upon approval.
e. When utilities cross land being divided, a utility easement shall be provided and indicated on
the record of survey. If an easement is located in a proposed permanent structure construction
area, the easement shall be vacated prior to the planning administrator's approval of the short
plat.
7. If the street(s) adjacent to the lot(s) have not been improved with sidewalk(s), the applicant shall
landscape the right of way area between the edge of the street pavement and the property line
with lawn or vegetative ground cover that will prevent the area from being used as an off street
parking area. Sidewalks shall be installed if sidewalks exist on adjoining parcels or if deemed
necessary for the public interest by the city administrator.
B. Submission of a short plat application shall be on a form prescribed by the city clerk and the
application and the required fees shall be filed with the city clerk. Acceptance or rejection of the
application, and notification of the applicant, shall be made in writing to the applicant by the city
clerk within thirty (30) days of submittal of the application to the city engineer. The application shall
be accompanied by the following information:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 357/467
1. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the property owner, if different
than the applicant.
2. A legal description of the entire area being divided and a legal description for each of the
proposed lots.
3. Letters of approval from all appropriate districts and agencies.
4. A list of all property owners and mailing addresses for property adjacent to the affected property.
5. A copy of any existing or proposed restrictions or covenants.
6. A sketch map drawn on good quality paper, sheet size no larger than eight and one-half inches
by eleven inches (81/2" x 11"), to a scale sufficient to assure legibility. Such a map shall contain,
at a minimum, the following:
a. Boundaries and dimensions of the entire area being divided and the proposed boundaries and
dimensions of the proposed lots. The size of each lot shall be indicated by square footage
computation sufficiently accurate to determine that each lot meets the minimum established lot
size requirements.
b. All existing buildings and structural improvements.
c. The location of any roads, easements or rights of way that exist or are proposed to serve the
short subdivision.
d. A space for approval of the city engineer.
e. A space for approval of the city clerk.
7. The sketch must comply with Idaho Code 50-1301 et seq.
C. The short plat shall be prepared by an Idaho registered surveyor.
D. The administrator shall provide copies of submitted documents, as necessary, to outside agencies
and jurisdictions which, in the opinion of the administrator, may be affected by the proposal. In
addition, the administrator shall provide written notice to the owners of property adjacent to the
property proposed for development. The notice shall provide the adjacent property owners a plan
of the division, general information concerning the proposal, and the time frame for submitting
written comments. The period of time for comment or response shall not be less than fourteen (14)
days nor greater than twenty one (21) days from the date of notice.
E. The city engineer shall, within thirty (30) days after the application is deemed accepted, transmit
copies of the plat and the engineer's recommendations thereon (unless a greater period of time is
agreed upon by the applicant) to the city clerk.
F. The city clerk shall act as hearing officer and shall conduct a short subdivision review, along with
appropriate staff, to ensure that all applicable ordinance provisions are followed or completed.
Short subdivision review shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Review of lot size and dimensions for conformance to the zoning ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 358/467
2. Determination that there are adequate provisions to serve the divided property with sewer and
water.
3. Review of the location of fire hydrants.
4. Review of the location for the installation of streetlights if determined to be necessary by the
public works department.
5. Determine if mitigation of any impact is warranted.
6. Define the scope of improvements and dedications required (curb, sidewalk, paving, water,
sewer, drainage, easements, right of way dedication, etc.).
7. Evaluation of the location of potential rights of way to access adjoining parcels.
G. A decision shall be rendered within thirty (30) days of the review unless circumstances require
otherwise, such circumstances to be set forth in writing to the applicant. The administrator shall, by
written decision, grant approval, approval with conditions, or deny the short subdivision. Notice of
the action taken by the administrator shall also be mailed to the owners of real property adjacent to
the short subdivision. A decision to deny shall be in writing and indicate reasons for denial and
indicate what steps are necessary to obtain approval. In the case of approval or approval with
conditions, a memorandum of understanding shall be prepared that details the conditions of
approval and the responsibilities of the developer. The memorandum of understanding shall be
signed by the developer and the administrator and recorded with the final survey.
H. In order to approve a short plat the administrator must make the following findings:
1. The proposed lots meet all established lot size and width requirements.
2. Adequate water supply and sewage disposal are available.
3. The decision to approve a short subdivision will not be contrary to the public interest.
4. The survey conforms with the zoning ordinance and comprehensive plan.
I. The subdivider shall record the final survey in the office of the county recorder of Payette County,
Idaho, within thirty (30) days after the date of approval. Otherwise, the short plat shall be
considered void.
J. The subdivider shall, immediately upon recording, furnish the city council with as many prints of the
short plat as may be required by the city. (Ord. 1356, 2012)
16.26.020: VIOLATIONS:
Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by fine and/or imprisonment up to but
not exceeding the maximum penalties set forth in Idaho Code sections 18-113 and 50-302. (Ord.
1356, 2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 359/467
Chapter 16.28
IMPROVEMENTS
16.28.010: TO BE SHOWN ON PLANS; STANDARDS GENERALLY:
A. The improvements described as follows in this chapter shall be shown on the construction plans of
any subdivision and installed in accordance with the procedures and requirements designated in
this chapter.
B. All improvements shall be in accordance with all elements of the comprehensive plan of the city
and the requirements of the Idaho Code, and shall further be in accordance with the standard
specifications of the city and with all requirements of this chapter. Construction shall be under the
supervision of the city engineer and subject to his approval. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-
15-7(A))
16.28.020: PRECONSTRUCTION FILING OF PLANS AND BOND;
POSTCONSTRUCTION FILING OF PLANS; COMPLETION CERTIFICATE:
A. Construction Drawings And Specifications: Ten (10) working days prior to the time scheduled for
review and approval of the final plat, the developer shall file with the public works department
completely detailed construction drawings and complete written construction specifications for all
improvements required in said subdivision together with supporting calculations.
B. Professional Engineer Stamp: Plans for the improvements required by this chapter shall be
prepared and stamped by a professional engineer registered in the state of Idaho.
C. Guarantee Of Completion Of Improvements:
1. Financial Guarantee: The developer shall provide a financial guarantee of the required public
improvements with the application for final plat approval. The city council may permit the
developer to provide the financial guarantee of performance in one or a combination of the
following arrangements. No building permits will be issued until all improvements are completed
and accepted by the city council.
2. Surety Bond:
a. Accrual: The bond shall accrue to the city covering construction, operation and maintenance
of the specific public improvements;
b. Amount: The bond shall be in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the total
estimated cost for completing construction of the specific public improvement, as estimated by
the applicant's engineer and reviewed and approved by the city engineer and council;
c. Term Length: The term length in which the bond is in force shall be for a period to be specified
by the city engineer for the specific public improvements and as stated in the public
improvements agreement;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 360/467
d. Bonding For Surety Company: The bond shall be with a surety company authorized to do
business in the state of Idaho, acceptable to the city council; and
e. Escrow Agreement: The escrow agreement shall be drawn and furnished in a form approved
by the city council.
3. Cash Deposits, Certified Check, Negotiable Bond, Or Irrevocable Bank Letter Of Credit:
a. Treasurer, Escrow Agent Or Trust Company: A cash deposit, certified check, negotiable bond,
or an irrevocable bank letter of credit, of such surety acceptable by the city, shall be deposited
with an escrow agent or trust company;
b. Dollar Value: The dollar value of the cash deposit, certified check, negotiable bond, or an
irrevocable bank letter of credit, shall be equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the total
estimated cost of construction of the specific public improvements, as estimated by the
applicant's engineer and reviewed and approved by the city engineer and council;
c. Escrow Time: Escrow time for the cash deposit, certified check, negotiable bond or
irrevocable bank letter of credit, shall be for a period to be specified by the city, and as stated
in the public improvements agreement;
d. Progressive Payment: In the case of cash deposits or certified checks, an agreement between
the city and the developer may provide for progressive payments out of the cash deposit or
reduction of the certified check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit, to the
extent of the cost of the completed portion of the public improvements, in accordance with a
previously entered into agreement.
4. Other Forms Of Security: The city council may accept an alternate form of security proposed by
the developer as long as such form is found valid and will cover one hundred ten percent (110%)
of the estimated costs of the improvements.
5. Conditional Approval Of Final Plat: With respect to financial guarantees, the approval of all final
subdivision plats shall be conditioned on the accomplishment of one of the following:
a. The construction of improvements required by this title shall have been completed by the
developer and approved by the city council.
b. Surety acceptable to the city shall have been filed in the form of a cash deposit, certified
check, a negotiable bond, irrevocable bank letter of credit or surety bond.
6. Inspection Of Public Improvements Under Construction: Before approving a final plat and
construction plans and specifications for public improvements, an agreement between the
developer and the city shall be made to provide for checking or inspecting the construction and
its conformity to the submitted plans. Such agreement shall require that the developer shall
provide for the inspection through a nonrelated third party, provide weekly construction reports
and provide copies of all test data, and any other data required by the city.
7. Penalty In Case Of Failure To Complete Construction Of Public Improvement: In the event the
developer shall, in any case, fail to complete such work within the period of time as required by
the conditions of the guarantee for the completion of public improvements, the city or any other
person with proper standing may proceed to have such work completed. In order to accomplish
this, the city or other persons shall pay for the cost and expense thereof any appropriating the
cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or negotiable bond which the
developer may deposit in lieu of a surety bond or may take such steps as may be necessary to
require performance by the bonding or surety company and as included in a written agreement
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 361/467
between the city and the developer; provided neither the city nor any person shall be required to
pay or spend more than the amount of the bond and/or other deposit.
D. Improvements: Prior to the acceptance by the city of any improvement installed by the developer,
two (2) sets of prints of the as built plans and specifications for all improvements, one set of which
shall be certified and signed by the engineer preparing such plans, shall be filed with the public
works department, and the second set shall be filed with the Idaho department of environmental
quality by the developer. In addition to the prints, an electronic copy compatible with city systems
shall be filed with the city.
E. Certification; Acceptance: Within fifteen (15) days after the completion of improvements, the
completion of which is guaranteed by a surety bond or other guarantee as provided for in
subsection C of this section and the filing of the as built plans as provided in subsection D of this
section, the city engineer shall certify the completion and recommend acceptance by the city
council of said improvements in writing and shall transmit a copy of such certification to both the
city clerk and to the developer. After city council approval the city clerk shall thereafter release said
surety bond or other guarantee. (Ord. 1276 § 2, 2007: Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: Ord. 905, 1980: prior
code § 11-15-7(B))
16.28.030: STREETS AND ALLEYS; DETERMINATION OF STREET TYPE;
SPECIFICATIONS:
A. Street type, whether arterial, collector or local, shall be determined by reference to the
comprehensive plan of the city and to a map of the entire area the street serves. When
classification of a local street, cul-de-sac or loop street is claimed, the entire length of the street
shall be shown on the subdivision plat being proposed or on a previously approved plat.
B. The pavement width of all streets shall conform to those widths defined in the comprehensive plan
or standard city specifications.
C. The paving design of the intersection of any new street with an existing state or federal highway
shall be in accordance with the standard specifications of the Idaho transportation department, but
in no case shall be less than the applicable specification contained in this section.
D. Pavement, base, and leveling coarse gravel shall be constructed in accordance with standard city
specifications.
E. In general, the centerline of street pavement shall coincide with the centerline of the right of way in
which the pavement is located.
F. All subdivisions shall be constructed with curbs and gutters in accordance with standard city
specifications.
G. Sidewalks four feet (4') in width shall be provided on both sides of any residential collector and
other local residential streets or five feet (5') in width along arterials or in any commercial or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 362/467
industrial area, or matching the width of any existing sidewalk in all zones of the city as long as
they are at least the minimum width. Sidewalks shall also be provided along any other street in a
subdivision where deemed by the city council to be essential to public convenience or safety, in
accordance with standard city specifications.
H. Driveway curb cuts and driveway approaches shall be made in accordance with the standard
specifications of the city.
I. Street lighting shall be in accordance with the standard specifications of the city.
J. Alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the standard specifications of the city.
K. All utilities shall be placed underground before any base street material is laid. Utilities, other than
water and sewer, shall be placed behind any sidewalk and within the right of way or front utility
easement. A joint trench will be used for electric, gas, phone and cable utilities. (Ord. 1219 § 1,
2002: prior code § 11-15-7(C))
16.28.040: WATERWORKS REQUIREMENTS:
A. Central waterlines and fire hydrants shall be provided in all subdivisions in accordance with
standard city specifications.
B. Irrigation main lines and distribution lines shall be provided in accordance with standard city
specifications. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-15-7(D))
16.28.050: STORMWATER DRAINAGE:
Stormwater drainage shall be provided for on site. Drainage improvements shall be constructed in
accordance with standard city specifications. In addition, such improvements shall meet the best
management practices accepted by the state of Idaho. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: Ord. 905, 1980: prior
code § 11-15-7(F))
16.28.060: STREAM OR DRAINAGE COURSE EASEMENTS; APPROVAL
REQUIRED FOR IRRIGATION ROUTE CHANGES:
A. The reservation of an easement along any stream or important surface drainage course located in
an area being subdivided may be required by the council for the purpose of widening, deepening,
sloping, improving or protecting the stream or drainage course.
B. No ditch, pipe or structure for irrigation water or irrigation wastewater shall be constructed, rerouted
or changed in any way unless such obstruction, rerouting or change has first been approved in
writing by the ditch company officer in charge; provided, however, that where such ditch, pipe or
structure is held in mutual ownership, said approval in writing shall be obtained from the engineer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 363/467
A copy of such written approval by the ditch company officer and/or the engineer shall be filed with
the construction drawings as provided. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-15-7(G))
16.28.070: SCHOOLS OR PARKS; STANDARDS GENERALLY:
Whenever the developer desires or proposes to reserve area for schools or parks, to be so designated
on the subdivision plans, such reservation shall meet the standards of the city and/or school district
respectively. The city reserves the right to request that parks or school locations be shown and
dedicated. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-15-7(H))
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 16.32
VARIANCES AND APPEALS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
16.32.010: VARIANCES; PERMISSIBLE WHEN:
The city council shall consider variances to the terms of this title which will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title will
result in unnecessary hardship and under such conditions that the spirit of this title shall be observed
and substantial justice done. A variance shall not be considered a right or special privilege, but may
be granted to an applicant only upon showing of undue hardship because of characteristics of the site
and that the variance is not in conflict with the public interest. In acting upon such variance the city
council shall make full investigation and shall only recommend granting a variance upon finding that
the following are true:
A. That the granting of the variance will not be in conflict with the spirit and intent of the
comprehensive plan for the city, and will not effect a change in zoning.
B. That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions, applicable to the property
involved, so that denial of the relief sought will result in:
1. Undue loss in value of the property;
2. Inability to preserve the property rights of the owner;
3. The prevention of reasonable enjoyment of the property.
C. The granting of such relief will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare,
or injurious to the property or improvements of other property owners, or the quiet enjoyment of
such property improvements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 364/467
D. That the reason for a variance was not caused by the owners, or previous owner's actions or
inactions. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-15-8(A))
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
16.32.020: VARIANCES; REQUEST PROCEDURE:
A. In requesting any modification of or variance to the provisions of this title, an owner, developer or
his engineer shall make written request to the city clerk.
B. Such request, together with such related data and maps as necessary to fully illustrate the relief
sought, shall be referred by the city clerk in writing to the planning and zoning commission.
C. The city clerk shall notify all adjoining property owners of the variance request and determine
whether to hold a public hearing. The planning and zoning commission shall act upon such request
and make recommendation to the council at its next regular meeting.
D. The city council, after receiving the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission, may
act upon such request at its next regular meeting.
E. Approval of such modifications shall require a majority vote of the regular membership of the city
council. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-15-8(A)(1 _ 5))
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
16.32.030: VARIANCES; CITY COUNCIL'S AUTHORITY TO SET CONDITIONS:
In granting variances and/or modification from the regulations of this title, the city council may require
such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objective of the standards or
requirements so varied or modified. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-15-8(B))
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
16.32.040: RIGHT OF APPEAL:
Any person, firm or corporation may appeal the decision of the city council to the district court in the
same manner and within the same time as other appeals may be taken from orders of the city council.
(Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-15-8(C))
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 365/467
Chapter 16.36
AMENDMENTS
16.36.010: PROCEDURE DESIGNATED:
The planning and zoning commission may recommend amendments to this title, and the city council,
in acting on such recommendation or on its own motion, may amend said title from time to time;
provided, however, that the procedure followed in such modifications shall be the same as in the
original adoption of said title. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-15-9)
Chapter 16.40
VIOLATION; PENALTY
16.40.010: DESIGNATED:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this title shall not be entitled to the
issuance of any building permits for construction of buildings or otherwise on the land being subject to
subdivision under the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002: prior code § 11-15-11)
16.40.020: PENALTY:
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor,
and is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any
violation of any of the provisions of this title is committed, continued or permitted as provided by
Idaho Code.
B. Upon conviction of any violation of any of the provisions of this title, such person shall be punished
by a fine of up to three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6)
months or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1219 § 1, 2002)
Title 17
ZONING
Chapter 17.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
17.04.010: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the ZONING TITLE OF THE CITY. (Ord. 1204, 2002:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 366/467
prior code § 11-1-1)
17.04.020: TO BE INTERPRETED AS MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare.
To protect the public, among other purposes, such provisions are intended to provide for adequate
light, pure air, safety from fire and other danger, undue concentration of population, and ample parking
facilities. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code § 11-1-2)
17.04.030: SCOPE:
It is not intended by this title to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing
provisions of other laws or regulations, except those specifically repealed by this title; or with private
restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other private agreement; or with restrictive
covenants running with the land to which the city is a party. Where this title imposes a greater
restriction upon land, buildings or structures than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of
law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this title shall prevail. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code
§ 11-1-3)
Chapter 17.08
DEFINITIONS
17.08.010: GENERALLY:
For the purposes of this title, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings given in this section. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code § 11-1-4(A))
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING: A subordinate use or building customarily incidental to and
located on the same lot with the main use or building, and includes a family garden.
AGRICULTURE: Tilling of soil, horticulture, raising crops, livestock, dairying, including all uses
customarily accessory and incidental thereto; but excluding slaughterhouses and commercial feed
lots.
AIRPORT: Any area of land or water, which is used or intended, for use by aircraft and including the
necessary appurtenant structures of facilities located thereon.
ALLEY: Any public space or thoroughfare twenty feet (20') or less in width, but not less than ten feet
(10') in width, which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public travel and which affords
secondary access to abutting property.
ALTERATION: As applied to a building or structure, this term is a change or rearrangement in the
structural parts or in the exit or existing facilities; or is an enlargement, whether by extending on a side
or by increasing in height; or is the moving from one location or position to another.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 367/467
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the care or treatment of cats,
dogs or other animals.
APARTMENT BUILDING: Multiple rooms or suite or rooms in a multiple-family structure which are
arranged, designed or used as a single housekeeping unit which has complete kitchen and sanitary
facilities permanently installed.
AUTOMOBILE SALES LOT: Premises on which new and used passenger automobiles, trailers,
motorhomes or trucks in operating condition are displayed in the open for sale or trade, and where no
repair or service work is done.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Premises used primarily for the retail sale and delivery to the
vehicle of motor vehicle fuel and of lubricating oil, tires and incidental vehicular accessories and
providing vehicular lubrication and related services, including motor vehicle repairs and/or manual or
automatic car washes.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: Any use of premises, excluding fully enclosed buildings, whereon
more than two (2) nonlicensed motor vehicles not in operating condition are standing more than thirty
(30) days or on which such used motor vehicles or parts thereof, are dismantled or stored.
BED AND BREAKFAST: A professionally run facility providing up to sixteen (16) rooms for temporary
overnight accommodations, and where the owner-innkeeper is a resident on the property. A bed and
breakfast provides breakfast for overnight guests, but does not provide a restaurant and/or bar.
Exterior signage must conform with sign ordinances of that zone and area.
BUFFER: A strip of land designed to separate different uses and protect one land use from another.
The protection is from noises, emissions, views, or other activities not permitted in the protected zone.
A buffer yard is normally landscaped and maintained as an open space. The term "may" be broadly
used to describe an area that separates two (2) different and separate districts.
BUILDING: A structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter or roofed enclosure for persons,
animals or property, including tents, lunch wagons, dining cars, camp cars, trailers and other roofed
structures on wheels or other supports used for residential, business, mercantile, storage, commercial,
industrial, institutional, assembly, educational or recreational purposes. For the purposes of this
definition, "roof" includes an awning or other similar covering, whether or not permanent in nature.
BUILDING AREA: The aggregate of the maximum horizontal cross section area of the main building
on a lot, excluding cornices, eaves, gutters or chimneys, steps, one-story open porches, balconies
and terraces.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The officer or duly authorized representative or other designated authority
charged with the administration and enforcement of the building code and any other codes dealing
with building, adopted by the city of Payette.
CHILDCARE CENTER: A childcare facility providing childcare for over twelve (12) children.
CHILDCARE, FAMILY HOME: A childcare facility providing for six (6) or fewer children as an
accessory use to residential uses.
CHILDCARE, GROUP: A childcare facility for seven (7) to twelve (12) children within the operator's
residence or that is outside the operator's home.
CHURCH: A place where people congregate to worship on a regular basis which is not a residence or
place of business.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 368/467
CITY: The city of Payette.
CITY CLERK: "City clerk" is defined in chapter 2.12 of this code.
COMMISSION: The city planning and zoning commission. The planning commission is declared to
also be the zoning commission of the city.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A compilation of goals, policy statements, standards, programs and maps
for guiding the physical, social and economic development, both public and private of the city of
Payette and its environs, and defined in the local planning act of 1976, and adopted through
ordinance by the city of Payette.
CONDITIONAL USE: A permit to use a certain piece of land in a manner for which no right exists; i.e.,
the use would not comply with district regulation, but with the acquisition of a permit development may
proceed, provided that the conditions of the permit are followed.
CONDOMINIUM: A structure containing separate living units, owned by persons having separate
interests in said structure with a common interest in the real property upon which it is situated.
CONVENIENCE STORE: A premises used for retail sale of motor vehicle fuel, vehicle accessories,
fast food, grocery and dairy items.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improve or unimprove real estate, including, but not
limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations located within the area of special flood hazard.
DUPLEX: A dwelling containing separate living units for two (2) families that share a common wall, but
have separate utility services and/or facilities for both.
DWELLING: A building designed or used as the living quarters for one or more families.
DWELLING HOUSE: A detached house designed for and occupied exclusively as the residence of not
more than one family.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: "Multiple-family dwelling" is a dwelling on one lot containing
separate living units for three (3) or more families, but which may have joint services or facilities for all.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms providing facilities for food preparation, sleeping, living and
bathroom amenities.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE: The installation and erection or maintenance by public utilities or municipal
departments or commissions of gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems,
and of collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains,
sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other
similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith; but not including buildings reasonably
necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal departments or
commissions or for the public health, safety or general welfare.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: "Private garage" is a building or part thereof accessory to a main building which
provides for the storage of automobiles and in which no occupation or business for profit is carried on.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 369/467
GARAGE, PUBLIC: "Public garage" is a building or part thereof, other than a private garage, for the
storage of motor vehicles and in which service station activities may be carried on.
GARDEN, RESIDENTIAL: That area of ground used for the production of agricultural and horticultural
products for the use of the residents occupying the premises, and which is not for sale or resale.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any gainful occupation engaged in by an occupant of a dwelling unit and
meeting the requirements of section 17.64.150 of this title.
HOUSEHOLD PETS: "Household pets" are limited to dogs and cats that are kept within the property
boundary of the household plus fish, small animals like hamsters that are caged and kept within the
residence and caged birds like a parrot or parakeet that are kept within the residence. Requests to
harbor any other kind of pet shall be taken to the planning and zoning commission before being
introduced into the city.
JUNK: Any worn out, cast off or discarded article or material which is ready for destruction or has
been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some use. Any article or material which,
unaltered or unchanged and without further reconditioning, can be used for its original purpose as
readily as when new shall not be considered junk.
JUNKYARD: "Junkyard" is the use of more than fifty (50) square feet of the area of any lot, whether
inside or outside a building, or the use of any portion of that half of any lot that joins any street, for the
storage, keeping or abandonment of junk. A junkyard must comply with section 17.64.200 of this title.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Any lot or premises on which three (3) or more domesticated animals are
housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained in return for compensation, or sold, and which may offer
incidental medical treatment. This use is only allowed within the area of city impact with a conditional
use permit.
LANDSCAPING: Shall include:
A. Plant material which includes the use of a mixture of ground covers, shrubs and trees in a
variety of sizes. Preferences shall be given to the use of drought tolerant, low maintenance
native species. Decorative "hard surface" materials such as, but not limited to, volcanic rock,
gravel or textured paving or "soft surfaces" such as, but not limited to, redwood bark or wood
chips may be utilized to fill up to forty percent (40%) of the required landscaped area.
B. Installation of street trees within the right of way may be required upon approval of species and
location by the city.
C. Plant material will be selected to maintain sight or clear vision triangles at intersections.
D. A method of piped irrigation shall be provided to each landscaped area.
E. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or tenant for the ongoing maintenance of all
landscaping, once installed, which is to be kept in good condition and free from weeds, refuse
and debris.
F. A plan shall be submitted for approval to the city prior to development of the site.
LIVESTOCK CONFINEMENT OPERATION (LCO): Any lot, corral, or facility where more than ten (10)
animal units of livestock are confined, or stabled and fed, or maintained for a total of one hundred
eighty (180) days or more in any twelve (12) month period; and on which crops, vegetation, forage
growth or post harvest residues are not sustained in the normal growing season over any portion of
the lot or facility. Livestock shall be considered domesticated animals, poultry, rabbits and furbearing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 370/467
animals. Animal units shall be determined by the county standard.
LOADING SPACE: An off street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to a
group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials, and which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access.
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one building, and the accessory
building or uses customarily incidental to it, including such open spaces as are required by this
chapter.
LOT, CORNER: "Corner lot" is a lot abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets, the angle of
intersection being not more than one hundred thirty five degrees (135o). It is the land occupied or to
be occupied by the corner building and its accessory buildings.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: "Reversed corner lot" is a corner lot on which the building does not face
the same street as the rest of the homes on that lot.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, constructed according to the HUD/FHA manufactured/mobile
home construction and safety standards, built after July 1, 1976, transportable in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or is forty (40) body feet
or more in length, or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, electrical systems contained therein, except that such term shall include any structure
which meets all the requirements of this section except the size requirements and with respect to
which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban
development and complies with the standards established under 42 USC 5401 et seq. A
manufactured home must meet the siting conditions as specified in section 17.64.080 of this title.
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME PARK: Any area, tract, plot, or site of land, whereupon two (2) or
more manufactured/mobile homes are placed, located and maintained for dwelling purposes on a
permanent or semipermanent basis and for which a fee, rental or contract for payment for such use is
collected by or payable to the person holding the land.
MOBILE HOME: A detached single-family dwelling, designed to be transported after fabrication on its
own wheels, flatbed or detached wheels, arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling
complete, after location on permanent foundation support on its chassis frame, and hooked to all
utilities as any built on site house would be, as set out in chapter 5.28 of this code. A mobile home
must meet the siting standards as specified in section 17.64.080 of this title.
MOTEL: A building, or group of buildings on the same premises whether detached or in connected
rows, containing sleeping or dwelling units independently accessible from the outside, with garage
space or parking space located on the premises and designed for, or occupied by travelers. The term
includes, but is not limited to, any buildings or building groups designated as auto courts, motor
lodges, tourist courts or by any other title or sign intended to identify them as providing lodging to
motorists.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: See definition of Dwelling, Multiple-Family.
NONCONFORMING USE: A building, structure or use of land existing at the time of the enactment of
this title and which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. See chapter
17.56 of this title.
NUDE, NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 371/467
than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a full opaque covering
of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a
discernible turgid state.
NURSING HOME, CONVALESCENT HOME: A building housing any facility, however named, whether
operated for profit or not, the purpose of which is to provide skilled nursing care and related medical
services for two (2) or more individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity or requiring
care because of old age.
PARKING SPACE: An area of not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet nine feet by twelve
feet (9' x 12'), net, exclusive of access or maneuvering area, ramps or columns, to be used exclusively
as a temporary storage space for one private motor vehicle. Truck loading and unloading space shall
not be included in such area.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: An area of land in which a variety of residential, commercial and
industrial uses develop under single ownership or control. Accommodated in a preplanned
environment with more flexible uses than those restrictions that would normally apply under these
regulations and which are detailed in chapter 17.44 of this title.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The "planning/zoning commission" for the city is a quasi-judicial board
appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council. Responsibilities of the planning commission are
detailed in chapter 2.52 of this code.
RETAIL SHOP: A building or portion of a building in a residential district constructed in the style of a
residence and used for the sale of merchandise or services to the ultimate consumer, and so used
only upon special permit of the planning and zoning commission.
ROOMING HOUSE: Any dwelling for hire in which more than three (3) persons, either individually, or
as families are housed or lodged, with or without meals. A boarding house, lodging house or furnished
rooming house shall be deemed a rooming house.
SETBACK: The line between the property line and the line upon which a structure may be erected, as
designated in each zoning district. No structures may occupy the space between the property line and
the setback line. Permitted residential uses shall meet the residential zoning standards if located in
any other zone other than A residential and B residential zoning.
SIGN: Any structure or natural object such as a tree, rock, bush and the ground itself, or part thereof
or device attached thereto or painted or represented thereon, which shall be used to attract attention
to any object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business, or which shall
display or include any letter, word, model banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or representation
used as, or which is in the nature of announcement, direction or advertisement. For the purpose of this
definition, the word "sign" does not include the flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, state, city or
other political, education, charitable, philanthropic, civic, professional, religious, or like campaign,
drive, movement or event.
STREET: A. Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, place, viaduct, easement for access,
or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway; or a street or way shown in a
plat heretofore approved pursuant to law, or approved by official action and includes the land between
street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise of pavement, shoulders, gutters,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the right of way.
B. "Street" also means a thoroughfare which has been dedicated or granted to the public and
accepted by proper public authority, or a thoroughfare not less than fifty six feet (56') wide which
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 372/467
has been made public by right of use and which affords the principal access to the abutting
property, and/or provides vehicular circulation.
Dead-End Street: A street connecting to another street at one end only.
Street, Arterial: "Arterial street" means a street with a high level of traffic mobility and a low level of
access to land. Arterial streets are found most commonly on the section lines and require an eighty
foot (80') right of way with a forty seven foot (47') improved surface.
Street, Collector: "Collector street" means a street with a medium level of traffic mobility and medium
level of access to land. Collector streets require a seventy foot (70') to ninety foot (90') right of way
with a forty one foot (41') improved surface.
Street, Frontage: "Frontage street" means a minor street designated as an industrial street by the
council. It is the primary purpose of an industrial street to provide for traffic movement in an industrial
area.
Street, Local: "Local street" means a street that is intended to provide access to lots and serve the
needs of a neighborhood. Local streets require a fifty six foot (56') right of way and a thirty seven foot
(37') improved surface.
Street, Loop: "Loop street" means a minor street that forms a loop and returns to the same street
from which it originated. A street forming a connection between two (2) other streets is not considered
a loop.
Street, Partial: "Partial street" means a dedicated right of way that provides only a portion of the
required street width.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attachment to
something having location on the ground, including signs and billboards, but not including fences or
walls used as fences.
TOWNHOUSE: A structure containing separate living units requiring no setback side lines between
contiguous units, having separate utility connections, and is owned by a person or persons having
divided interests in said structure including the real property upon which it is situated.
TWO-FAMILY DUPLEX: See definition of Duplex.
USE: The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either
land or a building is or may be occupied or maintained.
VARIANCE: "Variance" provides a device which grants a property owner relief from certain provisions
of this title when, because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of
the property, compliance would result in an undue hardship upon the owner as distinguished from
mere inconvenience.
WRECKING YARD: An establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated, or used for
storing, keeping, buying, or selling junk, or for the maintenance or operation of an automobile
graveyard.
YARD: An open space, other than a court, on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward except as otherwise provided in this title.
YARD, FRONT: "Front yard" is an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the main building,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 373/467
extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and the front line of the building
projected on the side lines of the lot.
YARD, REAR: "Rear yard" is an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the main building,
between the rear line of the building and the rear line of the lot, which extends the full width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE: "Side yard" is an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the main building,
situated between the building and the side line of the lot, which extends from the front yard to the rear
yard.
ZONING COMMISSION: The planning commission.
ZONING MAP: The map incorporated into this title designating the use district zones.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The city of Payette zoning ordinance. (Ord. 1330, 2010: Ord. 1204, 2002:
Ord. 971, 1987: Ord. 902, 1979: prior code § 11-1-4(A))
Chapter 17.12
REGULATIONS GENERALLY
17.12.010: BUILDINGS AND LAND; USE OR CONSTRUCTION; CONFORMITY
REQUIRED GENERALLY:
No building, structure or premises shall be used or occupied, and no building or part thereof or other
structure shall be erected, raised, moved, placed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered except
in conformity with the regulations in this title specified for the district, as shown on the official map, in
which it is located. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code § 11-2-3(A)(1))
17.12.015: SCHEDULE OF BUILDING HEIGHT AND LOT AREA REGULATIONS:
A. Building Height, Area Regulations And Yard Setbacks:
OFFICIAL HEIGHT AND AREA
REGULATIONS; MINIMUM YARD SETBACKS1
Zoning
District
Maximum
Height Front Setback
Rear
Setback
Interior
Side
Setback
Street
Frontage
Minimum
Lot Area
(Square
Feet)
A-R 35' 25' from front property line
or 55' from street
centerline; whichever is
greater1
8'1 8'1 75' 8,000/10,000
corner lot
B-R 35' 25' from front property line
or 55' from street
8'1 8'1 60' 6,000/8,000
corner lot
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 374/467
centerline; whichever is
greater1
C 50' 0'1d n/a n/a
C-1 50' 0'1d n/a n/a
C-2 50' 0'1d n/a n/a
T 20' 30' 25' 10' 0' 108,900
I 85' 25'1d 25' 20' 20' n/a
Notes:
1. Setback reductions (to be measured from the foundation to the property line):
a. The roofs of buildings shall not project to within 4 feet of the side property line.
b. Open structures such as porches, canopies, balconies, platforms, carports, covered
patios and similar architectural projections shall be considered part of the building to which
they are attached and shall not project more than 4 feet into the required rear yard setback.
c. Where a front uniform setback exists which is less or greater than required in this
subsection, the setback shall conform to such uniform setback.
d. In zone C, subsection 17.32.040A of this title applies; in zone C-1, subsection 17.34.040A
of this title applies; in zone C-2, subsection 17.36.040A of this title applies; in zone I,
subsection 17.40.040A of this title applies.
B. Residential Buildings: All residential buildings in residential districts must meet residential official
height and area regulations. (Ord. 1423, 2017)
17.12.020: BUILDINGS AND LAND; YARD SIZE AND FAMILIES PER BUILDING
RESTRICTIONS:
Except as provided in this title, no building, structure or premises shall be erected, altered or used so
as to produce smaller yards or less unoccupied acres than prescribed by the setback restrictions of
the district in which built, and no building shall be occupied by more families than prescribed for such
building, structure or premises for the zone in which it is located. (Ord. 1204, 2002: Ord. 971 § 6,
1987: prior code § 11-2-3(A)(2))
17.12.030: BUILDINGS; SEPARATE YARD, COURT OR OPEN SPACE REQUIRED:
A. Except as provided in this title, no yard, court or open space, or part thereof, shall be included as a
part of the yard, court or open space similarly required for any other building, structure or dwelling
under this title.
B. No building or structure shall be less than twenty feet (20') in width or twenty feet (20') in length.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 375/467
C. The following structures shall be excluded from the minimum length and width requirement as
prescribed herein: architectural projections, porches, canopies, balconies, platforms, carports,
patios, covered patios, belfries, cupolas, ventilators, chimneys, awnings, fences, decks, storage
sheds, or any other addition or improvement to an existing building or structure which existing
structure already meets the length and width requirements of this title. (Ord. 1204, 2002: Ord. 1066
§ 1, 1993: Ord. 991 §§ 1, 2, 1989: Ord. 988 § 1, 1988: prior code § 11-2-3(A)(3))
17.12.040: SURVEY AND ESTABLISHMENT OF PROPERTY CORNERS:
Before any person may apply for, or receive, a building permit, variance, a conditional use permit or
any other zoning or use permit which involves the locating, varying, changing, moving or altering of lot
lines or corners, or for new construction or for major exterior changes which alter the outside
dimensions of a structure, the person seeking the permit shall provide a survey by a licensed surveyor
in which the lot lines or boundaries and corners have been established as a matter of record. At the
time of application and inspection, the surveyor shall have visibly staked the lot lines and corners.
(Ord. 1204, 2002: Ord. 1085 § 1, 1994)
17.12.050: LOTS IN TWO DISTRICTS:
Where a district boundary line, as established in this title or as shown on the zoning map, divides a lot
which was in single ownership and of record at the time of the effective dates hereof, the least
restrictive district shall apply to the entire lot. The use so extended shall be deemed to be conforming.
(Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code § 11-3-1(A))
17.12.060: LOTS IN BUSINESS OR INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS ADJACENT TO
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS; ADHERENCE TO RESIDENTIAL YARD
REQUIREMENTS:
Where a lot in a business or industrial district abuts a lot in a residential district, there shall be
provided along such abutting lines a yard equal in width or depth to that required in the residential
district. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code § 11-3-1(C))
17.12.070: MIXED RESIDENTIAL AND BUSINESS OR INDUSTRIAL FRONTAGE;
RESIDENTIAL YARD DEPTH REQUIRED:
Where the frontage on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets is zoned partly as
residential and partly as business or industrial, the front yard depth in the business or industrial district
shall be equal to the required front depth of the residential district. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code § 11-3-
1(D))
17.12.080: GARAGE ENTRANCES AND EXITS; MINIMUM DISTANCE
REQUIREMENT FROM RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
No public or private garage for more than five (5) motor vehicles shall have an entrance or exit for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 376/467
motor vehicles within sixty feet (60') of a residential district. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code § 11-3-1(E))
17.12.090: PARKING LOTS AND DRIVEWAYS ABUTTING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT;
WALL OR FENCE REQUIRED; GLARELESS LIGHTING REQUIRED:
Whenever a parking lot or a driveway to a parking lot is established in other than a residential district
so as to abut the side or rear line of a lot in a residential district, a solid masonry wall or a substantial,
sightly fence, not less than three feet (3') high and not more than six feet (6') high, shall be
constructed and maintained along said side or rear lot line up to, but not beyond, the setback building
line. In addition, in all use districts the lighting, including any permitted illuminated sign, on any parking
lot or driveway shall be arranged so that there will be no annoying glare directed or reflected toward
residential buildings or districts. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code 11-3-1(F))
17.12.100: REVERSED CORNER LOT ABUTTING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT;
MINIMUM REAR YARD REQUIREMENT:
In the case of a reversed corner lot, where the rear of a lot is in a commercial or industrial district,
there shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty five feet (25'); provided, that where a public alley
separates the rear of the lot in the commercial or industrial district and the side of the lot in any
residential district, no rear yard shall be required. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code § 11-3-1(G))
17.12.110: SINGLE UNITS:
Single units in a residential district shall have no accessory building built without first constructing a
primary residential structure. There shall be only one primary structure built on any one lot. (Ord.
1204, 2002: Ord. 1101 § 2, 1995)
17.12.120: LOTS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT ADJACENT TO BUSINESS OR
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT; LEAST RESTRICTED USE PERMISSIBLE:
The first residentially zoned lot having a side yard adjacent to any commercial or industrial district may
be utilized in accordance with the use requirements of the next least restricted residential zone;
provided, that the area, height and other restrictions of the zone in which it is located are met. In
addition, any single adjacent structure located or built upon the first sixty feet (60') of such a
residentially zoned lot with a side yard adjoining a commercial or industrial district may be used for
offices for groups of doctors, dentists, architects, engineers or attorneys; clinics with private
dispensaries; and insurance, institutional and real estate offices. In addition, such other
semicommercial uses as determined by the commission to be of similar character are permitted. Such
structure or use must comply with the area, height and other restrictions of the zone in which it is
located. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code § 11-3-1(B))
17.12.130: OCCUPANCY STANDARDS:
Within a single residence, no more than two (2) persons per habitable room shall reside. "Habitable
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 377/467
room" shall be defined as excluding hallways, kitchens and bathrooms. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
Chapter 17.16
DISTRICT ESTABLISHMENT AND ZONING MAP
17.16.010: DISTRICT DIVISION GENERALLY; ZONING MAP ADOPTION BY
REFERENCE:
A. For the purposes of this title, the city is divided into districts as provided in this title.
B. The use districts for parcels of land located within the city are classified and reclassified as shown
on a map entitled the "zoning map of the city of Payette", on file in the office of the city clerk and
identified by approving signatures of the mayor and clerk, which map, with all explanatory matter
thereon, shall be deemed to accompany, be, and is made a part of this title. No building or
premises shall be used and no building shall be erected except in conformity with the regulations
and ordinances of the city prescribed for the use district in which it is located. (Ord. 1204, 2002:
prior code § 11-2-1)
17.16.020: RULES FOR BOUNDARY INTERPRETATION:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the districts as shown on the zoning
map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline or street line of
streets, the centerline or alley line of alleys, or the centerline or right of way line of highways, such
lines shall be construed to be such district boundaries.
B. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerline of
street lines of streets, the centerlines or alley lines of alleys, or the centerlines or right of way lines
of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and such
distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall
be determined by the use of the scale shown on the zoning map.
C. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be
construed to be said boundaries.
D. Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such boundary shall be deemed to be
located midway between the main tracks of said railroad line.
E. Where the boundary of a district follows a stream, lake or other body of water, said boundary line
shall be construed to be at the limit of the jurisdiction of the city, unless otherwise indicated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 378/467
F. All areas within the corporate limits which are underwater and are not shown as included within any
district shall be subject to all of the regulations of the district which immediately adjoins the water
area. If the water area adjoins two (2) or more districts, the boundaries of each district shall be
construed to extend into the water area in a straight line until they meet the other district.
G. Any areas shown on the zoning map as a park, playground, school, cemetery, water, street or right
of way, shall be subject to the zoning regulations of the district in which they are located. In case of
doubt, the zoning regulations of the most restricted adjoining district shall govern.
H. In every case where property has not been specifically included within a district, or where territory
has become a part of the city by annexation, the same shall automatically be classed as lying and
being in the A residential district until such classifications have been changed by an amendment to
this title as provided by law.
I. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated in the manner authorized by law, the
zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically
extended to the center of such vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then be subject
to all regulations of the extended districts. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code § 11-2-2)
17.16.030: DISTRICT DIVISION DESIGNATED:
A. The city is divided into seven (7) use districts, which shall be known, in the order of restrictiveness,
beginning with the most restrictive as:
1. T transitional;
2. A residential;
3. B residential;
4. C commercial;
5. C-1 commercial - downtown;
6. C-2 commercial;
7. I industrial. (Ord. 1204, 2002: Ord. 1066 § 1, 1993: prior code § 11-5-1)
Chapter 17.20
T TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT
17.20.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the T Transitional District is to protect a country type lifestyle while the area is
transitioning from agricultural to urban type uses. The uses protected are gardening, family recreation
and the keeping of a limited number of livestock and poultry. Lots must be large enough to offer a
country lifestyle without imposing upon neighboring properties. The minimum lot size is two and one6/
5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 379/467
half (21/2) acres and should be planned in such a manner to allow other lots to be incorporated as
density increases into A and B Residential. Building location must be such that water and sewer
facilities can be easily installed to provide access to each lot, without affecting surrounding properties
adversely. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.20.020: PERMITTED USES:
The following are allowed in the T Transitional District:
Accessory uses to any uses permitted in the district;
Agriculture, not including livestock confinement operations (LCOs).
Buildings housing horses and other usual farm animals shall not be located closer than fifty feet (50')
from any dwelling other than the dwelling on the property.
Garden or plant nursery, selling only produce or plants, the major portion of which is raised on the
premises, and excluding any use injurious, noxious or offensive to the neighborhood.
Golf course.
Municipal facilities.
Single-family dwelling as regulated in the A Residential District with the exception that the minimum lot
size for such use shall be two and one-half (21/2) acres (108,900 square feet). (Ord. 1451, 2018)
17.20.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission after public notice has
been given in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6509, and a public hearing is held. Any permit
issued shall contain such safeguards and special conditions as the commission deems necessary.
Such uses and buildings must be appropriately located, designed and meet a community need without
adversely affecting the neighborhood.
Agricultural buildings.
Childcare facilities.
Commercial kennel, animal hospital.
Home occupations.
Public building, hospital or church.
Public utility installation.
Riding stables and schools.
Schools; private, commercial and public.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 380/467
Temporary buildings as necessary for construction purposes for a period not to exceed one year.
Truck and tractor and engine repair.
The City may determine other uses to be similar to those listed above. (Ord. 1425, 2017)
17.20.040: AREA AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Height Regulations: Any building or structure or portion thereof hereafter erected which is not of an
agricultural nature, shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in height unless a greater height is approved
by conditional use permit.
B. Setback Requirements: The following are setback requirements for the T Transitional Zone:
1. Front Yard: No building or structure shall be erected nearer than thirty feet (30') of the street side
property line.
2. Side Yard: No building shall be erected closer than ten feet (10') to any side property line,
except corner lots shall maintain a thirty foot (30') side yard adjacent to the street which
intersects the street upon which the building fronts.
3. Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty five feet (25').
4. Area Requirements: The minimum lot area shall be two and one-half (21/2) acres (108,900
square feet). (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.20.050: BUILDING AND USE RESTRICTIONS:
A. Corner Clearance: Within the area formed by the lines of intersecting streets or roadways and a
sight line joining points on such lines thirty feet (30') distant from their point of intersection, or in the
case of a rounded corner, the point of intersection of their tangents, no structure or foliage shall be
maintained between a height of three feet (3') and eight feet (8') above the plane through the curb,
street or roadway grades whichever is the highest.
B. Projections: Nothing herein shall prevent the projection of steps, eaves, cornices, masonry
fireplaces, windowsills or belt courses into any required yard. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.20.060: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses are permitted. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.20.070: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
The off street parking requirements for the T Transitional Zone are referred to in chapter 17.72 of this
title. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 381/467
Chapter 17.24
A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
17.24.010: CONSTRUCTION OR USE; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided in this title, no main building or premises in an A Residential District
shall be erected, altered, used, arranged or designed to be used, in whole or part, for uses other than
set forth in this chapter and unless they comply with all the provisions set forth in this chapter. (Ord.
1204, 2002: Ord. 887, 1978: Ord. 847, 1976: Prior Code § 11-6-1)
17.24.020: PERMITTED USES:
The following are permitted in A Residential Districts:
Municipal facilities.
One-family dwellings.
Two-family dwellings. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.24.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission after public notice has
been given in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6509 and a public hearing is held. The Planning
and Zoning Commission may require appropriate safeguards and special conditions as said
commission deems necessary. Such uses and buildings must be appropriately located and designed
to meet a community need without adversely affecting the neighborhood.
Accessory buildings in excess of the square footage of the primary residential structure and/or in
excess of twenty two feet (22') in height at its highest point.
Bed and breakfasts.
Buildings of more than two (2) stories, except public or semipublic.
Childcare facilities.
Churches.
Condominiums and townhouses.
Fire stations.
Home occupations.
Libraries.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 382/467
Parks and buildings for same.
Playgrounds and buildings for same.
Schools: private, commercial and public.
Triplexes. (Ord. 1442, 2018)
17.24.040: AREA AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. There shall be a setback of at least twenty five feet (25') from the front of the property line or fifty
five feet (55') from the street centerline, whichever setback is greater; provided, however, where a
uniform setback exists which is less or greater than required in this subsection, the setback shall
conform to such uniform setback.
B. There shall be a side yard of not less than eight feet (8').
C. On a corner lot, the minimum setback on the street upon which a majority of the building fronts
shall be twenty five feet (25') from the property line or fifty five feet (55') from the street centerline,
whichever setback is greater; the setback on an intersecting street shall be not less than ten feet
(10') from the property line or forty feet (40') from the centerline of the intersecting street; provided,
however, that in the event the majority of the buildings on both streets comply with the minimum
setback for fronting streets, the minimum setback on both sides of the corner lot may be required
to be the setback of the fronting street.
D. A lot shall have at least seventy five feet (75') of frontage onto a public street unless it is a corner
lot, which shall have at least eighty five feet (85') of frontage onto a public street.
E. Where there are no alleys, a setback of at least eight feet (8') from the back property line shall be
required, unless a variance is granted under the provisions of this title.
F. Minimum lot size shall be eight thousand (8,000) square feet unless it is a corner lot, which shall be
a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. (Ord. 1442, 2018)
17.24.050: BUILDING AND USE RESTRICTIONS:
A. The roofs of buildings shall not project to within four feet (4') of the side property line.
B. If garages open on side streets, they shall be at least ten feet (10') from the side property line, and,
if the opening is on an alley, the setback shall be eight feet (8') from the property line.
C. No building of more than two (2) stories, except public shall be permitted except by approval of the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 383/467
D. No permanent signboards of any kind shall be permitted.
E. No animals, other than household pets, shall be permitted except as outlined in section 6.04.090,
"Poultry", of this Code.
F. Sidewalks shall be constructed in all residential areas either adjacent to street curbs or set back
away from the curb so the outer edge of the sidewalk lies adjacent to the property line. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall designate which option may be utilized. If the sidewalk is
set back from the curb, a planting strip shall be maintained between the sidewalk and street curb.
A "planting strip" is an area between a curb and sidewalk which is landscaped or maintained as a
lawn.
G. All dwelling units shall be at least twenty feet (20') in width and forty feet (40') in length. (Ord. 1345,
2011)
17.24.060: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
The off street parking requirements for the A Residential Zone are referred to in chapter 17.72 of this
title. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
Chapter 17.28
B RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
17.28.010: CONSTRUCTION OR USE; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided in this title, no main building or premises in a B Residential District shall
be erected, altered, used, arranged or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for uses other than set
forth in this chapter unless they comply with all the provisions set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1204,
2002: Prior Code § 11-7-1)
17.28.020: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses in the B Residential Districts are as follows:
All uses permitted in A Residential Districts (see section 17.24.020 of this title).
Assisted living homes.
Bed and breakfasts.
Boarding houses.
Dancing schools.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 384/467
Home occupations offices.
Hospitals.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Municipal facilities. (Ord. 1204, 2002: Ord. 1066 § 1, 1993: Ord. 971 § 10, 1987: Prior Code § 11-7-
1(A))
17.28.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission after public notice has
been given in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6509 and a public hearing is held. The Planning
and Zoning Commission may require appropriate safeguards and special condition as said
commission deems necessary. Such uses and buildings must be appropriately located and designed
to meet a community need without adversely affecting the neighborhood.
All special uses permitted and regulated in an A Residential District (see section 17.24.030 of this
title).
Accessory buildings in excess of the square footage of the primary residential structure, and/or in
excess of twenty two feet (22') in height at its highest point.
Childcare facilities.
Convalescent homes, nursing homes and congregate homes.
Neighborhood grocery store or convenience store serving the needs of the residents in the immediate
area. (Ord. 1442, 2018)
17.28.040: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Requirements for location of buildings in A Residential Districts shall be applicable to location of
buildings in B Residential Districts.
B. Minimum lot size shall be as follows:
1. Multi-family housing: Three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet per living unit.
2. Single-family home: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
3. Corner lots for single-family homes: Eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
C. A lot shall have at least sixty feet (60') of frontage onto a public street unless it is a corner lot, which
shall have at least seventy five feet (75') of frontage onto a public street. (Ord. 1423, 2017)
17.28.050: BUILDING AREA AND USE RESTRICTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 385/467
A. Buildings permitted shall provide parking facilities required by chapter 17.72 of this title.
B. Billboards of not more than eight (8) square feet may be permitted. Signs for home occupations
shall be regulated by section 17.64.150 of this title. (Ord. 1451, 2018)
17.28.060: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
The off street parking requirements for the B Residential Districts are referred to in chapter 17.72 of
this title. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
Chapter 17.32
C COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
17.32.010: CONSTRUCTION OR USE; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided in this title, no main building or premises in a C commercial district shall
be erected, altered, used, arranged or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for uses other than set
forth in this chapter unless they comply with all the provisions set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1204,
2002: prior code § 11-8-1)
17.32.020: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses in the C commercial district are as follows:
Assembly halls.
Automobile sales rooms.
Carpenter shops.
Dancing academies.
Dry cleaning and laundry establishments.
Garages, private and public.
Hotels.
Lodge halls.
Mortuaries, funeral homes, undertaking parlors.
Motels.
Municipal facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 386/467
Newspaper printing plants.
Office buildings.
Photograph galleries.
Printing and bookbinding establishments.
Public transportation depots.
Recreation halls.
Repair shops.
Restaurants and tearooms.
Service stations and convenience stores.
Stores, retail and wholesale.
Studios.
Telephone exchanges.
Theaters. (Ord. 1204, 2002: Ord. 1094 § 1, 1995: Ord. 1066 § 1, 1993: Ord. 971 § 12, 1987: prior
code § 11-8-1(A))
17.32.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted by the planning and zoning commission after public notice has
been given in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6509 and a public hearing is held. The planning
and zoning commission may require appropriate safeguards and special conditions as said
commission deems necessary. Such uses and buildings must be appropriately located and designed
to meet a community need without adversely affecting the neighborhood.
Uses permitted in A residential districts and in B residential districts. Any permitted residential use
shall meet the residential zoning standards as specified in the A residential and B residential zoning
regulations.
Churches.
Dance halls.
Drinking establishments that serve beer, wine or liquor for on site consumption. Provided, however, in
the event a drinking establishment license is being transferred to a new owner within ninety (90) days
from the date the current owner ceases doing business, a conditional use permit will not be required. If
there is any change in the use, including, but not limited to, increased hours of operation, size,
capacity, type of drinking establishment, or entertainment then the transfer shall be subject to
receiving a new conditional use permit.
Light manufacturing, which is not dangerous or offensive on account of dust, gas or smoke and noise.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 387/467
Manufactured home parks. Because of increased residential density in a manufactured home park,
commercial uses allowed in commercial zones will not be permitted within a manufactured home park.
Residential use directly connected to the business including, but not limited to, motel residences,
security housing, office/residence setups. Such residences shall meet all standards for residences as
specified in the B residential district.
Warehouses used for storage of merchandise that is sold at retail on the premises to the ultimate
consumer, excluding mail order warehouses.
Warehouses used for storage of personal property not intended for sale. (Ord. 1425, 2017)
17.32.040: AREA AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Setback Required When: No setback shall be required except where buildings are constructed
adjacent to a street of less than sixty feet (60') in width, in which case buildings shall be
constructed no closer than thirty five feet (35') from the centerline of the street. Landscaping shall
cover five percent (5%) of the lot or ten feet (10') deep along any street frontage, whichever is less.
Delivery service areas of twenty feet (20') in width in the rear or side may be required.
B. Minimum Lot Size: There shall be no minimum lot size in the C commercial district. (Ord. 1204,
2002: Ord. 1066 § 1, 1993: prior code § 11-8-1(B))
17.32.050: BUILDINGS AND USE RESTRICTIONS GENERALLY:
A. No window or door while in an open position or during opening shall project into any street or alley.
B. For each five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor space, one off street loading zone of at least
three hundred (300) square feet shall be provided on the property.
C. For all business or commercial use permitted in C commercial district built after the effective date of
this title, the minimum number of off street parking areas required are delineated in chapter 17.72
of this title.
D. No new structure shall occupy more than eighty percent (80%) of the total lot size. (Ord. 1423,
2017)
17.32.060: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
Whenever a building or structure is constructed after the effective date of this title, the city of Payette
landscaping ordinance shall be complied with unless such structure is located within the downtown
core and such requirements cannot be met due to lot size or configuration. Whenever a building or
structure existing prior to the effective date of this title is enlarged by three hundred ninety nine (399)
square feet or more, or by fifty percent (50%) or more in the number of housing units, seating capacity
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 388/467
or otherwise, said building or structure shall then and thereafter comply with the city of Payette
landscaping ordinance unless such structure is located within the C-1 zoning district and such
requirements cannot be met due to lot size or configuration. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.32.070: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
The off street parking requirements are referred to in chapter 17.72 of this title. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
Chapter 17.34
C-1 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT - DOWNTOWN
17.34.010: CONSTRUCTION OR USE; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided in this title, no main building or premises in a C-1 Commercial District
shall be erected, altered, used, arranged or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for uses other
than set forth in this chapter unless they comply with all the provisions set forth in this chapter. (Ord.
1204, 2002)
17.34.020: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses in the C-1 Commercial District are as follows:
All uses allowed in a C Commercial District.
Licensed sidewalk cafes and outdoor dining areas per section 5.12.020 of this Code. (Ord. 1411,
2016)
17.34.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission after public notice has
been given in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6509 and a public hearing is held. The Planning
and Zoning Commission may require appropriate safeguards and special conditions as said
commission deems necessary. Such uses and buildings must be appropriately located and designed
to meet a community need without adversely affecting the neighborhood.
All conditional uses as allowed in a C Commercial District.
Drinking establishments that serve beer, wine or liquor for on site consumption. Provided, however, in
the event a drinking establishment license is being transferred to a new owner within ninety (90) days
from the date the current owner ceases doing business, a conditional use permit will not be required. If
there is any change in the use, including, but not limited to, increased hours of operation, size,
capacity, type of drinking establishment, or entertainment then the transfer shall be subject to
receiving a new conditional use permit.
Residential use. (Ord. 1425, 2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 389/467
17.34.040: AREA AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Setback Required When: No setback shall be required except where buildings are constructed
adjacent to a street of less than sixty feet (60') in width, in which case buildings shall be
constructed no closer than thirty five feet (35') from the centerline of the street. Landscaping shall
cover five percent (5%) of the lot or ten feet (10') deep along any street frontage, whichever is less.
Delivery service areas of twenty feet (20') in width in the rear or side may be required.
B. Minimum Lot Size: There shall be no minimum lot size in the C-1 Commercial District. (Ord. 1204,
2002)
17.34.050: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS GENERALLY:
A. No window or door while in an open position or during opening shall project into any street or alley.
B. No new structure shall occupy more than eighty percent (80%) of the total lot size.
C. Broken glass shall be secured by replacement or re-glazing within thirty (30) days of notice from
City to property owner. An administrative extension may be granted upon receipt of written request,
and upon justifiable cause demonstrated. (Ord. 1435, 2017)
17.34.060: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING ZONE REQUIREMENTS:
A. The off street parking and loading zone requirements for the C-1 Commercial District are referred to
in chapter 17.72 of this title.
B. For each five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor space, one off street loading zone of at least
three hundred (300) square feet shall be provided on the property.
C. For all nonresidential use permitted and located on a lot in the C-1 Commercial District built or use
intensified after the effective date of this title, where there is not area available on the lot to meet
the number of off street parking areas or off street loading zone as required and delineated in
chapter 17.72 of this title, shall be exempt from the requirement of providing off street parking. The
exemption shall be applied to the land use on the lot requiring the fewest number of spaces. Only
one exemption shall be allowed per lot.
D. The City Council may enact an in lieu parking space construction fee when it is not possible to
provide some or all of the required off street parking. The funds shall be retained by the City and
shall be used exclusively for the purpose of acquiring and developing public off street parking
facilities. The in lieu fee is set by resolution, when enacted. (Ord. 1393, 2015)
17.34.070: DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 390/467
The boundaries for the C-1 Commercial District extend from Third Avenue North including Lots 1-5 in
block 2 of Chase Addition to the City of Payette, to the east boundary of Kiwanis Park and, from the
east centerline of Seventh Street to the west centerline of Ninth Street. (Ord. 1404, 2016)
Chapter 17.36
C-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
17.36.010: CONSTRUCTION OR USE; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided in this title, no main building or premises in a C-2 commercial district
shall be erected, altered, used, arranged or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for uses other
than set forth in this chapter unless they comply with all the provisions set forth in this chapter. (Ord.
1204, 2002: prior code § 11-9-1)
17.36.020: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses in the C-2 commercial district are as follows:
Animal hospitals.
Armories.
Assembly halls.
Bakeries.
Cold storage, including frozen food lockers.
Laundries and dry cleaning establishments.
Light manufacturing, which is not dangerous or offensive on account of dust, gas, smoke or noise, in
cases where the major portion of the produce is not sold on the premises to the ultimate consumer.
Lodge halls.
Lumberyards.
Municipal facilities.
Public transportation depots.
Wholesale commercial business, other than manufacturing or processing. (Ord. 1204, 2002: Ord.
1066 § 1, 1993: prior code § 11-9-1(A))
17.36.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 391/467
The following uses may be permitted by the planning and zoning commission after public notice has
been given in accordance with Idaho Code section 67-6509 and a public hearing is held. The planning
and zoning commission may require appropriate safeguards and special conditions as said
commission deems necessary. Such uses and buildings must be appropriately located and designed
to meet a community need without adversely affecting the neighborhood.
Drinking establishments that serve beer, wine or liquor for on site consumption. Provided, however, in
the event a drinking establishment license is being transferred to a new owner within ninety (90) days
from the date the current owner ceases doing business, a conditional use permit will not be required. If
there is any change in the use, including, but not limited to, increased hours of operation, size,
capacity, type of drinking establishment, or entertainment then the transfer shall be subject to
receiving a new conditional use permit.
Fuel yards.
Manufactured home parks.
Residential uses; any permitted residential use shall meet the residential standards as specified in the
B residential zone regulations. (Ord. 1425, 2017)
17.36.040: AREA AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Setback Required When: No setback shall be required except where buildings are constructed
adjacent to a street of less than sixty feet (60') in width, in which case buildings shall be
constructed no closer than forty feet (40') from the centerline of the street. Landscaping shall cover
five percent (5%) of the lot or ten feet (10') deep along any street frontage, whichever is less.
Delivery service areas of twenty feet (20') in width in the rear or side may be required.
B. Minimum Lot Size: There shall be no minimum lot size in the C-2 commercial district. (Ord. 1204,
2002: Ord. 1066 § 1, 1993: prior code § 11-9-1(B))
17.36.050: BUILDING AND USE RESTRICTIONS GENERALLY:
A. No window or door while in an open position or during opening shall project into any street or alley.
B. For each six thousand (6,000) square feet of floor space, two (2) off street loading zones of at least
three hundred fifty (350) square feet each shall be provided on the property. In addition, for each
ten thousand (10,000) square feet of open shed or yard used for storage, one loading zone of at
least three hundred fifty (350) square feet shall be provided on the property. All other parking
requirements are addressed in chapter 17.72 of this title.
C. Location and size of curb cuts and driveways shall be approved by the city council; provided,
however, that any curb cut or driveway greater than twelve feet (12') in width will be permitted only
if public parking space is provided within three hundred feet (300') equal to the number of parking
spaces removed from public use by such curb cut or driveway.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 392/467
D. All uses permitted in C commercial districts shall be allowed in C-2 commercial districts; provided,
however, that C-2 commercial districts shall be primarily for the purposes of commerce or industry.
E. No new structure shall occupy more than eighty percent (80%) of the total lot size. (Ord. 1423,
2017)
17.36.060: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
Whenever a preexisting structure is enlarged by three hundred ninety nine (399) square feet or more,
or by fifty percent (50%) or more in the number of housing units, seating capacity or otherwise, said
building or structure shall comply with the definition of "landscaping" in section 17.08.010 of this title.
(Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.36.070: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
The off street parking requirements for the C-2 commercial districts are referred to in chapter 17.72 of
this title. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
Chapter 17.40
I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
17.40.010: CONSTRUCTION OR USE; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided in this title, no main building or premises in an I industrial district shall
be erected, altered, used, arranged or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for uses other than set
forth in this chapter and unless they comply with all the provisions set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1204,
2002: Ord. 1066 § 1, 1993: prior code § 11-10-1)
17.40.020: PERMITTED USES:
Any uses permitted in C commercial districts and C-2 commercial districts; provided, however, that the
primary purpose of the I industrial district shall be for industrial purposes as set forth in this section.
Premises shall be used and occupied by structures used primarily for industrial purposes, including
the following:
Agricultural industry as follows:
Canneries.
Creameries.
Egg processing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 393/467
Feed stores and feed manufacturing.
Flour mills and elevators.
Fruit and vegetable packing.
Fruit and vegetable processing.
Poultry processing.
Sugar processing.
Heavy industry as follows:
Auto sales or repair, mechanical shops.
Coal yards and wood yards.
Heavy manufacturing, where confined to defined limits such as street boundaries.
Ice plants.
Iron and steel fabricating.
Lumberyards.
Municipal facilities.
Planing mills.
Railroad yards.
Truck terminals.
Warehouses.
Other industry that either does not have objectionable noises, odors or refuse; provided, however, that
other such industries may be permitted by the planning commission under appropriate safeguards and
such special conditions as said commission deems necessary. (Ord. 1204, 2002: Ord. 1066 § 1, 1993:
prior code § 11-10-1(A))
17.40.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
Any industrial use not defined under permitted uses within this section may be permitted by the
planning and zoning commission after public notice has been given in accordance with Idaho Code
section 67-6509 and a public hearing is held. The planning and zoning commission may require
appropriate safeguards and special conditions as said commission deems necessary. Such uses and
buildings must be appropriately located and designed to meet a community need without adversely
affecting the neighborhood.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 394/467
Bulk petroleum products, storage plant industry, autos, mechanical and wrecking where confined to
buildings and fenced premises.
Nude and seminude establishments. (Ord. 1425, 2017)
17.40.040: AREA AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Setback Required When: No setback shall be required except where buildings are constructed
adjacent to a street of less than sixty feet (60') in width, in which case buildings shall be
constructed no closer than forty feet (40') from the centerline of the street. Landscaping shall cover
five percent (5%) of the lot or ten feet (10') deep along any street frontage, whichever is less.
Delivery service areas of twenty feet (20') in width in the rear or side may be required.
B. Minimum Lot Size: There shall be no minimum lot size in the industrial district. (Ord. 1204, 2002:
Ord. 1066 § 1, 1993: prior code § 11-10-1(B))
17.40.050: BUILDING AND OFF STREET PARKING PLANS; PLANNING
COMMISSION REVIEW AND APPROVAL REQUIRED:
A. All building plans shall be subject to review and approval by the planning commission and city
council with a view to maximum utilization of property and with a full use of property.
B. Plans for off street parking shall be reviewed by the planning commission and be subject to its
approval. Requirements shall be in conformance with chapter 17.72 of this title. (Ord. 1204, 2002:
prior code § 11-10-1(C))
17.40.060: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
Whenever a preexisting structure is enlarged by fifty percent (50%) or more in floor area, number of
employees, number of housing units, seating capacity or otherwise, said building or structure shall
comply with the definition of "landscaping" in section 17.08.010 of this title. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.40.070: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
The off street parking requirements for the I industrial district are referred to in chapter 17.72 of this
title. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
Chapter 17.44
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
17.44.010: INTENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 395/467
The intent of a planned unit development (PUD) is to permit greater flexibility in the development of
residential, commercial, or manufacturing uses or some combination thereof, than is generally
possible under the regulations for the various use districts. It is further intended to provide a
harmonious variety of uses, a higher level of amenities, and the preservation of natural qualities and
open space. A PUD may be located in any area of the city subject to the following standards and the
approval of the planning commission and city council. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.44.020: VALIDITY:
When examining a PUD proposal, the planning commission shall determine:
A. That the development promotes clustering of individual lots;
B. That the design of the development provides economies in the provisions of roads and other public
improvements. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.44.030: COMPLIANCE:
In addition to compliance with the goals and objectives of this title and those set forth in the
comprehensive plan, an applicant for PUD approval shall additionally demonstrate:
A. The desirability of a PUD over a traditional subdivision in the specific instance in which the concept
is intended to be used; and
B. That the PUD shall be so located with respect to major streets and highways or other transportation
facilities, as to provide direct access to the development without creating traffic burdens along
minor streets in residential, commercial, or industrial districts outside said PUD; and
C. That, upon completion, the PUD shall be so located in relation to sanitary sewers, water lines,
storm and surface drainage systems and other utility systems and installations that neither
extension nor enlargement of such systems will be required in manner, form, character, location,
degree, scale, or timing resulting in higher net public cost or earlier incursion of public cost than
would develop in a form generally permitted in the district. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.44.040: SITE AREA:
A PUD shall contain a site area of not less than:
A. Three (3) acres for residential development;
B. Ten (10) acres for residential use with subordinate commercial or light manufacturing uses;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 396/467
C. Five (5) acres for commercial development; and
D. Ten (10) acres for industrial and manufacturing development. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.44.050: LAND USE:
In a residential PUD, commercial and manufacturing uses shall be distinctly subordinate to the
residential use and shall be oriented to the provision of goods and services to the residents of the
development. Approval for such a combination of uses shall be withheld until building permits have
been granted for at least fifty percent (50%) of the dwelling units. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.44.060: ARRANGEMENT OF COMMERCIAL USES:
When PUDs include commercial uses, commercial buildings and establishments shall be planned as
groups having common parking areas and common ingress and egress points in order to reduce the
number of potential accident locations at intersections. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.44.070: FACILITIES:
The plan of the project shall provide for the integrated and harmonious design of buildings, and for
adequate and properly arranged facilities for internal traffic circulation, landscaping and such other
features and facilities as may be necessary to make the project attractive and efficient from the
standpoint of the adjoining and surrounding noncommercial areas. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.44.080: LANDSCAPING:
All areas designed for future expansion or not intended for immediate improvement or development
shall comply with section 17.08.400 of this title. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.44.090: ARRANGEMENT OF MANUFACTURING USE:
PUDs may include manufacturing uses if it can be shown that the development results in a more
efficient and desirable use of land.
A. Manufacturing uses and parcels shall be developed utilizing landscaping and existing woodlands as
buffers to screen lighting, parking areas, loading areas or docks and/or outdoor storage of raw
materials or products. A planned manufacturing area shall provide for the harmony of buildings and
a compact grouping in order to economize in the provision of such utility services as are required.
Thoroughfares shall be kept to a minimum throughout a planned manufacturing area in order to
reduce through traffic.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 397/467
B. If the project is located adjacent to any residential uses, a buffer yard consisting of trees, shrubs or
fences may be required. All intervening spaces between the right of way line and project building
line and intervening spaces between buildings, drives, parking areas and improved areas shall be
landscaped with trees and plantings and property maintained at all times. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.44.100: INDEPENDENT:
A PUD shall be essentially independent and contained. It shall be physically disassociated from
surrounding properties with different uses. Terrain orientation of streets and highways, woods, or
rivers may serve to create such a disassociation. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.44.110: UTILITIES:
Underground utilities, including telephone and electrical systems are required within the limits of the
PUD. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.44.120: STREETS:
The arrangement, type, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets within the PUD shall conform to
the city design standards and shall be further considered in relation to:
A. Traffic conditions on existing streets;
B. Topographical conditions;
C. Public convenience and safety;
D. Circulation patterns within the boundaries of the development;
E. The layout of the site with respect to locations and dimensions of vehicular and pedestrian
entrances, exits, drives and walkways. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.44.130: PUBLIC FACILITIES:
A PUD may include site availability for needed public services not otherwise provided for. Such
provisions may include, but are not limited to, school sites, utilities, and parks and recreation areas.
(Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.44.140: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A PUD shall comply with the provisions established in this title having reference to the form and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 398/467
presentation of preliminary and final plat. In addition, the following information shall be submitted:
A. Description of open space, recreational facilities, roads and other facilities proposed to be under
common ownership.
B. A copy of any proposed covenants.
C. Proposed type(s) of ownership(s) upon completion of development.
D. A copy of the community association agreement, describing provisions to assure permanence of
open space and other facilities held in common ownership.
E. A development plan which calls for a development time of eighteen (18) months or less for street
and utility improvements, and outlines a schedule of the completion time for required public
improvements; and includes a plan on the financial mechanism to construct and to continue to fund
the upkeep of these improvements. The city reserves the right to require financial guarantees of
these improvements per subsection 16.28.020C of this code.
F. Such additional information as may have been required as a result of the preplat conference or
information deemed necessary by the planning commission or city engineer. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
Chapter 17.56
NONCONFORMING USES
17.56.010: EXISTING STRUCTURES, BUILDINGS AND LAND; CONTINUANCE
PERMISSIBLE WHEN:
The lawful use of any building, structure or land existing at the time of the enactment of the provision
in this title may be continued although such use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter,
provided the conditions of this chapter are met. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code § 11-4-1(A))
17.56.012: EXISTING NONCONFORMING SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL USE:
Any single-family structure, located in any district that was in use as a single-family residence at the
time of adoption or amendment to this chapter, and which has continued as a residential use, shall not
be considered to be a nonconforming use but shall be considered a special use until such time that
the residential use is replaced with another approved use. A single-family residential structure,
granted special use status, shall have the same privileges as a permitted residential structure and
may be replaced/remodeled if a building permit has been obtained, and as long as the setbacks can
be met or a variance is granted. Upon a change in use, to commercial or industrial, the residential
structure shall not be changed back to a residential use unless a conditional use permit has been
approved through following the public hearing process. A change in use shall not be considered to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 399/467
have occurred until the structure has actually been converted to a nonresidential use. (Ord. 1392,
2015)
17.56.020: UNSAFE BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:
Nothing in this title shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any portion of a
building or structure declared unsafe by a proper authority. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code § 11-4-1(A)
(1))
17.56.030: BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES; RESTRICTIONS ON ALTERATIONS:
A nonconforming building or structure may be altered, improved, or reconstructed provided such work
is not to an extent exceeding in aggregate cost sixty percent (60%) of the assessed value of the
building or structure, unless the building or structure is changed to a conforming use. (Ord. 1204,
2002: prior code § 11-4-1(A)(2))
17.56.040: EXTENSIONS:
A nonconforming use shall not be extended, but the extensions of a lawful use to any portion of a
nonconforming building or structure which existed prior to the enactment of the provisions in this title
shall not be deemed the extension of such nonconforming use. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code § 11-4-
1(A)(3))
17.56.050: CHANGES PROHIBITED:
No nonconforming building, structure or use shall be changed to another nonconforming use. (Ord.
1204, 2002: prior code § 11-4-1(A)(4))
17.56.060: RESTORATION PERMISSIBLE WHEN:
A. Nothing in this title shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing, rebuilding and continued use of any
nonconforming building or structure damaged by fire, collapse, explosion or act of God,
subsequent to the effective date of the provisions codified in this chapter, wherein the expense of
such work does not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the actual value of the building or structure at
the time such damage occurred. Provided, however, in the case of a residential property in a
nonresidential zone, if the structure can be rebuilt on exactly the same footprint as the damaged
building, then reconstruction of the dwelling shall be allowed provided the rebuilt structure
conforms to all current building and fire codes. Provided further, in the case of damage exceeding
sixty percent (60%) of the value of a residential dwelling which is located in a commercially zoned
area, where the structure cannot be rebuilt on exactly the same footprint, the owner shall be
allowed to rebuild the structure provided the rebuilt/replacement structure complies with the most
current residential setback requirements and the building permit is applied for and construction
commences within one year of the damage.
1. In the event the planning administrator, or a designee, finds that:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 400/467
a. Commercial or industrial uses have developed or are developing in the zone, and
b. A majority of the abutting property owners or their representatives are opposed to a
continuation of the use of the structure as a principal residence then a rebuild permit shall not
be issued without a public hearing before the city council.
c. When requesting a permit for a rebuild or if seeking a rebuild letter, an applicant shall supply
the administrator with written statements from the abutting property owners or their
representatives which indicate whether the abutting landowners oppose or favor the request.
(Ord. 1412, 2016)
17.56.070: WEAR AND TEAR REPAIR PERMISSIBLE WHEN:
Nothing in this title shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing or rebuilding of a nonconforming
building, structure or part thereof, existing at the effective date of the provisions in this title, rendered
necessary by wear and tear, deterioration or depreciation; provided, that the cost of such work shall
not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the assessed value of such building or structure at the time
such work is done, nor shall it prevent compliance with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 1204, 2002:
prior code § 11-4-1(A)(7))
17.56.080: ABANDONMENT; RETURN PROHIBITED:
A nonconforming use of any building or premises which has been abandoned shall not thereafter be
returned to such nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned:
A. When the intent of the owner to discontinue the use is apparent; or
B. When the characteristic equipment and the furnishings of the nonconforming use have been
removed from the premises and have not been replaced by similar equipment within one year,
unless other facts show intention to resume the nonconforming use; or
C. When it has been replaced by a conforming use; or
D. When it has been changed to another use under permit from the planning and zoning commission;
or
E. When the use has been discontinued for a period of ninety (90) days. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code
§ 11-4-1(A)(8))
17.56.090: EXTENSION FOR PURPOSES OF DISPLACEMENT PROHIBITED:
No nonconforming use shall be extended to displace a conforming use. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code
§ 11-4-1(A)(9))
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 401/467
17.56.100: JUNKYARDS AND WRECKING YARDS; ZONING CHANGES;
ENCLOSURES REQUIRED WHEN:
No junkyard or automobile wrecking yard not within an enclosed masonry building and not within a
heavy industrial or unrestricted industrial district shall be operated or maintained for more than six (6)
months after a zoning change to a use district within which such yard is not permitted; except, that in a
light industrial district, where the planning and zoning commission determines that it is impractical to
roof over a large area containing junk material or an automobile wrecking yard, the commission may
permit the construction around such area of a seven foot (7') high masonry wall or substantial sightly
tight or semitight fence, whichever in its opinion is the more appropriate in the surroundings of the
property, and may then permit, for a specified time, the continued use of such property for such
purposes. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code § 11-4-1(A)(10))
17.56.110: UNLAWFUL USE NOT AUTHORIZED:
Nothing in this title shall be interpreted as authorization for or approval of the continuance of the use of
a structure or premises in violation of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code § 11-4-
1(A)(11))
17.56.120: APPLICABILITY TO DISTRICT BOUNDARY CHANGES:
Whenever the boundaries of a district are changed so as to transfer an area from one district to
another district of a different classification, the provisions of this chapter shall also apply to any
nonconforming uses existing therein. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code § 11-4-1(A))
17.56.130: PROCEDURE DESIGNATED:
A. The council may, from time to time, on its own motion, or on petition or on recommendation of the
planning commission, amend, supplement or repeal the regulations and provisions of this title.
B. Every such proposed amendment or change, whether initiated by the council or by petition, shall be
referred to the planning commission for a report thereon before the public hearing provided for in
subsection C of this section.
C. The council shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on proposed amendments and cause
notice to be published not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing in the newspaper of
general circulation within the city. The notice shall state the general nature of the proposed
amendments.
D. An amendment or rezoning may be initiated by a petition of interested property owners for rezoning
of any land to a less restricted district; provided, that said land is adjacent to or directly across a
street or alley from property which is already zoned the same or less restricted zone as that to
which said property is proposed to be zoned. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 402/467
Chapter 17.60
AMENDMENTS
17.60.010: PROCEDURE DESIGNATED:
A. The council may from time to time, on its own motion, or on petition or on recommendation of the
planning commission, amend, supplement or repeal the regulations and provisions of this title.
B. Every such proposed amendment or change, whether initiated by the council or by petition, shall be
referred to the planning commission for report thereon before the public hearing provided for in
subsection C of this section.
C. The council shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on proposed amendments and cause
notice to be published not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city. The notice shall state the general nature of the proposed amendments.
D. An amendment or rezoning may be initiated by a petition of interested property owners or
authorized agents of such owners for rezoning of any land to a less restricted district; provided,
that said land is adjacent to or directly across a street or alley from property which is already zoned
in the same or less restricted zone as that to which said property is proposed to be zoned. (Ord.
1204, 2002: Ord. 1066 § 1, 1993: prior code § 11-14-4)
Chapter 17.64
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
17.64.010: GENERAL:
The purpose of these performance standards is to set specific conditions for various uses. In addition
to all other regulations specified in this title, the following provisions shall be adhered to. (Ord. 1204,
2002)
17.64.020: CONVERSION OF DWELLINGS TO MORE UNITS:
A residence may not be converted to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units unless:
A. The yard dimensions will meet the yard dimensions required by the zoning regulations for new
structures in that district.
B. The lot area per family equals the lot area requirements for new structures in that district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 403/467
C. The conversion is in compliance with all other relevant codes and ordinances. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.64.030: TEMPORARY BUILDINGS:
Temporary buildings, construction trailers, equipment and materials used in conjunction with
construction work may only be permitted in any zone during the period construction work is in
progress, but such temporary facilities shall be removed upon completion of the construction work. In
a residential district of the City this use shall be limited to one hundred twenty (120) days. Storage of
such facilities or equipment beyond the completion date of the project shall require a conditional use
permit authorized by the City. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.64.040: PARKING AND STORAGE OF CERTAIN VEHICLES:
No inoperable and/or unregistered vehicles of any kind or type shall be parked or stored on any
residential property other than in a completely enclosed building or an enclosed yard that is not visible
to the neighbors. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.64.050: PROVISIONS FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES:
No land or structure in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner creating dangerous,
injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable conditions which could adversely affect the surrounding
areas or adjoining premises, except that any use permitted by this chapter may be undertaken and
maintained if safeguards are employed which will reduce dangerous and objectionable conditions to
acceptable limits as set out herein.
A. Fire Hazards: Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or explosive materials,
including hazardous materials, should be protected by adequate firefighting and fire protection
equipment and by such safety devices as are normally used in the handling of any such material.
Such hazards shall be kept removed from adjacent activities to a distance which is compatible with
the potential danger involved as specific in the Fire Code and the National Safety Foundation
publications.
B. Radioactivity Or Electrical Disturbance: No activity shall emit harmful radioactivity at any point, or
electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation of any equipment at any point other than
that of the creator of such disturbance.
C. Noise: Noise that is audible from fifty feet (50') or greater from the source. Air raid sirens or fire
sirens and related apparatus used solely for public purposes are exempt from this requirement, as
are noises attendant to ordinary agricultural operations.
D. Vibration: No vibration shall be permitted which is discernable without instruments on any adjoining
lot or property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 404/467
E. Air Pollution: Air pollution shall be subject to the rules and regulations established by the Southwest
District Health Department, its successor, the State of Idaho or the United States of America.
F. Glare: No direct or reflected glare shall be permitted which is visible from any property outside an
industrial-commercial zone or from any street.
G. Erosion: No erosion, caused by human instrumentalities, shall be permitted which will carry
objectionable substances onto neighboring properties.
H. Enforcement Provisions: The City, prior to the issuance of a building permit, may require the
submission of statements and plans indicating the manner in which dangerous and objectionable
elements involved in processing and in equipment operations are to be eliminated or reduced to
acceptable limits and tolerances.
I. Measurements Procedures: Methods and procedures for the determination of the existence of any
dangerous and objectionable elements shall conform to applicable standard measurement
procedures by the Southwest District Health Department. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.64.060: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS/STRUCTURES:
A. Shall not be located in any required front yard setback area.
B. Shall not be located closer than eight feet (8') from any side or rear property line.
C. In residential zones, the square footage of an accessory structure shall not be greater than that of
the primary residence, unless approved through conditional use permit.
D. A detached accessory building, structure, or use shall not exceed twenty two feet (22') in height in
residential zones. In all other zones, the height of an accessory building, structure or use shall not
exceed the maximum building height allowed in the applicable zoning district.
E. Any accessory building, including detached garages, over two hundred (200) square feet in size
shall require a building permit.
F. Must be compatible with the surrounding structures. (Ord. 1442, 2018)
17.64.070: ANIMAL CLINIC, ANIMAL HOSPITAL, VETERINARY OFFICE,
COMMERCIAL KENNEL:
Animal clinics, animal hospitals, veterinary offices, commercial kennels shall be located at least three
hundred feet (300') from any residence including motels and hotels, except for an owner's residence.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 405/467
The City may modify these requirements if the animals are housed in soundproof structures that
screen them from view of the abutting residential property. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.64.080: MANUFACTURED HOME PLACEMENT:
Manufactured homes meeting the following standards may be sited on single-family lots within the City
limits. Manufactured home does not include recreational vehicles.
A. The manufactured home shall be a doublewide.
B. The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and backfilled foundation and enclosed
at the perimeter unless located within a floodplain, which causes compliance with the City
floodplain standards as referenced in title 15, chapter 15.36 of this Code.
C. The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof of no less than three feet (3') in height for each
twelve feet (12') in width.
D. The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material and
appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on residential
dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the predominant materials used on
surrounding dwellings.
E. Additions to a manufactured home shall be of compatible construction using like materials.
F. Only one manufactured home may be placed on any single lot. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.64.090: MOBILE HOME PLACEMENT:
A. No mobile home may be placed on a single-family lot within the city limits of the city after the
effective date of this title unless it meets the rehabilitation standards as specified in title 44 of the
Idaho Code and also meets the siting standards of a manufactured home as stated in section
17.64.080 of this chapter. Mobile homes do not include recreational vehicles.
B. Neither mobile homes, manufactured homes nor recreational vehicles shall be placed on any lot in
any district to provide housing which is in addition to the primary residential structure. (Ord. 1204,
2002)
17.64.100: BULK STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS AND GASES:
Bulk storage of flammable liquids and gases shall:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 406/467
A. Be located at least three hundred feet (300') from a residence, motel, or hotel, except for an
owner's residence.
B. Be erected only with the written approval of the Payette department of public safety and with any
other governmental agency having jurisdiction.
C. Have suitable loading and unloading spaces and off street parking facilities meeting the approval of
the Payette department of public safety. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.64.110: CHEMICALS, PESTICIDE AND FERTILIZER STORAGE AND
MANUFACTURING:
Chemicals, pesticide and fertilizer storage and manufacturing will have adequate fire protection,
storage area, handling and disposal as approved in writing by the Payette department of public safety.
(Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.64.120: CONTRACTOR'S YARD:
A. Shall be located a minimum distance of three hundred feet (300') from any residence except for an
owner's residence.
B. Shall have a vision screening fence around areas utilized for storage of equipment and demolition
material. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.64.130: DRIVE-IN COMMERCIAL FACILITIES:
A. Shall be enclosed within the property lines and landscaping and fencing, except for ingress and
egress, to prevent trash from moving onto other properties;
B. Shall have a six foot (6') high sight obscuring fence along the property lines that adjoin a residence;
C. Shall provide for adequate trash receptacles; and
D. Lighting shall be positioned so that artificial lighting is directed inward towards the lot and does not
shine directly on surrounding property. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.64.140: FILLING, GRADING, LAGOONING, DREDGING, OR OTHER
EARTHMOVING ACTIVITIES:
A. Shall take place in such a manner as to result in the smallest amount of bare ground exposed for
the shortest time feasible.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 407/467
B. Shall provide temporary ground cover, such as mulch.
C. Shall use diversions, silting basins, terraces and other methods to trap sediment.
D. Shall provide lagooning in such a manner as to avoid creation of fish trap conditions.
E. Shall not result in damage to a floodway, channel or natural drainageway.
F. Shall construct and stabilize side and bottom of cuts, fills, channels and artificial watercourses to
prevent erosion or slope failure.
G. Shall not have below grade excavation except for drainageways within fifty feet (50') of any lot line
or public right of way.
H. Shall restore topsoil or loam to a depth of not less than six inches (6"). (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.64.150: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
A. No more than one person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be
engaged in such occupation. In an A residential district, no nonfamily employees are allowed.
B. The use of the dwelling unit or garage for a home occupation shall be clearly incidental and
subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants and not more than twenty percent
(20%) of the floor area of the dwelling unit or garage shall be used to conduct the home
occupation.
C. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building premises, or other visible
evidence of the conduct of such home occupation other than one sign, not exceeding two (2)
square feet in area, indirectly illuminated and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building
except in an A residential district in which no sign is allowed.
D. No significant traffic shall be generated by such home occupation, and any need for parking
generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall meet the off street parking requirements
as specified in this title, and shall not be located in a required front yard.
E. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration,
glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable off of the lot. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in
any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the
premises. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 408/467
17.64.160: MANUFACTURED HOME/RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS:
Manufactured home/recreational vehicle parks shall be allowed in districts B and C by conditional use
permit, but only when such parks are constructed and maintained in accordance with chapter 5.28 of
this code. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.64.170: OUTDOOR STORAGE OF COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL
MATERIALS:
Commercial and industrial materials stored outdoors:
A. Will be screened from view from any existing adjoining residence or residentially zoned area,
whether or not such property is separated by an alleyway or street.
B. Will not be located in any front yard setback area. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.64.180: RIDING STABLES AND SCHOOLS:
A. Will locate all stables or loafing sheds not nearer than three hundred feet (300') from any residence,
except for owner's residence. All facilities shall be set back a minimum distance of thirty feet (30')
from any property line.
B. Will be designed and located with full consideration being given to their proximity to adjacent uses
and their effect upon adjacent and surrounding properties as to the storage of horse trailers and
the factors of noise and odor.
C. Will require that the owner or operator of such use shall have a continuous obligation to maintain
adequate housekeeping practices to prevent the creation of a nuisance. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.64.190: INDOOR RIFLE AND PISTOL RANGES:
A. Shall be designed with a backstop.
B. Shall be designed to avoid a line of fire that is directed towards any residence or business within
one mile.
C. Shall incorporate landscaping that is compatible with the surrounding landscaping.
D. Shall provide supervision and security measures during all periods of use. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.64.200: WRECKING YARD AND JUNKYARD:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 409/467
A. A solid fence blocking the view of the yard from outside the yard meeting the terms of this title and
kept in good repair shall be constructed parallel to and ten feet (10') behind the right-of-way line of
any public street or highway for any auto wrecking yard and salvage yard. Said fence shall be
constructed along the entire premises devoted to such auto wrecking or salvage yard, and shall be
constructed within one year from the effective date of this title.
B. Materials used and details of construction must be approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be guided by the need to preserve
and protect the scenic and aesthetic values of the surrounding area, and to protect property value.
C. Shall not store automobiles or junk in a manner exceeding the fence height.
D. Shall have such landscaping that is appropriate with the surrounding area.
E. Shall have a current, valid license from the City to operate a junkyard.
F. Shall be in compliance with section 17.56.100 of this title. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.64.210: LANDFILLS, RECYCLING CENTERS, INCINERATORS, COMPOST
OPERATORS, AND OTHER SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITIES:
The Planning Commission may grant a conditional use permit for the construction of a landfill,
recycling center, incinerator, commercial composting operation, liquid waste land farm, or any other
type of solid waste disposal or recycling operation subject to the following conditions:
A. No such permit shall be granted in the A and B Districts.
B. Such operations shall obtain proper State and local permits.
C. Such operations shall be required to establish, to the commission's satisfaction, that they intend to
and are financially capable of complying with all State, Federal, and local laws, ordinances and
regulations governing the conduct of such operations.
D. Such operation shall be required to plan for, install and maintain such safeguards and measures as
the commission shall require to ensure that groundwater quality and air quality are preserved and
environmental hazards, nuisances and unsightly areas are not created by the operation.
E. Such operations that involve the landfilling of solid waste shall be required to install a composite
liner system and a leachate collection system. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.64.220: RAILROAD BOXCARS/MOTOR VEHICLE CARGO CONTAINERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 410/467
Railroad boxcars, motor vehicle cargo containers, old unoccupied mobile or manufactured homes or
other containers normally used for the shipment of freight, cargo or other items, by rail, ship or motor
vehicular transportation, wherein the applicant desires to cause the same to be located upon property
within the City for storage or other purposes are specifically prohibited from being located within any
district within the City or the area of City impact except if utilized on a short term basis as follows:
A. Portable storage containers used for moving household contents in or out of a residence shall be
allowed for a maximum of ninety (90) days in any one calendar year and shall only be located on a
driveway or other area on private property.
B. A construction storage container shall not be located on any property for more than six (6) months
in any twelve (12) month period, measured continuously from the day the container is first placed.
The building inspector or designee may grant extensions of up to six (6) months, but only if it is
determined that:
1. The storage container is located on a site with an active building permit.
2. The storage container is a necessary part of the construction process.
3. Not be allowed in the public right-of-way.
4. Construction is moving forward in a timely manner and in accordance with generally accepted
industry standards.
5. The storage containers shall be removed prior to the granting of a certificate of occupancy.
C. In the event that an applicant desires to place a railroad boxcar/motor vehicle cargo container that
is not permitted by subsection A or B of this section, then said applicant is allowed to apply for a
conditional use permit. (Ord. 1437, 2017)
17.64.230: TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS:
A "townhouse" as defined by section 17.08.010 of this title, shall be subject to the following
restrictions:
A. Minimum lot size shall be three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet per living unit.
B. Minimum lot width shall be thirty five feet (35') per living unit.
C. Minimum intersecting street setbacks shall be twenty five feet (25') from the property line.
D. Minimum front yard setback shall be twenty five feet (25') from the front property line.
E. Minimum side yard setback shall be ten feet (10') from the side property line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 411/467
F. Minimum rear yard setback shall be fifteen feet (15') from the rear property line.
G. A minimum of two (2) side by side off street parking spaces shall be provided on each lot.
H. The maximum number of contiguous townhouses shall be four (4).
I. The maximum height on any townhouse shall be two (2) stories high.
J. A storage area for recreational vehicles (RVs), providing for one RV parking space per two (2)
townhouses shall be provided in the property.
K. All other zoning or subdivision requirements in the area in which the structure is being located shall
apply. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 17.68
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
17.68.010: DUTY OF CITY CLERK OR BUILDING OFFICIAL:
Except as otherwise provided in this title, the building official, city clerk or his designee, shall
administer and enforce this title, including the receiving of applications and the issuing of building
permits. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued by him except where the
provisions of this title have been complied with. (Ord. 1204, 2002: Ord. 1066 § 1, 1993: prior code
§ 11-13-1(A))
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
17.68.020: BUILDING PERMITS; REQUIRED; APPLICATION INFORMATION; FEE:
A. No building or structure shall be erected, added to or structurally altered until a permit therefor has
been issued by the building official, city clerk or his designee. All applications for such permits shall
be in accordance with the requirements of this title and, unless upon written order of the planning
and zoning commission, no such building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 412/467
building where said construction, addition or alteration, or use thereof, would be in violation of any
of the provisions of this title.
B. There shall be submitted with all applications for building permits two (2) copies of a layout or plot
plan drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and
location on the lot of the building and accessory building to be erected, and such other information
as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this title.
C. One copy of such layout or plot plan shall be returned with the building permit, when approved by
the city upon the city's receipt of payment of a fee based upon the currently recognized building
code. (Ord. 1204, 2002: Ord. 1066 § 1, 1993: prior code § 11-13-1(B))
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
17.68.030: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY; REQUIRED WHEN; APPLICATION;
RECORDKEEPING:
A. No building shall be occupied until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building
official, city clerk, or his designee.
B. No nonconforming use shall be maintained, renewed, changed or extended without a certificate of
occupancy having first been issued by the building official, city clerk or his designee.
C. All certificates of occupancy shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit.
Said certificate shall be issued within five (5) days after the erection or alteration has been
approved.
D. The building official, city clerk or his designee shall maintain a record of all certificates, and copies
shall be furnished, upon request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the
building affected.
E. No permit for excavation of, the erection or alteration of, or repairs to any building shall be issued
until an application has been made for a certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 1204, 2002: prior code
§ 11-13-1(C)(1 _ 5))
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
17.68.040: FEE SCHEDULE FOR CERTAIN ZONING AND SUBDIVISION
REQUESTS:
The following fee schedule for certain types of applications is hereby created:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 413/467
A. Applications for conditional use permits or special use permits shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee set by resolution.
B. Applications for rezones, variances, annexation and nonconforming uses shall be accompanied by
a nonrefundable fee set by resolution.
C. All other applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee set by resolution.
D. An application for subdivision approval shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as required
by section 16.16.050 of this code and the applicant shall be advised that in addition to the
application fee, applicant may be responsible for all expenses incurred by the city.
E. By naming specific categories of applications which require fees with applications, the city does not
intend to imply that other unnamed categories are to be exempt from application fees. (Ord. 1371,
2012: Ord. 1204, 2002: Ord. 1163 § 1, 1999: Ord. 1066 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1003 § 1, 1990)
Chapter 17.72
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES
17.72.010: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. No building or structure shall be erected, substantially altered or its use changed unless
permanently maintained off street parking and loading spaces have been provided in accordance
with the provisions of this title.
B. The provisions of this chapter, except where there is a change of use, shall not apply to any
existing building or structure. Where the new use involves no additions or enlargements, there
shall be provided as many such spaces as may be required by this title.
C. Whenever a building or structure constructed after the effective date of this title is changed or
enlarged in floor area, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for
an increase in the number of existing parking spaces, additional parking spaces shall be provided
on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or structure existing prior to the
effective date of this title is enlarged by three hundred ninety nine (399) or more square feet, or by
fifty percent (50%) or more in the number of housing units, seating capacity or otherwise, said
building or structure shall then and thereafter comply with the full parking requirements set forth
herein. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.72.020: STANDARDS:
A. Location Of Parking Spaces: The following regulations shall govern the location of off street parking
spaces and areas:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 414/467
Off street parking spaces for all residential uses shall be located off street on the same lot. Any
conversion of garage or parking space required to meet the off street parking requirement shall be
accompanied by the provision of additional off street parking to replace those eliminated.
1. Commercial, Industrial Or Institutional Parking: Parking spaces for commercial, industrial or
institutional use shall be located not more than three hundred feet (300') from the principal use.
2. Apartments, Dormitories Or Similar Parking: Parking spaces for apartments, dormitories or
similar residential uses shall be located not more than one hundred feet (100') from the principal
use.
3. Loading Space Requirements And Dimensions: Off street loading spaces for commercial uses
may be required by the city.
4. Maintenance: The owner or lessee of property used for parking and/or loading shall maintain
such area in good condition without holes and free of dust, trash and other debris.
5. Surface: The required number of parking and loading spaces as set forth below, together with
driveways, approaches, aisles, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other circulation areas, shall be
improved to a standard equal to or better than the surface of the public street it adjoins. Parking
in the residential areas shall have a fifteen foot (15') apron from the street.
6. Curb, Gutter, Sidewalk: When a parking lot adjoins a public street, curb, gutter and sidewalk will
be constructed as part of the lot on any side that faces a public street.
7. Approaches: All private driveway approaches to a public street shall be no more than seven
percent (7%) in grade and shall meet city standards.
8. Drainage: All parking and loading areas shall provide for on site surface water retention. The
retention plan shall be reviewed and approved by the city.
9. Lighting: Any commercial, school or church parking area, located in any district in the city, which
will be used during nondaylight hours, shall be properly illuminated. Any lights used to illuminate
a parking lot shall be so arranged to reflect light away from the adjoining property.
10. Access: Any commercial or industrial parking area shall be designed in such a manner that any
vehicle leaving or entering the parking area from or onto a public or private street shall be
traveling in a forward motion. Access driveways for parking areas or loading spaces shall be
located in such a way that any vehicle entering or leaving such areas shall be clearly visible by a
pedestrian or motorist approaching the access or driveway from a public or private street.
11. Striping And Paving: All parking areas shall be paved and striped with double lines, six inches
(6") both sides of center, between stalls to facilitate the movement into and out of the parking
stalls.
12. Screening And/Or Landscaping: Whenever a parking area is required by this or other city
ordinance to be screened on any sides which adjoin or face other properties, the planting screen
shall be not less than three feet (3') nor more than six feet (6') in height and shall be maintained
in good condition. The space between such fence, wall or planting screen and the lot line of the
adjoining premises in any residential district shall be landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs or
evergreen ground cover, and maintained in good condition.
13. Wheel Blocks: Whenever a parking lot extends to a property line, wheel blocks or other
suitable devices shall be installed to prevent any part of a parked vehicle from extending beyond
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 415/467
the property line.
14. Joint Use: Two (2) or more nonresidential uses may jointly provide and use parking spaces
when their hours of operation do not normally overlap; provided, that a written agreement is
presented to the city simultaneously with the application for a building permit. The written
agreement shall be reviewed and approved before the issuance of any building permit. (Ord.
1204, 2002)
17.72.030: OFF STREET PARKING DESIGN AND DIMENSIONAL TABLES:
45 60 90 Parallel
Width of parking space 13 ft. 10 ft. 9 ft. 9 ft .
Length of parking space 15 ft. 18 ft. 19 ft. 23 ft .
Width of driveway aisle 13 ft. 17 ft. 25 ft. 12 ft .
(Ord. 1204, 2002)
17.72.040: PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
For the purpose of this title, the following parking space requirements shall apply. Parking
requirements shall apply to the use that occupies the majority of floor space within the structure(s) on
the property, with the exception of home occupations which shall meet the requirements below. An
area blocked by a parking space directly behind it shall not be considered a parking space.
Type Of Use Parking Spaces Required
Commercial:
Automobile service garages
which also repair
1 for every 2 gasoline pumps and 2 for every service bay
Funeral parlors, mortuaries and
similar
1 for every 3 seats in chapel areas
Hotels, motels 1 per every sleeping room and 1 for every 2 employees
Institutional:
Churches or other places of
religious assembly
1 for every 3 seats; 2 for every 5 seats
Hospitals 1 for every bed
Libraries, museum and art 1 for every 400 square feet of floor area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 416/467
galleries
Medical, dental clinics, doctor's
office and waiting rooms
1 for every 200 square feet of floor area
Sanitariums, homes for the
aged, nursing homes, children's
homes, asylums and similar
1 for every 2 beds
Manufacturing:
All types of manufacturing
storage
1 for every employee per shift (except, parcel delivery and
freight for which the building terminal is designed) plus 1 for
each motor vehicle used in the business
Recreational or entertainment:
Auditoriums, sports arenas,
theaters and similar uses
1 for every 4 seats
Banks, financial institutions,
similar uses
1 for every 200 square feet of floor area
Bowling alleys 4 for each alley or for each 100 square feet of the area
used for restaurant, cocktail lounge or similar use
Dance floors, skating rinks 1 for every 100 square feet of floor area used for the
activity
Dining rooms, restaurants,
taverns
1 for every 2 seats and 1 for every 200 square feet of floor
area in nightclubs
Offices, public or professional
administration service building
1 for every 400 square feet of floor area
Outdoor swimming pools, public
1 for every 5 persons' capacity plus 1 for each 4 seats or 1
for each 30 square feet of floor area used for seating
purposes, whichever is greater
Retail stores 1 for every 250 square feet of floor area
All other types of business or
commercial uses permitted in
any business district
1 for every 300 square feet of floor area
Residential:
Apartments, or multi-family
dwelling
2 for every unit; 2 for 2 bedroom units; 3 for a 3-bedroom
unit; 3 for a 4-bedroom unit
Boarding houses, rooming
houses, dorms, bed and
breakfasts
1 for every sleeping room, permanent occupant; 2 for
owner/operator
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 417/467
Manufactured/mobile home park
2 for every unit
Single-family or two-family
dwelling
2 for every unit; 2 for 2- and 3-bedroom units; 3 for a 4-
bedroom unit; 3 for a 5-bedroom unit; 1 additional space for
each bedroom unit beyond 5
Schools, public, parochial or
private:
Business, technical and trade
schools
1 for every 2 students and 1 per instructor
Colleges, universities 1 for every 4 students
Elementary and junior high
schools
2 for every classroom and 1 for every 6 seats in
auditoriums or assembly halls
High schools 1 for every 5 students and 1 for every teacher and
employee
Kindergartens, childcare
centers, nursery schools and
similar uses
2 for every classroom; 1 per 4 children
(Ord. 1204, 2002)
Chapter 17.76
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
17.76.010: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS ALLOWED:
The city may grant a change in zoning contingent upon the owner fulfilling specific terms, provisions,
reservations and commitments contained in an agreement in order to provide a balance between the
owner's desire for certainty in the development process and the city's desire for control of project
impacts, to insure harmony with the established surrounding pattern of development; and to ensure
that the development proceeds in the best interest of health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
Payette. Such agreement must be in compliance with Idaho Code section 67.6511. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 17.78
VARIANCES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 418/467
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
17.78.010: VARIANCES; PERMISSIBLE WHEN:
The city council shall consider variances to the terms of this title which will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title will
result in undue hardship upon a landowner and under such conditions that the spirit of this title shall
be observed and substantial justice done. A variance shall not be considered a right or special
privilege, but may be granted to an applicant only upon showing of undue hardship because of the
characteristics of the site. In acting upon a variance request, the city council shall make full
investigation and shall only grant a variance upon finding that the following are true:
A. That the granting of the variance will not be in conflict with the spirit and intent of the
comprehensive plan for the city, and will not effect a change in zoning.
B. That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions, applicable to the property
involved, or the intended use thereof, which do not apply generally to the property or class of use
in the district, so that a denial of the relief sought will result in:
1. Undue loss in value of the property.
2. Inability to preserve the property rights of the owner.
3. The prevention of reasonable enjoyment of any property right of the owner.
C. The granting of such relief will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare,
or injurious to the property or improvements of other property owners or the quiet enjoyment of
such property improvements.
D. That the reason for a variance was not caused by the owners, or previous owner's actions. (Ord.
1204, 2002)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
17.78.020: VARIANCES; REQUEST PROCEDURE:
A. In requesting any modification to the provisions of this title, a landowner, developer or his engineer
shall make written request to the city clerk.
B. Such request, together with such related data and maps as necessary to fully illustrate the relief
sought, shall be referred by the city engineer or city clerk in writing to the planning and zoning
commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 419/467
C. The planning and zoning commission after conducting a public hearing, shall act upon such request
and make a recommendation to the city council at its next regular meeting or within thirty (30)
days. If no recommendation is made within such time, the matter shall be forwarded to the city
council as if there were a favorable recommendation.
D. The council, after receiving the recommendations of the planning commission, shall hold its own
public hearing and shall act upon the matter within sixty (60) days.
E. Approval of such modifications shall require a majority vote of the regular membership of the city
council.
F. Any decision of the planning and zoning commission may be appealed to the city council. Any
person including, but not limited to, the city clerk, public works director or zoning commission may
file an appeal. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
17.78.030: VARIANCES; COUNCIL'S AUTHORITY TO SET CONDITIONS:
In granting variances and/or modifications from the regulations of this title, the council may require
such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objective of the standards or
requirements so varied or modified. (Ord. 1204, 2002)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1460 - PLANNING & ZONING
COMMISSION. Go to new ordinance.
17.78.040: RIGHT OF APPEAL:
A. Any decision of the planning and zoning commission may be appealed to the city council. Any
person including, but not limited to, the city clerk, public works director or zoning commissioner
may file an appeal.
B. Any person, firm or company may appeal the decision of the council to the district court. (Ord.
1204, 2002)
Chapter 17.80
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
17.80.001: SUSPENDING IMPACT FEES:
A. This chapter shall be of no force or effect for a period of one year beginning on January 1, 2019.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 420/467
B. Collection of development impact fees pursuant to this chapter shall be, and is hereby suspended
as of January 1, 2019. During the period of suspension, a study shall be conducted of the City's
capital improvement plan and impact fee ordinance. Suspension shall extend to all building permit
applications received prior to January 1, 2016, in which impact fees have not yet been collected.
C. Neither the adoption of this section nor the repeal of any ordinance shall, in any manner, affect the
prosecution for violation of such ordinance committed prior to the effective date hereof or be
construed as a waiver of any license or penalty due under any such ordinance or in any manner
affect the validity of any action heretofore taken by the Payette City Council or the validity of any
such action to be taken upon matters pending before the Payette City Council on the effective date
hereof. Unless a new ordinance is adopted prior to January 1, 2020 on January 1, 2020, all impact
fees shall again be due and collected in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 1456, 2018)
17.80.010: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
The Payette City Council of Payette, Payette County, Idaho, finds that:
A. Based on the Payette Comprehensive Plan adopted by the Payette City Council pursuant to
chapter 65, title 67, Idaho Code, including, but not limited to, the capital improvements element of
the Comprehensive Plan, and the general governmental goal of protecting the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of Payette it is necessary that the Payette's public facilities for: 1)
police and 2) fire be expanded and improved to accommodate new development within the City of
Payette. Throughout this chapter, the system improvements for these two (2) types of public
facilities are sometimes collectively referred to as the "Payette capital facilities" and sometimes
individually referred to as a "Payette capital improvements element".
B. The City of Payette has formed the Development Impact Fee Advisory Committee required by
Idaho Code section 67-8205, and that committee has performed the duties required of it pursuant
to such statute. The City intends that the committee continue to exist and to perform those duties
identified in Idaho Code section 67-8205 that occur following the adoption of development impact
fees.
C. New residential and nonresidential development imposes and will impose increasing and excessive
demands upon City capital facilities.
D. The revenues generated from new residential and nonresidential development often do not
generate sufficient funds to provide the necessary improvements of these City capital facilities to
accommodate new development.
E. New development is expected to continue, and will place ever increasing demands on the City to
provide and expand City capital facilities to serve new development.
F. The city has planned for the improvement of the city capital facilities in the capital improvements
element of the Payette comprehensive plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 421/467
G. Chapter 82, title 67 of the Idaho Code (the Idaho development impact fee act) authorizes the city to
adopt a development impact fee system to offset, recoup, or reimburse the portion of the costs of
needed improvements to the city capital facilities caused by new development in the city.
H. The creation of an equitable development impact fee system would promote the purposes set forth
in the Idaho development impact fee act, in that it would: 1) ensure that adequate public facilities
are available to serve new growth and development; 2) promote orderly growth and development
by establishing uniform standards by which local governments may require that those who benefit
from new growth and development pay a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities
needed to serve new growth and development; 3) ensure that those who benefit from new growth
and development are required to pay no more than their proportionate share of the cost of public
facilities needed to serve new growth and development; and 4) prevent duplicate and ad hoc
development requirements.
I. The creation of an equitable development impact fee system would enable the city to accommodate
new development, and would assist the city to implement the capital improvements element of the
comprehensive plan.
J. In order to implement an equitable development impact fee system for the city capital facilities, the
city retained BBC Research & Consulting to prepare an impact fee study for these types of
facilities. The resulting document is titled "City Of Payette Of Payette, Idaho, Development Impact
Fees Study & Capital Improvements Element Plans", dated May 4, 2011 (the "development impact
fee study"), and that document is hereby incorporated by reference.
K. The methodology used in preparing the development impact fee study, when applied through this
chapter, complies with all applicable provisions of Idaho law, including those set forth in Idaho
statutes sections 67-8204(2), 67-8204(16), 67-8204(23), 67-8207 and 67-8209. The incorporation
of the development impact fee study by reference satisfies the requirement in Idaho statutes
section 67-8204(16) for a detailed description of the methodology by which the development
impact fees were calculated, and the requirement in Idaho Code section 67-8204(24) for a
description of acceptable levels of service for system improvements.
L. The development impact fee study contains the capital improvements element of the city
comprehensive plan, and such element has been prepared in conformance with the requirements
of chapters 65 and 82 of title 67 of the Idaho Code.
M. The development impact fee study sets forth reasonable methodologies and analyses for
determining the impacts of various types of new development on the city capital facilities, and
determines the cost of acquiring or constructing the improvements necessary to meet the demands
for such facilities created by new development.
N. In accordance with Idaho Code, the development impact fee study was based on actual system
improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs. In addition, the development impact fee
study uses a fee calculation methodology that is net of credits for the present value of revenues
that will be generated by new growth and development based on historical funding patterns and
that are anticipated to be available to pay for system improvements, including taxes, assessments,
user fees, and intergovernmental transfers.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 422/467
O. The development impact fees described in this chapter are based on the development impact fee
study, and do not exceed the costs of system improvements for city capital facilities to serve new
development that will pay the development impact fees.
P. The facilities for police and fire included in the calculation of fees in the development impact fee
study will benefit all new residential and nonresidential development throughout the city, and it is
therefore appropriate to treat all areas of the city as a single service area for purposes of
calculating, collecting, and spending the development impact fees collected from residential and
nonresidential development.
Q. There is both a rational nexus and a rough proportionality between the development impacts
created by each type of development covered by this chapter and the development impact fees
that such development will be required to pay.
R. This chapter creates a system by which development impact fees paid by new development will be
used to finance, defray, or reimburse a portion of the costs incurred by the city to construct
improvements for city capital facilities in ways that benefit the development for which each
development impact fee was paid within a reasonable period of time after the development impact
fee is paid, and in conformance with Idaho Code section 67-8210.
S. This chapter creates a system under which development impact fees shall not be used to correct
existing deficiencies for any capital facilities, or to replace or rehabilitate existing improvements, or
to pay for routine operation or maintenance of those facilities.
T. This chapter creates a system under which there shall be no double payment of impact fees, in
accordance with Idaho Code section 67-8204(19).
U. This chapter is consistent with all applicable provisions of chapter 82, title 67, Idaho Code,
concerning development impact fee ordinances. (Ord. 1349, 2011)
17.80.020: AUTHORITY AND APPLICABILITY:
A. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the city's general police power, the authority granted to the city
pursuant to chapters 65 and 82, title 67, Idaho Code, and other applicable laws of the state of
Idaho.
B. This chapter shall apply to all areas of the city. (Ord. 1349, 2011)
17.80.030: INTENT:
A. This chapter is adopted to be consistent with, and to help implement, the Payette comprehensive
plan, and particularly the capital improvements element of that plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 423/467
B. The intent of this chapter is to ensure that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost
of improvements to city capital facilities; to ensure that such proportionate share does not exceed
the cost of improvements to such facilities required to accommodate new development; and to
ensure that funds collected from new development are actually used for improvements to city
capital facilities that benefit such new development.
C. It is the further intent of this chapter to be consistent with those principles for allocating a fair share
of the cost of new capital facilities to new development, and for adopting development impact fee
ordinances, established by chapter 82, title 67 of the Idaho Code.
D. It is not the intent of this chapter to collect any money from any new development in excess of the
actual amount necessary to offset new demands for city capital facilities created by such new
development.
E. It is not the intent of this chapter that any monies collected from any development impact fee
deposited in an impact fee account ever be commingled with monies from a different impact fee
account, or ever be used for a development impact fee component different from that for which the
fee was paid, or ever be used to correct current deficiencies in the city capital facilities or ever be
used to replace, rehabilitate, maintain, or operate any city facility. (Ord. 1349, 2011)
17.80.040: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, some of which
are assigned by Idaho Code section 67-8203, as indicated:
ACCOUNTS: The police and the fire, established as part of the development impact fee trust fund
established in section 17.80.070 of this chapter.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING: Housing affordable to families whose incomes do not exceed eighty
percent (80%) of the median income for the city. Section 67-8203(1) Idaho Code.
APPROPRIATE: To legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other
official act of a governmental entity. Section 67-8203(2) Idaho Code.
BUILDING PERMIT: A building permit issued by the building official permitting the construction of a
building or structure within the city.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT: An improvement with a useful life of ten (10) years or more, by new
construction or other action that increases the service capacity of a public facility. Section 67-8203(3)
Idaho Code.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS ELEMENT: A component of the city comprehensive plan adopted
pursuant to chapter 65, title 67, Idaho Code, which component meets the requirements of a capital
improvements plan pursuant to chapter 65, title 67 of the Idaho Code. Section 67-8203(4) Idaho Code.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN: A plan adopted pursuant to this chapter that identifies capital
improvements for which development impact fees may be used as a funding source. Section 67-
8203(5) Idaho Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 424/467
CITY: City of Payette, Idaho.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Payette, Idaho.
DEVELOPER: Any person or legal entity undertaking development, including a party that undertakes
the subdivision of property pursuant to Idaho Code sections 50-1301 through 50-1334. Section 67-
8203(6) Idaho Code.
DEVELOPMENT: Any construction or installation of a building or structure, or any change in use of a
building or structure, or any change in the use, character or appearance of land, that creates
additional demand and need for public facilities or the subdivision of property that would permit any
change in the use, character or appearance of land, except that "development" shall not include
activities that would otherwise be subject to the payment of the development impact fee if such
activities are undertaken by a taxing district as defined in section 63-201, Idaho Code, in the course of
carrying out the taxing district's public responsibilities, unless the adopted impact fee ordinance
expressly includes taxing districts as being subject to development impact fees. Section 67-8203(7)
Idaho Code.
DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL: Any written authorization from a governmental entity that authorizes
the commencement of a development. Section 67-8203(8) Idaho Code.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE: The payment of money imposed as a condition of development
approval to pay for a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve
development. Section 67-8203(9) Idaho Code. In the context of this chapter, development impact fee
means one of the two (2) impact fees defined for the two (2) city capital facilities elements, and
development impact fees means both impact fees. The term does not include:
A. A charge or fee to pay the administrative, plan review, or inspection costs associated with
permits required for development;
B. Connection or hookup charges;
C. Availability charges for drainage, sewer, water or transportation for services provided directly to
the development; or
D. Amounts collected from a developer in a transaction in which the city or another governmental
entity has incurred expenses in constructing capital improvements for the development if the
owner or developer has agreed to be financially responsible for the construction or installation of
the capital improvements, unless a written agreement is made pursuant to Idaho Code section
67-8209(4) for credit or reimbursement.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ADMINISTRATOR: That individual designated from time to time by the
city council of Payette, Idaho, to administer the development impact fee system established by this
chapter.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE STUDY: The document entitled "City Of Payette Of Payette, Idaho
Development Impact Fees Study & Capital Improvements Element Plans", dated May 4, 2011,
prepared by BBC Research & Consulting for the city of Payette that sets forth reasonable
methodologies and analyses for determining the impacts of various types of development on the
Payette capital facilities and determines the cost of expansions to those facilities necessary to meet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 425/467
the demands created by new development.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE TRUST FUND: The trust fund established by section 17.80.070 of this
chapter that includes: a) a police capital facilities account and b) a fire capital facilities account. The
development impact fee trust fund is also sometimes called the trust fund.
DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENT: A requirement attached to a developmental approval or other
governmental action approving or authorizing a particular development project including, but not
limited to, a rezoning, which requirement compels the payment, dedication or contribution of goods,
services, land, or money as a condition of approval. Section 67-8203(10) Idaho Code.
EXTRAORDINARY COSTS: Those costs incurred as a result of an extraordinary impact. Section 67-
8203(11) Idaho Code.
EXTRAORDINARY IMPACT: An impact that is reasonably determined by the governmental entity to:
a) result in the need for system improvements, the cost of which will significantly exceed the sum of
the development impact fees to be generated from the project or the sum agreed to be paid pursuant
to a development agreement as allowed by Idaho Code section 67-8214(2), or b) result in the need for
system improvements that are not identified in the capital improvements plan. Section 67-8203(12)
Idaho Code.
FEE PAYER: That person who pays or is required to pay a development impact fee. Section 67-
8203(13) Idaho Code. A fee payer may include a developer.
FIRE CAPITAL FACILITIES: Lands, as well as buildings, improvements to land, and related
equipment and vehicles meeting the definition of "capital improvement", used for fire and emergency
medical service facilities included in the calculation of the fire impact fee in the development impact
fee study, and specifically including those related costs included in the definition of "system
improvement costs", but not including maintenance, operations, or improvements that do not expand
capacity.
IMPACT GENERATING LAND DEVELOPMENT: Land development designed or intended to permit a
use of the land that will contain more dwelling units or floor space than the then existing use of the
land, or the making of any material change in the use of any structure or land in a manner that
increases demand for city capital facilities. The type of proposed impact generating land development
shall be based on the proposed use of the land.
INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENT: A study prepared by a fee payer, calculating the cost of expansions or
improvements to one or more of the city capital improvements elements required to serve the fee
payer's proposed development, that is based on the established LOS standard, is performed on an
average cost (not marginal cost) methodology, that uses the service units and unit construction costs
stated in the development impact fee study, and is performed in compliance with any criteria for such
studies established by this chapter or by the city.
LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS: A description of the service area and projections of land use densities,
intensities, and population in the service area over at least a twenty (20) year period. Section 67-
8203(16) Idaho Code.
LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS): A measure of the relationship between service capacity and service
demand for public facilities. Section 67-8203(17) Idaho Code.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, constructed according to HUD/FHA mobile home construction
and safety standards, transportable in one or more sections, that, in the traveling mode, is eight feet
(8') or more in width or is forty (40) body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is three
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 426/467
hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and that is built on a permanent chassis and designed to
be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities,
and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein, except
that such term shall include any structure that meets all the requirements of this definition except the
size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required
by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established
under 42 USC 5401 et seq. Section 67-8203(18) Idaho Code.
MODULAR BUILDING: Is defined in section 39-4301, Idaho Code. Section 67-8203(19) Idaho Code.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, governmental agency, business trust, estate, partnership,
association, two (2) or more persons having a joint or common interest, or any other entity.
POLICE CAPITAL FACILITIES: Lands, as well as buildings, improvements to land, and related
equipment and vehicles meeting the definition of "capital improvement", used for police facilities
included in the calculation of the police impact fee in the development impact fee study, and
specifically including those related costs included in the definition of "system improvement costs", but
not including maintenance, operations, or improvements that do not expand capacity.
PRESENT VALUE: The total current monetary value of past, present, or future payments,
contributions or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction or money. Section 67-8203(20)
Idaho Code.
PROJECT: A particular development on an identified parcel of land. Section 67-8203(21) Idaho Code.
PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS: Site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to
provide service for a particular development project and that are necessary for the use and
convenience of the occupants or users of the project. Section 67-8203(22) Idaho Code.
PROPORTIONATE SHARE: That portion of the cost of system improvements determined pursuant to
Idaho Code section 67-8207, that reasonably relates to the service demands and needs of the project.
Section 67-8203(23) Idaho Code.
PUBLIC FACILITIES: A. Roads, streets and bridges, including rights of way, traffic signals,
landscaping and any local components of state or federal highways;
B. Stormwater collection, retention, detention, treatment and disposal facilities, flood control
facilities, and bank and shore protection and enhancement improvements;
C. Parks, open space and recreation areas, and related capital improvements; and
D. Public safety facilities, including law enforcement, fire, emergency medical and rescue, street
lighting facilities and related capital improvements.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary quarters for
recreational, camping, or travel use, that either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn
by another vehicle. Section 67-8203(25) Idaho Code.
SERVICE AREA: Any defined geographic area identified by a governmental entity or by
intergovernmental agreement in which specific public facilities provide service to development within
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 427/467
the area defined, on the basis of sound planning or engineering principles or both. Section 67-
8203(26) Idaho Code.
SERVICE UNIT: A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or discharge attributable to
an individual unit of development calculated in accordance with generally accepted engineering or
planning standards for a particular category of capital improvements. Section 67-8203(27) Idaho
Code.
SUCCESSOR IN INTEREST: A "person", as defined by this chapter, who gains a fee simple interest in
land for which a development impact fee is paid or a credit is approved pursuant to the terms of this
chapter.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT COSTS: Costs incurred for construction or reconstruction of system
improvements, including design, acquisition, engineering and other costs attributable thereto, and also
including, without limitation, the type of costs described in Idaho Code section 50-1702(h), to provide
additional public facilities needed to serve new growth and development. For clarification, system
improvement costs do not include: a) construction, acquisition or expansion of public facilities other
than capital improvements identified in the capital improvements plan; b) repair, operation or
maintenance of existing or new capital improvements; c) upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing
existing capital improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency,
environmental or regulatory standards; d) upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing existing capital
improvements to provide better service to existing development; e) administrative and operating costs
of the governmental entity unless such costs are attributable to development of the capital
improvement plan, as provided in Idaho Code section 67-8208; or f) principal payments and interest or
other finance charges on bonds or other indebtedness except financial obligations issued by or on
behalf of the governmental entity to finance capital improvements identified in the capital
improvements plan. Section 67-8203(29) Idaho Code.
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS: In contrast to project improvements, means capital improvements to
public facilities that are designed to provide service to a service area including, without limitation, the
type of improvements described in Idaho Code section 50-1703. Section 67-8203(28) Idaho Code. For
the purposes of this chapter, the system improvements are the police capital facilities and fire capital
facilities. (Ord. 1349, 2011)
17.80.050: DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES IMPOSED:
A. Fee Obligation:
1. After the effective date hereof, any person who commences any impact generating land
development, except those exempted pursuant to subsection B of this section, shall be obligated
to pay development impact fees upon commencement of such activity. The amount of the
development impact fees shall be determined in accordance with this chapter.
2. If the fee payer is applying for an extension of a permit issued previously, then the development
impact fees required to be paid shall be the net increase between the development impact fees
applicable at the time of the current permit application and any development impact fees
previously paid pursuant to this chapter to finance similar types of system improvements to
accommodate demands created by the same development.
3. If the fee payer is applying for a permit to allow a change of use or for the expansion,
redevelopment, or modification of an existing development, the development impact fees
required to be paid shall be based on the net increase in the development impact fees for the
new use as compared to the previous use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 428/467
B. Exemptions: The following types of development shall be exempted from payment of the
development impact fees. Any claim for exemption shall be made no later than the time when the
applicant applies for the first building permit for the proposed development that creates the
obligation to pay the development impact fees, and any claim for exemption not made at or before
that time shall have been waived. The development impact fee administrator or a designee shall
determine the validity of any claim for exemption pursuant to the criteria set forth below.
1. Rebuilding the same amount of floor space of a structure that was destroyed by fire or other
catastrophe, providing the structure is rebuilt and ready for occupancy within two (2) years of its
destruction;
2. Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not increase the number of service units;
3. Replacing a residential unit, including a manufactured home, with another residential unit on the
same lot, provided that the number of service units does not increase;
4. Constructing an addition on a residential structure that does not increase the number of service
units;
5. Placing a temporary construction trailer or office on a lot;
6. Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses, such as tennis courts or clubhouse,
unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the use creates a significant impact on the capacity of
system improvements;
7. The installation of a modular building, manufactured home, or recreational vehicle if the fee
payer can demonstrate by documentation such as utility bills and tax records that either: a) a
modular building, manufactured home, or recreational vehicle was legally in place on the lot or
space prior to the effective date hereof, or b) a development impact fee has been paid previously
for the installation of a modular building, manufactured home or recreational vehicle on that
same lot or space;
8. Projects for which a development impact fee for each type of public facility covered by this
chapter has previously been paid in an amount that equals or exceeds the development impact
fee that would be required by this chapter;
9. Projects built by the federal government or the state government; and
10. Public schools.
C. Fee Table And Calculation Of Amount Of Development Impact Fees:
Impact Fee Category Amount
Police fees:
Residential (per dwelling unit) As set by resolution
Nonresidential (per square foot) As set by resolution
Fire fees:
Residential (per dwelling unit) As set by resolution
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 429/467
Nonresidential (per square foot) As set by resolution
Total city impact fees:
Residential As set by resolution
Nonresidential As set by resolution
1. Using The Fee Table: Development impact fees shall be calculated using the fee table in this
section, unless: a) the fee payer requests an individualized assessment pursuant to subsection
C2 of this section or b) the city designates the proposed development as a development of
extraordinary impact in writing to the fee payer, in which case the provisions of subsection C3 of
this section shall apply.
a. Any person who commences any new impact generating land development, except those
exempted pursuant to this chapter, or those preparing an individual assessment pursuant to
this chapter, shall pay all development impact fees applicable to the proposed development,
as determined by the fee table in this section. Persons choosing to pay applicable
development impact fees pursuant to fee table shall be deemed to have made a full and
complete payment of the project's proportionate share of city capital facilities costs for system
improvements, except as noted in subsection E of this section.
b. If the proposed development is of a type not listed in the fee table in this section, then the city
shall apply the development impact fees applicable to the most nearly comparable type of land
use listed in the fee table in this section. The determination as to which type of development is
most nearly comparable to the proposed development shall be made by referring to traffic
generation rates for land uses published by the Institute Of Transportation Engineers, and by
identifying that land use listed in the fee table in this section whose traffic generation rates are
most comparable to the proposed land use. If no traffic generation rate for the proposed land
use appears in a publication of the Institute Of Transportation Engineers, or if it is not possible
to determine which land use listed in the fee table in this section has the most comparable
traffic generation rates, then the most nearly comparable land use shall be determined by the
development impact fee administrator based on comparison of other characteristics of the
proposed land use (including employment or occupancy, the size of the facility, and the
amount of parking to be provided) with the characteristics of those land uses listed in the fee
table in this section.
c. If the proposed development includes a mix of those uses listed in the fee table in this section,
then the development impact fees shall be determined by adding up the development impact
fees that would be payable for each use as if it were a freestanding use pursuant to the fee
table in this section.
d. If the fee payer requests that the city calculate the amount of development impact fees due
pursuant to the fee table in this section, the city shall notify the fee payer of such amount
within thirty (30) days after receipt of that request.
2. Using An Individual Assessment:
a. In lieu of calculating the amount(s) of development impact fees by reference to the fee table in
this section, a fee payer may request that the amount of the required development impact fee
be determined through an individual assessment for the proposed development. The
individual assessment process shall permit consideration of studies, data, and any other
relevant information submitted by the fee payer to adjust the amount of the fee. If a fee payer
requests the use of an individual assessment, the fee payer shall be responsible for retaining
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 430/467
a qualified professional to prepare the individual assessment that complies with the
requirements of this chapter, at the fee payer's expense. The fee payer shall bear the burden
of proving by clear and convincing evidence that the resulting individual assessment is a more
accurate measure of its proportionate share of the cost of city capital improvements, based on
the city's adopted levels of service, than the development impact fees that would otherwise be
due pursuant to the fee table.
b. Each individual assessment shall be based on the same level of service standards and unit
costs for system improvements used in the development impact fee study, shall use an
average cost (not a marginal cost) methodology, and shall document the relevant
methodologies and assumptions used.
c. An application for an individual assessment may be submitted at any time that the number of
dwelling units in the proposed dwelling units and the types and amounts of development in
each nonresidential category identified in the fee table in this section is known. The city shall
issue a decision within thirty (30) days following receipt of a completed application for
individual assessment and supporting information from the applicant, so as not to
unreasonably delay subsequent applications for or issuance of building permits.
d. Each individual assessment shall be submitted to the development impact fee administrator or
a designee, and may be accepted, rejected, or accepted with modifications by the
development impact fee administrator or a designee as the basis for calculating development
impact fees. The criteria for acceptance, rejection, or acceptance with modifications shall be
whether the individual assessment is a more accurate measure of demand for the city capital
improvements element(s) created by the proposed development, or the costs of those
facilities, than the applicable fee shown in the fee table in this section.
e. The decision by the development impact fee administrator or designee on an application for
an individual assessment shall include an explanation of the calculation of the impact fee,
shall specify the system improvement(s) for which the impact fee is intended to be used, and
shall include an explanation of those factors identified in Idaho Code section 67-8207.
f. If an individual assessment is accepted or accepted with modifications by the development
impact fee administrator or a designee then the development impact fees due under this
chapter for such development shall be calculated according to such individual assessment.
3. Extraordinary Impacts:
a. If the city determines that a proposed development generates extraordinary impacts that will
result in extraordinary costs, the city will notify the fee payer of such determination within thirty
(30) days after receipt of a request for a certification pursuant to subsection D of this section
or a request for a building permit or development approval, whichever occurs first. Such notice
shall include a statement that the potential impacts of such development on system
improvements are not adequately addressed by the development impact fee study, and that a
supplemental study at the fee payer's expense will be required.
b. Circumstances that may lead to a determination of extraordinary impacts include, but are not
limited to: 1) an indication that traffic generation from the proposed development or activity will
exceed those typical for a facility or activity of its type, 2) an indication that employment
generated by the development or activity will exceed those typical for a facility or activity of its
type, 3) an indication the assumptions used in the development impact fee study
underestimate the level of activity or impact on city capital facilities from the proposed
development or activity, or 4) an indication that levels of calls for law enforcement, fire, or
emergency services from developments or activities owned or operated by the fee payer or its
agents exceed the assumptions used in the development impact fee study.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 431/467
c. Within thirty (30) days following the designation of a development with extraordinary impacts,
the city shall meet with the fee payer to discuss whether the fee payer wants to: 1) pay for the
supplemental study necessary to determine the system improvement costs related to the
proposed development, or 2) modify the proposal to avoid generating extraordinary impacts,
or 3) withdraw the application for certification, building permit, or development approval.
d. If the fee payer agrees to pay for the supplemental study required to document the proposed
development's proportionate share of system improvement costs, then the city and the fee
payer shall jointly select an individual or organization acceptable to both to perform such
study; the fee payer shall enter into a written agreement with such individual or organization to
pay the costs of such study. Such agreement shall require the supplemental study to be
completed within thirty (30) days of such written agreement, unless the fee payer agrees to a
longer time.
e. Once the study has been completed, the fee payer may choose to: 1) pay the proportionate
share of system improvement costs documented by the supplemental study, or 2) modify the
proposed development to reduce such costs, or 3) withdraw the application. If the fee payer
agrees to pay the system improvement costs documented in the supplemental study, that
agreement shall be reduced to writing between the city and the fee payer prior to review and
consideration of any application for any development approval or building permit related to the
proposed development.
f. Notwithstanding any agreement by the fee payer to pay the proportionate share of system
improvement costs documented by the supplemental study, nothing in this chapter shall
obligate the city to approve development that results in an extraordinary impact.
4. Inflationary Costs: In any fiscal year in which an impact fee update is not conducted by the city,
impact fees will be adjusted to reflect inflationary costs using the "Engineering News-Records"
construction cost index as of January 1 of that fiscal year. The adjustment shall be effective on
October 1 of the next fiscal year. The city shall provide notice to the public of any such
adjustment sixty (60) days in advance of the effective date of such adjustment.
D. Certification: After the development impact fees due for a proposed development have been
calculated pursuant to the fee table in this section or the individual assessment, the fee payer may
request the development impact fee administrator or a designee for a certification of the amount of
development impact fees due for that development. Within thirty (30) days after receiving such
request, the development impact fee administrator or a designee shall issue a written certification
of the amount of development impact fees due for the proposed development. Such certification
shall establish the development impact fee so long as there is no material change to the particular
project as identified in the individual assessment application, or the impact fee schedule set forth in
the fee table in this section. The certification shall include an explanation of the calculation of the
impact fee including an explanation of factors considered under Idaho Code section 67-8207 and
shall also specify the system improvement(s) for which the development impact fee is intended to
be used.
E. Payment Of Fees:
1. All development impact fees due shall be paid to the city at the following times:
a. If a building permit or manufactured home installation permit is required, then at the time such
permit is issued; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 432/467
b. If no building permit or manufactured home installation permit is required, then at the time that
construction commences; or
c. At such other time as the applicant and the city have agreed to in writing, pursuant to
applicable Idaho law.
2. All monies paid by a fee payer pursuant to the fee table in this section shall be identified as
development impact fees and shall be promptly deposited in the appropriate accounts described
in subsection 17.80.070B of this chapter.
3. A fee payer may pay a development impact fee under protest in order to avoid delay in the
issuance of a building permit or development approval. A fee payer making a payment under
protest shall not be estopped from exercising the right of appeal provided in section 17.80.100 of
this chapter, nor shall such fee payer be estopped from receiving a refund of any amount
deemed to have been illegally collected. (Ord. 1371, 2012: Ord. 1349, 2011)
17.80.060: SERVICE AREAS:
The following service areas are established for each development impact fee element:
A. The police impact fee service area shall include the entire city, and police impact fees may be
expended for police capital facilities located anywhere in the city.
B. The fire impact fee service area shall include the entire city, and fire impact fees may be expended
for fire capital facilities located anywhere in the city. (Ord. 1349, 2011)
17.80.070: USE OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE FUNDS:
A. Establishment Of Trust Fund And Accounts:
1. A development impact fee trust fund (the "trust fund") is hereby established for the purpose of
ensuring that the development impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter are used to
address impacts reasonably attributable to new development for which the development impact
fees are paid.
2. The trust fund shall be divided into two (2) accounts: a police capital facilities account and a fire
capital facilities account.
3. The development impact fee trust fund shall be maintained in an interest bearing account. The
interest earned on each account shall not be governed by Idaho Code section 57-127, but shall
be considered funds of the account and shall be subject to the same restrictions on uses of
funds as the development impact fees on which the interest is generated.
4. Monies in each account shall be considered to be spent in the order collected, on a first in/first
out basis.
B. Deposit And Management Of The Trust Fund:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 433/467
1. All development impact fees collected by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be promptly
deposited into the appropriate account in the trust fund.
2. The city shall maintain accounting records for each account.
3. As part of its annual audit process, the city shall prepare an annual report: a) describing the
amount of all development impact fees collected, appropriated, or spent during the preceding
year for each capital improvements element and service area; and b) describing the percentage
of taxes and revenues from sources other than development impact fees collected, appropriated
or spent for system improvements during the preceding year by capital improvements element
and service area.
C. Limitations On Expenditures Of Fees In Accounts:
1. Police Impact Fee: The monies collected from the police impact fee shall be used only to plan
for and acquire or construct police capital facilities, or to pay debt service on any portion of any
future general obligation bond issue or revenue bond issue or similar instrument used to finance
the acquisition or construction of police capital facilities within the city or to reimburse the city for
such costs.
2. Fire Impact Fee: The monies collected from the fire impact fee shall be used only to plan for and
acquire or construct fire capital facilities, or to pay debt service on any portion of any future
general obligation bond issue or revenue bond issue or similar instrument used to finance the
acquisition or construction of fire capital facilities within the city or to reimburse the city for such
costs.
3. Development Impact Fees: Development impact fees shall not be used to pay for any purpose
that does not involve system improvements that create additional service available to serve new
growth and development. (Ord. 1349, 2011)
17.80.080: REFUNDS OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES PAID:
A. Duty To Refund: Development impact fees shall be refunded to the fee payer, or to a successor in
interest, in the following circumstances:
1. Service is available but never provided;
2. A building permit or permit for installation of a manufactured home is denied or abandoned;
3. The fee payer pays a development impact fee under protest and a subsequent review of the fee
paid or the completion of an individual assessment determines that the fee paid exceeded the
proportionate share to which the governmental entity was entitled to receive; or
4. The city has collected a development impact fee and has failed to appropriate or expend the
collected fees pursuant to subsection B of this section.
B. Failure To Encumber Trust Funds Or Commence Construction: Any development impact fees paid
shall be refunded if the city has failed to commence construction of system improvements in
accordance with this chapter, or to appropriate funds for such construction, within eight (8) years
after the date on which such fee was paid. Any refund due shall be paid to the owner of record of
the parcel for which the development impact fees were paid. The city may hold development
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 434/467
impact fees for longer than eight (8) years if it identifies in writing: 1) a reasonable cause why the
fees should be held longer than eight (8) years; and 2) an anticipated date by which the fees will
be expended, but in no event greater than eleven (11) years from the date they were collected. If
the city complies with the previous sentence, then any development impact fees identified in such
writing shall be refunded to the fee payer if the city has failed to commence construction of system
improvements in accordance with this chapter, or to appropriate funds for such construction on or
before the date identified in such writing.
C. No Refund Due:
1. Later Changes To Development: After a development impact fee has been paid pursuant to this
chapter no refund of any part of such fee shall be made if the project for which the fee was paid
is later demolished, destroyed, or is altered, reconstructed, or reconfigured so as to reduce the
size of the project or the number of units in the project.
D. Interest: Each refund shall include a refund of interest at one-half (1/2) the legal rate provided for in
Idaho Code section 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was originally paid.
E. Timing: The city shall make a determination of whether a refund is due within thirty (30) days after
receipt of a written request for a refund from the owner of record of the property for which the fee
was paid. When the right to a refund exists, the city shall send the refund to the owner of record
within ninety (90) days after the city determines that a refund is due.
F. Standing: Any person entitled to a refund shall have standing to sue for a refund under the
provisions of this chapter if there has not been a timely payment of a refund pursuant to
subsections A through B of this section. (Ord. 1349, 2011)
17.80.090: CREDITS AGAINST DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES:
A. Credits To Be Issued: When a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest has
constructed system improvements of the same category as a city capital improvements element, or
contributed or dedicated land or money towards the completion of system improvements of the
same category as a city capital improvements element, and the city has accepted such
construction, contribution, or dedication, the city shall issue a credit against the development
impact fees otherwise due for the same city capital improvements element in connection with the
proposed development, as set forth in this section. Credit shall be issued regardless of whether the
contribution or dedication to system improvements was required by the city as a condition of
development approval or was offered by the developer and accepted by the city in writing, and
regardless of whether the contribution or dedication was contributed by the developer or by a local
improvement district controlled by the developer.
B. Limitations: Credits against development impact fees shall not be given for: 1) project
improvements, or 2) any construction, contribution, or dedication not agreed to in writing by the city
prior to commencement of the construction, contribution, or dedication. Credits issued for one city
capital improvements element may not be used to reduce development impact fees due for a
different capital improvements element. No credits shall be issued for system improvements
contributed or dedicated prior to the effective date hereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 435/467
C. Valuation Of Credit At Present Value:
1. Land: Credit for qualifying land dedications shall, at the fee payer's option, be valued at the
present value of: a) one hundred percent (100%) of the most recent assessed value for such
land as shown in the records of the county assessor, or b) that fair market value established by a
private appraiser acceptable to the city in an appraisal paid for by the fee payer.
2. Improvements: Credit for qualifying acquisition or construction of system improvements shall be
valued by the city at the present value of such improvements based on complete engineering
drawings, specifications, and construction cost estimates submitted by the fee payer to the city.
The city shall determine the amount of credit due based on the information submitted, or, if it
determines that such information is inaccurate or unreliable, then on alternative engineering or
construction costs acceptable to the city as a more accurate measure of the value of the offered
system improvements to the city.
D. When Credits Become Effective:
1. Approved credits for land dedications shall become effective when the land has been conveyed
to the city in a form acceptable to the city at no cost to the city, and has been accepted by the
city. When such conditions have been met, the city shall note that fact in its records. Upon
request of the fee payer, the city shall issue a letter stating the amount of credit available.
2. Approved credits for acquisition or construction of system improvements shall generally become
effective when: a) all required construction has been completed and has been accepted by the
city, b) a suitable maintenance and warranty bond has been received and approved by the city,
and c) all design, construction, inspection, testing, bonding, and acceptance procedures have
been completed in compliance with all applicable requirements of the city and the state of Idaho.
Approved credits for the construction of system improvements may become effective at an
earlier date if the fee payer posts security in the form of a performance bond, irrevocable letter of
credit, or escrow agreement and the amount and terms of such security are accepted by the
development impact fee administrator or a designee. At a minimum, such security must be in the
amount of the approved credit or an amount determined to be adequate to allow the city to
construct the system improvements for which the credit was given, whichever is higher. When
such conditions have been met, the city shall note that fact in its records. Upon request of the
fee payer, the city shall issue a letter stating the amount of credit available.
E. Application Procedures:
1. In order to obtain a credit against development impact fees otherwise due, a fee payer shall
submit a written offer to dedicate to the development impact fee administrator or a designee for
specific parcels of qualifying land or a written offer to contribute or construct specific system
improvements to the city capital facilities in accordance with all applicable state or city design
and construction standards, and shall specifically request a credit against the type of
development impact fees for which the land dedication or system improvement is offered. No
request for a credit against development impact fees shall be accepted unless a written offer to
dedicate, contribute, or construct has previously been approved in writing by the city.
2. After receipt of the request for credit, the development impact fee administrator or a designee
shall review the request and determine whether the land or system improvements offered for
credit will reduce the costs of providing city capital facilities by an amount at least equal to the
value of the credit. If the development impact fee administrator or a designee determines that
the offered credit satisfies that criteria, then the credit shall be issued. The city shall complete its
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 436/467
review and determination of an application for credit within thirty (30) days after receipt of an
application for credit.
F. Transferability Of Credit: A credit may only be transferred by the fee payer that has received the
credit to a successor in interest pursuant to the terms of this chapter. The credit may be used only
to offset development impact fees for the same city capital improvements element for which the
credit was issued. Credits shall be transferred by any written instrument clearly identifying which
credits issued under this chapter are being transferred, the dollar amount of the credit being
transferred, and the city capital improvements element for which the credit was issued. The
instrument of transfer shall be signed by both the transferor and transferee, and a copy of the
document shall be delivered to the development impact fee administrator or a designee for
documentation of the change in ownership before it shall become effective.
G. Accounting Of Credits: Each time a request to use approved credits is presented to the city the city
shall reduce the amount of the development impact fees for the type of fee for which the credit is
provided, and shall note in the city's records the amount of credit remaining, if any. Upon request
of the fee payer or successor in interest to whom the credit was issued, the city shall issue a letter
stating the amount of credit remaining.
H. Credits Exceeding Fee Amounts Due: If the credit due to a fee payer pursuant to subsections A
through D of this section exceeds the development impact fee that would otherwise be due from
the fee payer pursuant to section 17.80.050 of this chapter (whether calculated through the fee
table in section 17.80.050 of this chapter or through an independent assessment), the fee payer
may choose to receive such credit in the form of either: 1) a credit against future development
impact fees due for the same capital improvements element, or 2) a reimbursement from
development impact fees paid by future development that impacts the system improvements
contributed or dedicated by the fee payer. Unless otherwise stated in an agreement with the fee
payer, the city shall be under no obligation to use any city funds, other than development impact
fees paid by other development for the same city capital improvements element _ to reimburse the
fee payer for any credit in excess of development impact fees due.
I. Written Agreement Required: If credit or reimbursement is due to the fee payer pursuant to this
subsection, the city shall enter into a written agreement with the fee payer, negotiated in good faith,
prior to the contribution, dedication, or funding of the system improvements giving rise to the credit.
The agreement shall provide for the amount of credit or the amount, time and form of
reimbursement, and shall have a term not exceeding ten (10) years. (Ord. 1349, 2011)
17.80.100: APPEALS AND MEDIATION:
Disputes regarding decisions made in the application of this chapter shall be resolved through appeal
to the city council or through mediation, as set forth below.
A. Right To Appeal:
1. Any fee payer that is or may be obligated to pay a development impact fee, or that claims a right
to receive a refund, reimbursement, or credit under this chapter, and who is dissatisfied with a
decision made by the development impact fee administrator or a designee in applying this
chapter, shall first request that the development impact fee administrator reconsider the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 437/467
decision. A fee payer requesting reconsideration shall state in writing to the development impact
fee administrator the reasons why the fee payer believes the decision to be in error. The
development impact fee administrator shall issue a written decision confirming or modifying the
decision within fifteen (15) days of receipt of a written request for reconsideration.
2. Any fee payer that is dissatisfied with the decision of the development impact fee administrator
upon reconsideration pursuant to subsection A1 of this section, may appeal such decision to the
city council. The fee payer shall have the burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence
that the decision was in error.
3. In order to pursue the appeal described in subsection A2 of this section, the fee payer shall file a
written notice of the appeal with the development impact fee administrator or a designee within
thirty (30) days after the date of the reconsideration, or the date on which the fee payer
submitted a payment of development impact fees under protest, whichever is later. Such written
application shall include a statement describing why the fee payer believes that the decision was
in error, together with copies of any documents that the fee payer believes support the claim.
4. The city council shall hear the appeal within sixty (60) days after receipt of a written notice of
appeal. The fee payer shall have a right to be present and to present evidence in support of the
appeal. The development impact fee administrator or designee who made the decision under
appeal shall likewise have the right to be present and to present evidence in support of the
decision. The criteria to be used by the city council in considering the appeal shall be whether: a)
the decision or interpretation made by the development impact fee administrator after
reconsideration, or b) the alternative decision or interpretation offered by the fee payer, more
accurately reflects the intents of this chapter that new development in the city pay its
proportionate share of the costs of system improvements to city capital facilities necessary to
serve new development. The city council shall issue a decision upholding, reversing, or
modifying the decision being appealed within thirty (30) days after hearing the appeal.
B. Mediation:
1. Any fee payer that has a disagreement with the city regarding a development impact fee that is
or may be due for a proposed development pursuant to this chapter, may enter into a voluntary
agreement with the city to subject the disagreement to mediation by a qualified independent
party acceptable to both the fee payer and the city.
2. Mediation may take place at any time following the filing of a timely appeal pursuant to this
section, or as an alternative to such appeal, provided that the request for mediation is filed no
later than the last date on which a timely appeal could be filed pursuant to subsection A of this
section.
3. Participation in mediation does not preclude the fee payer from pursuing other remedies
provided for in this subsection.
4. If mediation is requested, any related mediation costs shall be shared equally by the fee payer
and the city, and a written agreement regarding the payment of such costs shall be executed
prior to the commencement of mediation. (Ord. 1349, 2011)
17.80.110: ENFORCEMENT AND COLLECTION:
When any development impact fee is due pursuant to the terms of this chapter, or pursuant to the
terms of any written agreement between a fee payer and the city authorized by this chapter, and such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 438/467
fee has not been paid in a timely manner, the city may exercise any or all of the following powers, in
any combination, to enforce the collection of the fee:
A. The city may withhold building permits or other development approvals related to the development
for which the fee is due until all development impact fees due have been paid.
B. The city may withhold utility services from the development for which the fee is due until all
development impact fees due have been paid.
C. The city may add to the amount of the fee interest at the legal rate provided for in Idaho Code
section 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was due.
D. The city may impose liens for failure to timely pay a development impact fee following procedures
contained in chapter 5, title 45, Idaho Code. (Ord. 1349, 2011)
17.80.120: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to create any additional right to develop real property or
diminish the power of the city in regulating the orderly development of real property.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall obligate the city to approve any development request that may
reasonably be expected to reduce levels of service below minimum acceptable levels established
in the development impact fee study.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall restrict or diminish the power of the city: 1) to impose reasonable
conditions on the annexation of any property to the city in accordance with Idaho Code, including
conditions for recovery of project or system improvement costs required as a result of such
voluntary annexation, or 2) to negotiate and execute development agreements that may impose
additional conditions on development, including the recovery of project or system improvement
costs, either in connection with a proposed annexation or in connection with any other
development within the city.
D. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, that portion of a project for which a complete
application for a building permit has been received by the city prior to the effective date hereof
shall not be subject to the development impact fees imposed by this chapter. If the resulting
building permit is later revised or replaced after the effective date of this chapter, and the new
building permit reflects a development density, intensity, or number of units more than ten percent
(10%) higher than that reflected in the original building permit, then development impact fees may
be charged on the difference in density, intensity, or number of units between the original and the
revised or replacement building permit.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall restrict the city from requiring fee payer or an applicant for a
development approval or building permit to construct reasonable project improvements required to
serve the applicant's project, provided that such request does not duplicate a system improvement
in a category for which costs were included in the development impact fee study.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 439/467
F. Any monies, including any accrued interest not assigned to specific system improvements within
such capital improvements program and not expended pursuant to section 17.80.070 of this
chapter or refunded pursuant to section 17.80.080 of this chapter shall be retained in the same
account until the next fiscal year.
G. If the city discovers an error in the development impact fee study that results in assessment or
payment of more than a proportionate share of system improvement costs on any proposed
development, the city shall: 1) adjust the development impact fee to collect no more than a
proportionate share or 2) discontinue the collection of any development impact fees until the error
is corrected by ordinance.
H. If development impact fees are calculated and paid based on a mistake or misrepresentation, they
shall be recalculated. Any amounts overpaid by a fee payer shall be refunded by the city within
thirty (30) days after the city's acceptance of the recalculated amount, with interest at the legal rate
provided for in Idaho Code section 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was paid. Any
amounts underpaid by the fee payer shall be paid to the city within thirty (30) days after the city's
acceptance of the recalculated amount, with interest at the legal rate provided for in Idaho Code
section 28-22-104 from the date on which the fee was paid. In the case of an underpayment to the
city, the city may withhold issuance of building permits or development approvals for the project for
which the development impact fee was paid until such underpayment is corrected, and if amounts
owed to the city are not paid within such thirty (30) day period, the city may also repeal any
building permits or development approvals or building permits issued in reliance on the previous
payment of such development impact fee and refund such fee to the fee payer.
I. The development impact fee advisory committee established during the preparation of the
development impact fee study shall continue in existence, and shall be composed of not fewer
than five (5) members appointed by city council. Two (2) or more members shall be active in the
business of development, building, or real estate. The committee shall serve in an advisory
capacity and has been established to: 1) assist the city in adopting land use assumptions; 2)
review the capital improvements plan, and proposed amendments, and file written comments; 3)
monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements plan; 4) file periodic reports, at
least annually, with respect to the capital improvements plan and report to the city any perceived
inequities in implementing the plan or imposing the development impact fees; and 5) advise the
city of the need to update or revise land use assumptions, the capital improvements plan, and
development impact fees.
J. The city council shall consider the development impact fee advisory committee's recommended
revision(s) to this chapter at least once every twelve (12) months. The committee's
recommendations and the city council's actions are intended to ensure that the benefits to a fee
paying development are equitable, in that the fee charged to the development shall not exceed a
proportionate share of the costs of system improvements, and the procedures for administering
development impact fees remain efficient.
K. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent or prohibit private agreements between
developers, the city, the Idaho transportation department, and/or other governmental entities in
regard to the construction or installation of system improvements or providing for credits or
reimbursements for system improvement costs incurred by a developer or fee payer, including
interproject transfers of credits, or providing for reimbursement for project improvements that are
used or shared by more than one development project. If it can be shown that a proposed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 440/467
development has a direct impact on a public facility under the jurisdiction of the Idaho
transportation department, then the agreement shall include a provision for the allocation of
development impact fees collected from the developer or fee payer for the improvement of the
public facility by the Idaho transportation department.
L. Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and shall be subject to those remedies provided in
section 1.12.010 of this code. Knowingly furnishing false information to any official of the city
charged with the administration of this chapter on any matter relating to the administration of this
chapter, including, without limitation, the furnishing of false information regarding the expected
size, use, or impacts from a proposed development, shall be a violation of this chapter.
M. The section titles used in this chapter are for convenience only, and shall not affect the
interpretation of any portion of the text of this chapter.
N. All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this chapter shall be liberally construed
in order that the true intent and meaning of the Idaho development impact fee act and the city
council may be fully carried out. (Ord. 1349, 2011)
Chapter 17.85
PROTECTION OF PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM SOURCES
17.85.010: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this chapter include:
A. Protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
B. Fostering economic well being derived from the availability of clean water.
C. Minimizing public costs related to remediation, treatment, or replacement of the community water
supply.
D. Avoiding private costs and economic dislocation as a result of pollution of the public water supply.
E. Providing effective and efficient means for processing administrative permits to implement this
chapter. (Ord. 1418, 2016)
17.85.020: PROTECTION OF PUBLIC WATER SOURCES:
Irrespective of the zoning designation applied to any land or land use governed herein, such zoning
designation shall be subject to the limitations established by this section pursuant to title 13, chapter
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 441/467
13.03 of this code, which is intended to protect source water that supplies public water systems (PWS)
within the city of Payette. By reference to the provisions and accompanying source water protection
overlay map adopted by section 13.03.030 of this code, the following requirements and limitations
apply within any land use zone:
A. As respects the inner vulnerability tier designated by section 13.03.040 of this code, the following
uses are hereby prohibited:
All manufacturing or industrial businesses involving the collection, handling, manufacture, use,
storage, transfer, or disposal of any hazardous solid or liquid material or waste that is not positively
contained such that it cannot migrate into the earth, groundwater, or surface water, thereafter
presenting the potential impact of polluting groundwater.
Any newly installed septic tanks or drainfields less than two hundred feet (200') away from a PWS
wellhead.
Automobile or truck body/repair shops, gas stations, maintenance or fueling areas.
Confined animal feeding operation (CAFO) as defined by code or rule.
Existing septic tanks or drainfields less than one hundred feet (100') from a PWS wellhead serves
as constraint on new well placement.
Existing sewer lines less than one hundred feet (100') from a PWS wellhead serves as constraint
on new well placement.
Hazardous waste storage or disposal facility as defined herein.
Injection wells (shallow and deep) except for closed systems, certified as such by a licensed
professional engineer.
Junk or salvage yards as defined by this zoning ordinance.
New sanitary sewer system components and sewer lines closer than one hundred fifty feet (150')
from a PWS wellhead.
Oil and gas wells or drilling sites.
Petroleum manufacturing or processing facilities providing treatment or disposal of petroleum
products including, but not limited to, waste oil, oil filters, and tires and all other petroleum
products.
Sanitary landfill.
B. As respects the intermediate vulnerability tier designated by section 13.03.040 of this code, the
following uses are hereby prohibited:
All manufacturing or industrial businesses involving the collection, handling, manufacture, use,
storage, transfer, or disposal of any hazardous solid or liquid material or waste that is not positively
contained such that it cannot migrate into the earth, groundwater, or surface water, thereafter
presenting the potential impact of polluting groundwater.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 442/467
CAFO as defined by code or rule.
Deep injection well (18 feet in depth or more), except when designed and used for geothermal
heat, heat pump return flow, and uncontaminated cooling water return flow certified as such by a
licensed professional engineer or other qualified professional including a public agency building
inspector.
Hazardous waste storage or disposal facility as defined herein.
Oil and gas wells or drilling sites.
Petroleum manufacturing or processing facilities providing treatment or disposal of petroleum
products including, but not limited to, waste oil, oil filters, and tires and all other petroleum
products.
Sanitary landfill.
Shallow injection well (less than 18 feet in depth), if the depth to groundwater is less than twenty
five feet (25'). All shallow injection wells shall use best management practice (BMP) options, such
as those included in the most current version of DEQ's "Catalog Of Stormwater Best Management
Practices For Idaho Cities And Counties". The following injection wells are exempt: aquifer
recharge flow, aquifer remediation related well, and septic tank and drainfield systems permitted
and constructed according to law.
C. As respects the outer vulnerability tier designated by section 13.03.040 of this code, the following
uses are hereby prohibited:
All manufacturing or industrial businesses involving the collection, handling, manufacture, use,
storage, transfer, or disposal of any hazardous solid or liquid material or waste that is not positively
contained such that it cannot migrate into the earth, groundwater, or surface water, thereafter
presenting the potential impact of polluting groundwater.
Deep injection well (18 feet in depth or more), except when designed and used for geothermal
heat, heat pump return flow, and uncontaminated cooling water return flow certified as such by a
licensed professional engineer or other qualified professional including a public agency building
inspector.
Hazardous waste storage or disposal facility as defined herein.
Oil and gas wells or drilling sites.
Petroleum manufacturing or processing facilities providing treatment or disposal of petroleum
products including, but not limited to, waste oil, oil filters, and tires and all other petroleum
products.
Sanitary landfill.
Shallow injection well (less than 18 feet in depth), if the depth to groundwater is less than twenty
five feet (25'). All shallow injection wells shall use BMPs, such as those included in the most
current version of DEQ's "Catalog Of Stormwater Best Management Practices For Idaho Cities
And Counties". The following injection wells are exempt: aquifer recharge flow, aquifer remediation
related well, and septic tank and drainfield systems permitted and constructed according to law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 443/467
D. Any such application denied a permit may seek an administrative authorization by demonstrating
with clear and convincing evidence that the activity prohibited would pose no material risk of
polluting the water source for a potentially affected PWS. Any decision on an administrative appeal
may be heard before the city council of the city of Payette. (Ord. 1418, 2016)
Chapter 17.90
OIL AND GAS OPERATIONS
17.90.010: PURPOSE:
This chapter is a zoning and public nuisance ordinance enacted to protect and promote the health,
safety and general welfare of present and future residents of the city while at the same time providing
for the responsible and economically viable extraction of oil and gas minerals. This chapter is a police
power, public nuisance and land use regulation designed to establish separate land use,
environmental, traffic, cultural, historical and archaeological, emergency service and preparedness,
health and safety, and other standards to protect from any possible adverse public nuisance effects
and impacts resulting from oil and gas exploration, drilling, extraction or transportation in the city.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide, through zoning provisions, for the reasonable development
of land for oil and gas operation while providing adequate health, safety and general welfare
protections of the residents of the city of Payette. Oil and gas exploration, drilling and extraction
operations involve activities that are economically important and will impact the city of Payette.
Accordingly, it is necessary and appropriate to adopt reasonable requirements for oil and gas resource
development so that these resources can be obtained in a manner that is economically remunerative,
and that minimizes the potential impact on the residents of the city of Payette.
Local governments are preempted from regulating the same features of oil and gas well operations or
accomplishing the same purposes regulated under Idaho statute 47-317. Local zoning regulates
surface land use as authorized under the local land use planning act1. (Ord. 1384, 2014)
17.90.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, all terms used that are defined in the IDAPA regulations and are not
defined in this chapter are defined as provided in the IDAPA regulations as of the effective date of this
chapter. The following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
ADMINISTRATIVE: A regulatory review and/or action performed by an employee or contractor of the
city of Payette and not deemed a legislative or quasi-judicial action.
APPLICANT: Any person, owner, operator, partnership, company, corporation and its subcontractors
and agents who has an interest in real estate for the purpose of exploring or drilling for, producing, or
transporting oil or gas.
DEPARTMENT: The Idaho department of lands.
DEVELOPMENT: Any work which actively promotes bringing in production.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 444/467
DRILLING PAD: The area of surface operations surrounding a proposed or existing well or wells and
accessory structures and equipment necessary for drilling, completion, recompletion, work over,
development and production activities.
GEOPHYSICAL OR SEISMIC OPERATIONS: Any geophysical method performed on the surface of
the land utilizing certain instruments operating under the laws of physics respecting vibration or sound
to determine conditions below the surface of the earth which may contain oil or gas and is inclusive of,
but not limited to, the preliminary line survey, the acquisition of necessary permits, the selection and
marking of shot hole locations, necessary clearing of vegetation, shot hole drilling, implantation of
charge, placement of geophones, detonation and backfill of shot holes, and vibroseis.
OIL AND GAS: Crude oil, natural gas, methane gas, propane, butane and/or any other constituents or
similar substances that are produced by drilling an oil or gas well.
OIL AND GAS WELL: A hole drilled into the earth for the purpose of exploring for or extracting oil, gas,
or other hydrocarbon substances.
OIL OR GAS FACILITY OR FACILITIES: A new well or wells and the surrounding well site and well
pad, constructed and operated to explore for or produce crude oil and/or gas and includes auxiliary
and associated equipment and facilities, such as derricks, separators; dehydrators; pumping units;
tank batteries; tanks; metering stations and equipment; any equipment for the reworking of an existing
well bore; workover rigs; compressor stations and associated engines, motors, facilities and
equipment; water or fluid injection systems and associated facilities and equipment; storage or
construction storage yards; gathering systems and associated facilities and equipment, collection
lines, drip stations, vent stations, pigging facilities, chemical injection station, transfer pump stations
and valve boxes; any other structure, building or facility, temporary or permanent, mobile or stationary,
associated with or used in connection of a new oil or gas well or the installation, construction or
operation of the oil or gas well, and the roads used for ingress and egress to and from a new oil or gas
well or surrounding well site.
100-YEAR FLOODPLAIN: The land in the floodplain within the city subject to a one percent (1%) or
greater chance of flooding in any given year, as designated by the federal emergency management
agency, or on the flood insurance rate maps.
ROAD REPAIR AGREEMENT: A written agreement between the owner/operator and the city
obligating the operator to repair damage, excluding ordinary wear and tear, if any, to public streets,
including, but not limited to, bridges, caused by the operator or its employees, agents, contractors,
subcontractors or representatives in the performance of drilling or production of any wells authorized
by the city or county.
ROADWAY: Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, place, viaduct, easement for access,
or other way which is an existing state, city, or municipal roadway; or a street or way shown in a plat
heretofore approved pursuant to law or approved by official action; or a street or way in a plat duly
filed and recorded within the right of way boundaries whether improved or unimproved and may be
comprised of pavement, shoulder, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas, and lawns.
A. Arterial Route: A general term including expressways, major and minor arterial streets; and
interstate, state or city highways having regional continuity.
B. Collector Street: A street that provides for traffic movement within neighborhoods of the city and
between major streets and local street and for direct access to abutting property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 445/467
C. Local Street: A street that provides direct access to residential, commercial, industrial, or other
abutting land for local traffic movements and connects to collector and/or arterial streets.
1. Marginal Access Street: A minor street parallel and adjacent to an arterial route and intercepts
local streets and controls access to an arterial route.
2. Cul-De-Sac Street: A short local street having one end permanently terminated in a vehicular
turnaround.
3. Loop Street: A minor street with both terminal points on the same street of origin.
4. Alley: A public service way used to provide secondary vehicular access to properties
otherwise abutting upon a street.
WELL: An oil and gas well or an injection well, including, but not limited to, directional drilling wells (for
example, any well hole drilled into the ground).
WELL SITE: See definition of Oil Or Gas Facility Or Facilities. (Ord. 1384, 2014)
17.90.030: ZONING CLASSIFICATION:
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, an oil or gas well site shall be considered a permitted use by
right within any zoning district(s), subject to the standards listed herein. (Ord. 1384, 2014)
17.90.040: PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
A. No oil or gas well site, or an addition to an existing oil or gas well site, shall be constructed or
located within the city unless an administrative zoning permit under this chapter has been issued
by the city to the applicant approving the construction or preparation of the site for oil or gas
development.
B. Each application shall be submitted with the fee established pursuant to resolution of the city as
adopted. Such fee shall be reasonable related to the cost of administering this chapter.
C. Any modification to an existing and/or permitted oil or gas well site that materially alters the size,
location, number of wells or accessory equipment or structures, shall require a modification of the
permit under this chapter. Like kind replacements shall not require a permit modification.
D. Wells that were permitted and constructed prior to the adoption hereof shall not be required to meet
the requirements of this chapter. Any modification to an existing or permitted oil or gas well site
that occurs after the effective date hereof and materially alters the size, type, location, number of
wells and other accessory equipment or structures, shall require compliance with this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 446/467
E. Upon receiving notice from the department that an application has been submitted, the city will
notify all property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the affected tax parcel that an
application for a new oil and gas operation has been filed with the city planning and zoning
department. The notice is for informational purposes only and will not solicit any public comments
on the application.
F. If an applicant does not conduct said business for a period of one year, the administrative zoning
permit shall be null and void. The city council has the discretion to provide one 6-month extension
upon request by the applicant. Permits issued under this chapter shall not be transferable to any
other applicant, except by a majority vote of the city council, and the filing of an application by the
applicant to whom such license is, or may be, transferred or assigned.
G. A separate geophysical operations permit shall be required for exploration for oil or gas.
"Exploration of oil or gas" means geologic or geophysical activities, including, but not limited to,
surveying and seismic exploration, related to the search for oil, gas, or other subsurface
hydrocarbons. (Ord. 1384, 2014)
17.90.050: PERMIT APPLICATION:
A. The applicant shall provide to the city at the time of permit application:
1. A narrative describing an overview of the project including the number of acres to be disturbed
for development, the number of wells to be drilled including department permit number(s) for all
wells, if available, at the time of submittal and provided when issued later, and the location,
number and description of equipment and structures to the extent known.
2. The address of the oil or gas well site and a legal description of the parcel as determined by the
city and information needed to gain access to the well site in the event of an emergency.
3. The contact information of the individual or individuals responsible for the operation and
activities at the oil or gas well site shall be provided to the city and all applicable emergency
responders as determined by the city. Such information shall include a phone number where
such individual or individuals can be contacted twenty four (24) hours per day, three hundred
sixty five (365) days a year. Annually, or upon any change of relevant circumstances, the
applicant shall update such information and provide it to the city and all applicable emergency
responders as determined by the city.
4. A scaled site plan of the oil or gas well site showing the drilling pad, planned access roads, the
approximate location of derricks, drilling rigs, equipment and structures and all permanent
improvements to the site and any postconstruction surface disturbance in relation to natural
resources. Included in this map shall be an area within the development site for vehicles to
locate while gaining access to the oil or gas well site.
5. A narrative and map describing the planned access routes to the well sites on public roads
including the transportation and delivery of equipment, machinery, water, chemicals and other
materials used in the siting, drilling, construction, maintenance and operation of the oil or gas
well site.
6. The applicant will make the operation's preparedness, prevention and contingency plan
available to the city and all emergency responders at least thirty (30) days prior to drilling of an
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 447/467
oil or gas well and at least annually thereafter while drilling activities are taking place at the oil or
gas well site.
7. An appropriate site orientation for all applicable emergency responders as determined by the
city. The cost and expense of the orientation shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. If
multiple wells/well pads are in the same area (covered by the same emergency response
agencies), evidence from the appropriate emergency response agencies that a site orientation
was offered in the last twelve (12) months shall be accepted.
8. A narrative describing the environmental impacts of the proposed project on the site and
surrounding land and measures proposed to protect or mitigate such impacts shall be provided
to the city. (Ord. 1384, 2014)
17.90.060: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
A. Within five (5) business days after receipt of a permit application, the city will determine whether the
application is complete and advise the applicant accordingly.
B. If the application is complete and fulfills the requirements of this chapter, the city planning and
zoning administrator shall issue a permit within twenty one (21) days following the date the
complete application was submitted.
C. If the application is incomplete or does not fulfill the requirements of this chapter, the city will notify
the applicant of the missing and/or inadequate material and, upon receiving said material, shall
issue the permit within twenty one (21) days following the date the complete application was
submitted.
D. As a condition of permit approval, applicant shall provide all permits and plans from the department
and all other appropriate regulatory agencies within thirty (30) days of receipt of such permits and
plans. (Ord. 1384, 2014)
17.90.070: SITE DESIGN AND INSTALLATION:
A. General Requirement: All drilling and other operations conducted at an oil or gas facility or
construction of structures associated with, or serving an oil or gas facility, for which a permit is
required, shall strictly comply with the requirements of this chapter applicable to such oil or gas
facility or facilities, including, but not limited to, those set forth in this section, and shall be
conducted at all times in accordance with the best management practices of a reasonable and
prudent operator.
B. Setbacks:
1. No oil or gas facility shall be permitted within a 100-year floodplain as mapped and designated
by the federal emergency management agency (FEMA).
2. Setbacks shall not apply to roads used solely for the purpose of accessing oil or gas facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 448/467
3. Setbacks shall be measured from the center of roads and from the seasonal high water mark of
watercourses, or the outer boundary of the affected surface water feature.
4. No oil or gas facility shall be permitted within the following distances of the following geographic
features and structures:
a. Inhabited dwelling: Six hundred fifty feet (650');
b. Structure used as a place of assembly, school or institution: One thousand feet (1,000');
c. Nonresidential structure: Two hundred feet (200');
d. Any state, federal or city publicly dedicated road or highway: Two hundred feet (200');
e. Surface water features: Three hundred feet (300');
f. Existing water well permitted by the state engineer and used by less than five (5) households:
Two hundred feet (200');
g. Existing water well permitted by the state engineer used by five (5) or more households: One
thousand feet (1,000');
h. Within a designated cultural, historic or archaeological resource as recommended according
to the applicable surface management agency (e.g., SHPO).
The city council has the discretion to permit deviation from the prescribed setbacks based on
the operator's demonstrated ability to protect and/or mitigate the impacts on the foregoing
features, and with the written agreement of the surface property owner or tenant, or, where
applicable, the adjacent surface property owner or tenant, and/or the appropriate surface
management agency.
C. Access:
1. Vehicular access to a natural gas well, oil well or well pad solely via a local street is discouraged
unless it can be proven that the only viable vehicular access to the well site is via the local route.
The use of collector streets is preferred.
2. Payette city roadway standards and development procedures pertaining to minimum traffic sight
distances for all access points shall be adhered to.
3. Access directly to state roads from a well site may require an Idaho transportation department
(ITD) approach permit. Prior to initiating any work at a drill site, the city shall be provided a copy
of any required approach permit.
4. Access directly to city local streets shall require a Payette city road repair agreement prior to
initiating any work at a well site. Operator shall comply with any generally applicable bonding
and permitting requirements for city roads that are to be used by vehicles for site construction,
drilling activities and site operations.
D. Height:
1. There shall be an exception to the height restrictions contained in this section for the temporary
placement of drilling rigs, drying tanks, pad drilling and other accessory uses necessary for the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 449/467
actual drilling or redrilling of an oil or gas well. The duration of such exemption shall not exceed
the actual time period of drilling or redrilling of an oil or gas well or pad drilling.
2. If applicable, application will meet standards as defined in ordinance 938 of the city of Payette,
Payette Municipal Airport hazard zoning ordinance.
E. Screening And Fencing:
1. Security fencing shall not be required at oil or gas well sites during the initial drilling, or redrilling
operations.
2. Upon completion of drilling or redrilling security fencing consisting of a permanent chainlink
fence or approved alternate shall be promptly installed at the oil or gas well site to secure
wellheads, storage tanks, water or liquid impoundment areas, and other mechanical and
production equipment and structures on the oil or gas well site.
3. Security fencing shall be at least six feet (6') in height equipped with lockable gates at every
access point and having openings no less than twelve feet (12') wide. Additional lockable gates
used to access oil and gas well sites by foot may be allowed, as necessary. All locked access
gates shall have knox box access through the city fire department.
4. Warning signs shall be placed on the fencing surrounding the oil or gas well site providing notice
of the potential dangers and the contact information in case of an emergency. During drilling and
hydraulic fracturing, clearly visible warning signage must be posted on the pad site.
5. In construction of oil or gas well sites, the natural surroundings should be considered and
attempts made to preserve existing trees and other native vegetation. Existing trees and
respective root systems should not be disturbed whenever possible. Reforestation/revegetation
of the well site will be provided by the owner/operator as required by rules governing oil and gas
conservation.
F. Lighting: Lighting at the oil or gas well site, either temporary or permanent, shall be directed
downward and inward toward the activity, to the extent practicable, so as to minimize the glare on
public roads and adjacent properties.
G. Noise: The city recognizes that oil and gas development is accompanied by inherent noise.
However, the operator shall consider, to the extent possible, mitigation of noise resulting from the
oil or gas well development.
1. All construction, maintenance, and operations of any oil or gas facility shall be conducted in a
manner to minimize the noise created to the greatest extent possible.
2. Noise will be measured on the "A" scale, using an industry approved protocol. Sound
measurement instruments will be either a type I or type II, SPL instrument that meet or exceed
established ANSI standards.
3. Oil and gas operations at any well site, production facility, or gas facility shall comply with the
following maximum permissible noise levels measured at six hundred fifty feet (650') from the
source or at the receptor, unless another standard has been established in a surface use
agreement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 450/467
4. Noise standards for continuous operations shall apply to all oil or gas operations that operate on
a continual (greater than 8 hours/day), long term basis (greater than 3 weeks) in duration. In the
hours between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and the next seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. the noise levels
permitted below may be increased ten (10) db(A) for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes
in any one hour period.
5. Noise standards for temporary operations shall apply to all operations involving pipeline or gas
facility installation or maintenance, the use of a drilling rig, completion rig, workover rig, or
stimulation.
Duration
7:00 A.M.
To 7:00 P.M.
7:00 P.M.
To 7:00 A.M.
Continuous operations 60 dB(A) 55 dB(A)
Temporary operations 90 dB(A) 85 dB(A)
6. The exhaust from all engines, motors, coolers and other mechanized equipment, including
compressor station fans, shall be vented in a direction away from the closest existing building
units or platted subdivision lots.
H. Dust Control: Operator shall control fugitive dust arising from operations. Operator shall dustproof
work area by sprinkling with water or a water/calcium chloride mixture where necessary.
I. Weed/Debris Control: The site shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free from weeds,
debris and rubbish of every character to the satisfaction of the city code enforcement officer. The
well pad should remain vegetation free.
J. Work Hours: Site development, other than drilling shall be conducted only between seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Monday through Friday and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to
five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on Saturday. Truck deliveries of equipment and materials associated with
drilling and well servicing, site preparation and other related work conducted on the site shall be
limited to the above same work hour restrictions except in cases of an emergency. The operator
may request an exception to this subsection for good cause shown.
K. Temporary Housing: Temporary housing for well site workers is not permitted at any time on the
well site. One on site office is permitted, but is not to be used for sleeping accommodations. (Ord.
1384, 2014)
17.90.080: WATER QUALITY TESTING:
As a condition of permit approval, applicant must provide to county, prior to any drilling activity,
documentation of baseline water testing on a minimum of two (2) down gradient domestic wells for the
protection of public health and safety. The applicant shall notify landowners who have registered their
domestic wells with the Idaho department of water resources (IDWR) and whose property lies within
three hundred feet (300') of the proposed well drilling site by regular United States mail and by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 451/467
physical posting on the applicant's drill site fourteen (14) days in advance of intent to engage in
baseline well testing. Tests shall be completed for all items listed.
A. Field parameters:
1. Water temperature.
2. pH.
3. Specific conductivity.
B. Specific conductivity and total dissolved solids.
C. Major ions:
1. Chloride.
2. Fluoride.
3. Sulfate.
4. Nitrate.
5. Silica.
6. Alkalinity.
7. Calcium.
8. Sodium.
9. Potassium.
10. Magnesium.
D. Trace elements:
1. Aluminum.
2. Arsenic.
3. Barium.
4. Boron.
5. Iron.
6. Manganese.
7. Selenium.
8. Uranium.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 452/467
E. Radiochemical:
1. Gross alpha/gross beta radioactivity, in addition to uranium listed above.
F. Organics:
1. BTEX (benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, and xylene).
2. Methane; carbon isotopic composition for samples with sufficient methane.
Baseline water testing shall be completed every twenty four (24) months while the well is in
production. Copies of baseline water quality test results shall be provided by the applicant free of
charge to owners of the wells tested within thirty (30) days of receipt of written request of the
well owner. All domestic well owners, as identified by the Idaho department of water resources,
within the surrounding one hundred sixty (160) acre section shall be notified prior to drilling.
(Ord. 1384, 2014)
17.90.090: GEOPHYSICAL OPERATIONS:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any exploration activities within the
city regarding oil, gas, and/or other materials by the use of energy source operations, including,
without limitation, weight drops, explosives, and/or vibrating machines, thumper trucks or any other
vehicles or equipment that causes vibrations, without first obtaining a permit from the city. To the
extent an applicant seeks to conduct geophysical operations on city property, including, but not
limited to, city roads, highways, and real estate, the city council has the express right to grant or
deny any application under this chapter.
B. Permit Application; Fee Procedure: Application for a permit hereunder shall be made with the city.
Such application shall contain the following information: 1) name of the applicant; 2) address of the
applicant; 3) type of explosives or other geophysical methods of mineral exploration to be used,
and the purposes therefor; 4) a map designating a testing area and showing the location of all
points of use and the energy source to be used at each point; 5) a traffic control plan for any
operations or testing that will impede traffic on a public right of way; 6) the applicant's insurance
information, including the name of applicant's insurance carrier, the types and amount of insurance
covering its proposed operations, the name and telephone number of an individual to contact in
case of a claim for personal injury or property damage, and the procedure for obtaining a copy of
applicant's certificate of insurance; and 7) a copy of a signed and approved permit for geophysical
operations issued by the state of Idaho.
A nonrefundable permit fee as set by resolution of the city council for processing the application
and preparing the permit shall accompany each such application. On receipt of such application,
the city shall prepare a report showing all city facilities or infrastructure that may be affected by the
proposed exploration activity located in the testing area shown in such application. Such report and
the application shall then be submitted to the city council with the recommendations of city staff.
No permit shall be issued except upon approval of the city council.
C. Term: An approved geophysical operations permit shall expire thirty (30) days after completion of
all activities. All permits issued under this section shall be for a time period not to exceed ninety
(90) days from the date of issuance of the permit. (Ord. 1384, 2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 453/467
Chapter 17.95
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITIES, SPIRES, POLES,
ANTENNAS, STEEPLES, TOWERS, AND OTHER SUCH
STRUCTURES
17.95.010: PURPOSE:
To accommodate the communication needs of residents and businesses while protecting the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the community, regulations regarding personal wireless facilities,
spires, poles, antennas, steeples, towers, and other such structures are necessary in order to:
A. Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to the residents and businesses of
the City;
B. Minimize adverse visual effects of spires, poles, antennas, steeples, towers, and other such
structures through careful design and siting standards;
C. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from spire, pole, antenna, steeple, tower, and other
such structures' failure, through structural standards and setback requirements; and
D. Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to accommodate new wireless
telecommunication antennas in order to reduce the number of towers needed to serve the
community. (Ord. 1423, 2017)
17.95.012: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE: Means man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light
poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of
antennas or towers.
ANTENNA: Means any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or
structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals,
analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals, or
other communication signals.
FCC: Means the Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT: Means, when referring to a tower or other structure in this chapter, the distance measured
from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the
base pad and any antenna.
LATTICE TOWER: Means a support structure consisting of metal crossed strips or bars supporting
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 454/467
antennas and related equipment.
LICENSED AMATEUR COMMUNICATIONS: Means amateur radio operations, also known as
amateur radio service, as regulated and licensed by the FCC pursuant to 47 CFR part 97.
MONOPOLE: Means a structure composed of a single spire.
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITIES: Means facilities necessary for the provision of personal wireless
services (i.e., towers, support buildings, etc.).
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES: Are commercial wireless telecommunication services including
cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced
specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general
public.
TOWER: Means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting
one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including selfsupporting
lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative
tower structures, and the like. The term includes the structure and any support thereto. (Ord. 1438,
2018)
17.95.015: APPLICABILITY:
A. Towers And Antennas: All towers or antennas in Payette shall be subject to these regulations,
except as provided in subsections B and C of this section.
B. Amateur Radio Station Operators/Receive Only Antennas: This chapter shall not govern any
tower/antenna installation that is under seventy feet (70') in height and is owned and operated by a
Federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only antennas.
C. Preexisting Towers Or Antennas: Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas shall not be required
to meet the requirements of this chapter, other than to meet the requirements of State or Federal
law or to comply with the Uniform Building Code, as amended, and the National Electric Code.
(Ord. 1438, 2018)
17.95.020: TOWERS IN ZONING DISTRICTS:
A. Residential Districts:
1. Personal wireless facilities shall be prohibited in all residential zones.
B. Commercial/Industrial Districts:
1. Wireless antennas may be permitted to be attached to existing light standards and power line
support devices (or replacement equivalent of same height) provided, however, the antenna(s)
are either flush mounted or mounted in a manner that provides minimum visual impact.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 455/467
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all provisions of this subsection shall be applicable to wireless
antennas located on existing light standards and power line support devices. (Ord. 1438, 2018)
17.95.030: COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. A proposal for a new commercial wireless telecommunication service tower in excess of thirty five
feet (35') in height shall not be approved unless the commission finds that the telecommunications
equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved
tower or building within the following radius of the proposed tower:
1. A two (2) mile radius for towers with a height over one hundred ten feet (110').
2. A one mile radius for towers with a height over eighty feet (80') but not more than one hundred
ten feet (110').
3. A one-half (1/2) mile radius for towers with a height over fifty feet (50') but not more than eighty
feet (80').
4. A one-fourth (1/4) mile radius for towers with a height over thirty five feet (35') but not more than
fifty feet (50').
B. It shall be the burden of the applicant to demonstrate that the proposed tower or antenna cannot be
accommodated on an approved tower or building within the required search radius due to one or
more of the following reasons:
1. Unwillingness of another tower or facility owner to entertain shared use.
2. The proposed collocation of an existing tower or facility would be in violation of any local, State
or Federal law.
3. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower
or building, as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or
approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or
equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost.
4. The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other
existing or planned equipment at the tower or building as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
5. Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius cannot accommodate the
planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by a qualified
and licensed professional engineer.
6. Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate the planned telecommunications
equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer, or other professional qualified to provide necessary
documentation.
7. Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service tower shall be designed,
structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and
comparable antennas for at least two (2) additional users if the tower is over one hundred ten
feet (110') in height, for at least one additional user if the tower is over fifty feet (50') in height.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 456/467
8. Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to
accept antennas mounted at varying heights.
9. Personal wireless facilities proposed at a location which has an approved building/zoning permit
(approved after the effective date hereof) for an existing facility which was required to allow
collocation shall not be required to obtain a separate building/zoning permit as long as all the
requirements of the previously approved special use permit will be complied with. Design review,
and subsequent building permit, will be required for any such proposal. (Ord. 1423, 2017)
17.95.040: TOWER AND ANTENNA DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
A. All personal wireless facilities shall be required to obtain design review by the City approval prior to
construction.
B. Towers and antennas shall be required to blend into the surrounding environment through the use
of color and camouflaging architectural treatment, except in instances where the color is dictated
by Federal or State authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration.
C. Personal wireless facility towers shall be of a monopole design unless the commission determines
that an alternative design would better blend into the surrounding environment.
D. With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service and connection lines approved by
the issuing authority, no part of any antenna or tower nor any lines, cable, equipment or wires or
braces in connection with either shall at any time extend across or over any part of the right-ofway,
public street, highway, sidewalk, or property line.
E. Every tower affixed to the ground shall be protected to discourage climbing of the tower by
unauthorized persons. The climbing pegs within the bottom twenty feet (20') of the tower shall be
removed and shall only be used when the tower is being serviced.
F. Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive resistant material.
G. Wood poles shall be impregnated with rot resistant substances. (Ord. 1423, 2017)
17.95.050: TOWER SETBACKS:
A. Towers shall meet the setbacks of the underlying zoning district with the exception of industrial
zoning districts, where towers may encroach into the rear setback area, provided that the rear
property line abuts another industrially zoned property and the tower does not encroach upon any
easements.
B. If the tower does not exceed the height limitations of the zone in which it is located, the tower shall
meet the setback requirement of the zone of this section. If the tower exceeds the height limit of
the zone in which it is located, the tower shall be set back one foot (1') for every ten feet (10') in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 457/467
total tower height. In either case, the tower shall be constructed to the Telecommunications
Industry Association/Electronic Industries Association (TIA/EIA) 222 revision F standard entitled
"Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Supporting Structures" or as hereinafter may be amended.
Otherwise, the tower shall be located a minimum of one foot (1') for each foot of height from all
property lines (the fall zone). No storage or structures other than the accessory utility buildings, are
permitted in the fall zone, except as may be specifically permitted by the Planning and Zoning
Commission through a conditional use process.
C. Towers shall be set back from all existing public right-of-way lines (or planned right-of-way lines if
additional height is to be acquired in the future) by a minimum distance equal to twice the height of
the tower including all antennas and attachments. If this requirement conflicts with other setback
requirements of this Code the setback with the greater distance shall prevail, except as may be
allowed in subsection E of this section.
D. Towers shall not be located between a principal structure and a public street.
E. A tower's setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a public street varied, at the sole
discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, to allow the integration of a tower into an
existing or proposed structure such as a church steeple, light standard, power line support device,
or similar structure. (Ord. 1423, 2017)
17.95.060: TOWER LIGHTING, SIGNAGE, AND ATTACHMENTS:
A. No antenna or tower shall have affixed or attached to it in any way, except during time of repair or
installation, any stationary lights, strobe lights, reflectors, flashers, or other illuminating device,
except as specifically required by the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications
Commission, or other Federal or State authority.
B. When incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light fixtures used to illuminate ball fields,
parking lots, or similar areas may be attached to the tower if approved by the commission.
C. The use of any portion of a tower for signs, other than warning or equipment information signs, is
prohibited.
D. No tower shall have constructed thereon, or attached thereto, in any way, any platform, catwalk,
crow's nest, or like structure, except during periods of construction or repair. (Ord. 1423, 2017)
17.95.070: AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNAS:
In accordance with the Federal Communications Commission's preemptive ruling PRB-1, towers
erected for the primary purpose of supporting amateur radio antennas may exceed seventy feet (70')
in height provided that a determination is made by the City that the proposed tower height is
technically necessary to successfully engage in amateur radio communications. (Ord. 1438, 2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 458/467
17.95.080: ACCESSORY UTILITY BUILDINGS:
All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower are required to have design review approved
by the City prior to construction. (Ord. 1423, 2017)
17.95.090: ABANDONED OR UNUSED TOWERS OR PORTIONS OF TOWERS:
As a condition of approval of any required conditional use permit for personal wireless facilities, all
abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities shall be required to be removed within sixty
(60) days of cessation of use as a personal wireless facility unless a time extension is granted by the
City. A copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease, which requires the applicant to remove the
tower and associated facilities upon cessation of the use as a personal wireless facility, shall be
submitted at the time of application. In the event that the tower and associated facilities are not
removed within the sixty (60) days, the tower and associated facilities may be removed by the City
and the costs of removal assessed against the property. (Ord. 1423, 2017)
17.95.095: PRIORITIES:
A. Priority Of Location: The following establishes the order of priorities for locating new
communications facilities:
1. Place antennas and towers in districts zoned industrial.
2. Place antennas and towers in districts zoned commercial which do not adjoin or adversely
impact residential neighborhoods.
3. Place antennas on appropriate existing structures, such as buildings, communications towers,
water towers, and smokestacks in other zoned districts.
4. Place antennas and towers on other private nonresidential property.
5. Place antennas and towers in residential districts only if locations for which a need has been
demonstrated are not available on existing structures or in nonresidential districts.
6. Place antennas and towers on public property.
An applicant for a new antenna support structure to be located in a residential zoning district
shall demonstrate that a diligent effort has been made to locate the proposed communications
facilities on a government structure, a private institutional structure, or other appropriate existing
structures within a nonresidential zoning district, and that due to valid considerations including
physical constraints, and economic or technological feasibility, no appropriate location is
available. The telecommunications company is required to demonstrate that it contacted the
owners of tall structures within a one mile radius of the site proposed, asked for permission to
install the antenna on those structures, and was denied for reasons other than economic ones.
The information submitted by the applicant shall include a map of the area to be served by the
tower, its relationship to other antenna sites in the applicant's network, and an evaluation of
existing buildings taller than twenty feet (20'), communications towers and water tanks within
one mile of the proposed tower.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 459/467
B. Priority Of Users: Priority for the use of city owned land for antennas and towers will be given to the
following entities in descending order:
1. City of Payette;
2. Public safety agencies, including law enforcement, fire, and ambulance services, which are not
part of the city and private entities with a public safety agreement with the city;
3. Other governmental agencies, for uses which are not related to public safety; and
4. Entities providing licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services including cellular,
personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced
specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services that are marketed to the
general public.
C. Minimum Requirements: The placement of antennas or towers on city owned property must comply
with the following requirements:
1. The antennas or tower will not interfere with the purpose for which the city owned property is
intended;
2. The antennas or tower will have no adverse impact on surrounding private property;
3. The applicant is willing to obtain adequate liability insurance and commit to a lease agreement
which includes equitable compensation for the use of public land and other necessary provisions
and safeguards. The fees shall be established by the council after considering comparable rates
in other cities, potential expenses, risks to the city, and other appropriate factors;
4. The applicant will submit a letter of credit, performance bond, or other security acceptable to the
city to cover the costs of antenna or tower's removal;
5. The antennas or tower will not interfere with other users who have a higher priority as discussed
in subsection B of this section;
6. Upon reasonable notice, the antennas or tower may be required to be removed at the user's
expense;
7. The applicant must reimburse the city for any costs which it incurs because of the presence of
the applicant's antennas or tower;
8. The user must obtain all necessary land use approvals; and
9. The applicant will cooperate with the city's objective to promote collocations and thus limit the
number of separate antenna sites requested.
D. Special Requirements: The use of certain city owned property, such as water tower sites, for
antennas or towers brings with it special concerns due to the unique nature of these sites. The
placement of antennas or towers on these special city owned sites will be allowed only when the
following additional requirements are met:
1. Water Tower Or Reservoir Sites: The city's water towers and reservoirs represent a large public
investment in water pressure stabilization and peak capacity reserves. Protection of the quality
of the city's water supply is of prime importance to the city. As access to the city's water storage
systems increases, so too increases the potential for contamination of the public water supply.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 460/467
For these reasons, the placement of antennas or towers on water tower or reservoir sites will be
allowed only when the city is fully satisfied that the following requirements are met:
a. The applicant's access to the facility will not increase the risks of contamination to the city's
water supply;
b. There is sufficient room on the structure and/or on the grounds to accommodate the
applicant's facility;
c. The presence of the facility will not increase the water tower or reservoir maintenance cost to
the city;
d. The presence of the facility will not be harmful to the health of workers maintaining the water
tower or reservoir; and
e. Facility meets requirements of the source water protection ordinance.
E. Application Process: All applicants who wish to locate an antenna or tower on city owned property
must submit to the city a completed application and detailed plan that complies with the submittal
requirements of this chapter, this title, and other provisions of this code, along with other pertinent
information requested by the city.
F. Termination: The council may cancel any lease if it determines that any one of the following
conditions exists:
1. A potential user with a higher priority cannot find another adequate location and the potential
use would be incompatible with the existing use;
2. A user's frequency broadcast unreasonably interferes with other users of higher priority,
regardless of whether or not this interference was adequately predicted in the technical analysis;
or
3. A user violates any of the standards in this chapter or the conditions attached to the city's lease
or other authorization.
Before acting, the city will provide notice to the user of the intended termination and the reasons
for it, and provide an opportunity for the user to address the council regarding the proposed
action. This procedure need not be followed in emergencies.
G. Reservation Of Right: Notwithstanding the above, the council reserves the right to deny, for any
reason, the use of any or all city owned property by any one or all applicants. (Ord. 1423, 2017)
17.95.100: ADDITIONAL APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. In addition to the information required elsewhere in this title, development applications for personal
wireless facilities, shall include the following supplemental information:
1. Documentation from a qualified and licensed professional engineer showing that the proposed
facility will be in compliance with the FCC standards regarding radio frequency (RF) emissions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 461/467
2. A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which describes the tower height
and design (including a cross section and elevation); documents the height above grade for all
potential mounting positions for collocated antennas and the minimum separation distances
between antennas; describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type of antennas
that it can accommodate; documents what steps the applicant will take to avoid interference with
established public safety telecommunications; includes an engineer's stamp and registration
number; and includes other information necessary to evaluate the request.
3. For all personal wireless facilities, a letter of intent committing the tower owner and his or her
successors to allow the shared use of the tower, as required by this code, if an additional user
agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.
4. Documentation showing that the proposed tower complies with regulations administered by the
federal aviation administration.
5. Written approval of the site location with specific reference to the height of the antenna structure
and any lighting issues, from the federal aviation administration, the chief of the Idaho division of
aeronautics, the Payette airport commission, and the Boise airport commission and an aviation
easement approved by the Boise airport commission.
6. Propagation charts showing existing and proposed transmission coverage at the subject site
and within an area large enough to provide an understanding of why the facility needs to be in
the chosen location.
7. A written analysis demonstrating that the proposed site is the most appropriate site within the
immediate area. For the purposes of this subsection, the analysis shall include all properties
within the search radii stated above. The analysis shall include, but is not limited to, the
following:
a. Description of the surrounding area, including topography;
b. Natural and manmade impediments that would obstruct adequate cellular telephone
transmissions;
c. Physical site constraints that would preclude construction of a cellular telephone facility on any
other site;
d. Technical limitations of the system that limit siting options. (Ord. 1423, 2017)
17.95.110: PERMITS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, reerect, or replace, any tower without first
making application to the city and securing a building/zoning permit.
B. A building/zoning permit shall not be required for antennas and/or towers erected temporarily for
test purposes, for emergency communication, or for broadcast remote pick up operations.
Temporary antennas shall be permitted for a maximum of seventy two (72) hours unless
specifically approved otherwise by the planning and zoning commission.
C. In addition to the findings required and conditions permitted for conditional use permits in this title,
the commission shall make an additional finding concerning the duration of the conditional use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 462/467
permit. Upon finding that the conditional use permit is to be limited in duration, a condition limiting
the duration and the basis for such a condition shall be included within the findings of fact and
conclusions of law for the conditional use permit. (Ord. 1423, 2017)
17.95.120: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING:
A. All personal wireless facilities requiring a conditional use permit shall comply with the conditional
use notice requirements within this code with the following additional requirements:
1. All property owners within five hundred feet (500') of a residential zone, and seven hundred fifty
feet (750') of C, C-1, C-2 zones, and one thousand feet (1,000') of I and T zones, of all property
lines of the site (or lease boundary lines, if applicable) shall be notified of the public hearing by
the city, by mail, a minimum of fifteen (15) days before the scheduled public hearing. The
applicant will be required to provide the names of the property owners to the city. (Ord. 1423,
2017)
17.95.130: HEIGHT:
The height of personal wireless facilities, spires, poles, antennas, steeples, towers, and similar
structures shall be determined by measuring the vertical distance from the point of contact with the
ground to the highest point of the structure, including any vertical projection thereof. When mounted
upon other structures, the combined height of the personal wireless facility, spire, pole, antenna,
steeple, tower, and/or similar structure, including the height of the structure mounted upon, shall be
used to determine height. The height of the buildings shall be determined under this code. (Ord. 1423,
2017)
Title 18
ANNEXATION
Chapter 18.01
ANNEXATION PROCEDURES
18.01.010: PURPOSE:
The city of Payette finds that the establishment of annexation procedures will promote uniformity and
certainty in annexation applications and that the establishment of annexation procedures will promote
the public health, safety and general welfare. Unless there are compelling reasons, the applicant shall
submit plans and applicable studies for all components of the proposed annexation. (Ord. 1279 § 1,
2007)
18.01.020: APPLICABILITY:
Any request for an annexation shall be controlled by the provisions of this chapter. To the extent the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 463/467
procedures of this chapter conflict with the procedures of Idaho Code section 50-222 and other
applicable state statutes, the provisions of state law shall control. If the city initiates an annexation, the
provisions of this chapter shall not govern. (Ord. 1279 § 1, 2007)
18.01.030: APPLICATION PROCESS AND FEES:
An application for an annexation of real property into the city of Payette shall be filed with the Payette
planning and zoning administrator ("administrator") by the owner of the real property or by at least one
holder of an interest in real property, whether said interest be created by earnest money agreement or
otherwise, for which the annexation is proposed. The applicant shall pay the nonrefundable
application fee for the proposed annexation, as established by ordinance, at the time of the filing of
the annexation application. During the review of an application for annexation, an applicant may also
be asked to reimburse the city for city staff time on an hourly basis, as established by ordinance, to
review and comment on the application, to assist and prepare any fiscal impact required for an
annexation and to prepare any necessary reports and findings. If the applicant fails to pay the city fees
on a timely basis, the city is authorized to suspend or if deemed appropriate, terminate the processing
of the annexation application. In the event an application for annexation is approved and an
annexation ordinance is adopted, the applicant will be required to pay for all costs associated with the
filing of the annexation ordinance and the preparation of the legal description and a map prepared in a
draftsmanlike manner that designates the boundaries of annexed property to be recorded with the
county recorder pursuant to state law. (Ord. 1279 § 1, 2007)
18.01.040: CONCURRENT ZONING CLASSIFICATION:
The city shall concurrently with the application for annexation consider an application for a zoning
classification consistent with the requirements (including notice provisions) and standards of the
Payette zoning ordinance. (Ord. 1279 § 1, 2007)
18.01.050: SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
Except as otherwise provided, the application shall include or attach the following items the
administration deems applicable to the annexation:
A. Application fees established by ordinance.
B. A statement of the size of the property in square footage and acres.
C. A description of the proposed project, including the approximate:
1. Number and size of proposed lots;
2. Length and location of the proposed water and sewer mains;
3. Length and location of proposed streets and alleys; and
4. Length and location of the proposed sidewalks.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 464/467
D. A schematic design of the entire project showing the proposed uses, density, streets, alleys,
easements, and proposed size and location of open spaces and parks.
E. A statement describing how the proposed project complies with specific goals and policies of the
Payette comprehensive plan.
F. A statement describing how the proposed project is compatible with adjacent neighborhood(s).
G. A statement describing how the applicable natural resources (e.g., watercourses, springs, streams,
wildlife and access to public lands) and natural hazards (e.g., floodplains and floodways) are
incorporated into proposed project and/or mitigated.
H. A statement describing what contributions and/or dedications the applicant is willing to make as
part of the proposed annexation.
I. A description of how the proposed annexation will protect Payette's established or proposed
wellhead protection zones.
J. A detailed description of how the annexation will impact the existing municipal infrastructure and
services (e.g., water, sewer, streets, library, police, fire and parks).
K. A statement of who will maintain the streets, alleys, parks and utilities (privately and publicly owned
utilities) and how the maintenance of the streets, alleys, parks and utilities (privately and publicly
owned utilities) will be funded.
L. A phasing plan showing the proposed dates of construction and completion of phased construction
for infrastructure, streets, alleys, utilities and all other development. In the case of a phased
project, subsections C and D of this section may be omitted for future phases; however, provisions
shall be made within an annexation agreement for submittal of plans and payment of fees for
future phases.
M. Unless the administrator determines one or more of the following studies are not warranted based
on the size, scope and impact of a proposed annexation, the following studies shall be submitted:
1. Traffic study showing impact on adjacent streets and streets that would serve the proposed
project.
2. Floodplain study (if applicable).
3. Wetland study (if applicable).
4. Wildlife study (if applicable).
5. A level I environmental study showing the presence of any hazardous waste (if applicable).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 465/467
6. Contour map depicting fifteen percent (15%) and twenty five percent (25%) slope lines
measured at two foot (2') intervals (for parcels over 0.5 of an acre).
N. A list of names and mailing addresses of all property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the
external boundaries of the proposed annexation and the names and mailing addresses of all
easement holders within the proposed annexation.
O. A fiscal impact analysis or an updated fiscal impact analysis in accordance with subsection
18.01.090B of this chapter. The analysis may be submitted at the time of the application for
annexation, or when the application is reviewed by the Payette city council ("council"), as set forth
in section 18.01.090 of this chapter (for parcels over 0.5 of an acre).
P. Applicant will provide a municipal well and associated water rights sufficient to supply the land
within the annexation in accordance with the Idaho administrative procedures act (IDAPA) and
Idaho department of environmental quality (DEQ). In lieu of a municipal well, the applicant will pay
a fee as set by resolution to the city for eventual development of a new well. (Ord. 1371, 2012:
Ord. 1279 § 1, 2007)
18.01.060: CERTIFICATION AND REVIEW:
The administrator shall review the application to determine whether the application is complete. Once
the applicant and the city enter into a written agreement for the payment of staff time and once the
administrator finds the application complete, the administrator shall certify the application as complete
and shall submit the application for review and comment to the applicable city departments and
appointed recommending boards.
Following receipt of comments by the city departments and boards, the administrator shall schedule a
meeting with the Payette planning and zoning commission ("commission") at its next regular available
meeting for review of the application by the commission. (Ord. 1279 § 1, 2007)
18.01.070: NOTICE:
The city clerk shall mail to each addressee in the list furnished by the applicant a copy of the notice of
the time and place of the hearing at least fifteen (15) days before the date set for a hearing. The
applicant has the burden of providing to the city an updated and correct list of property owners during
the public hearing process. When notice is required to two hundred (200) or more property owners or
purchasers of record, alternate forms of notice may be provided in lieu of mailed notice. Sufficient
notice shall be deemed to have been provided if the city provides, at the applicant's expense, notice
through a display advertisement at least four inch by two inch (4" x 2") column in size in the official
newspaper of the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, in addition to site posting on all
external boundaries of the site. The applicant shall reimburse the city for all mailing costs and
publication costs associated with providing notice hereunder. Any notice for annexation which is
mailed and published shall contain:
A. The time and place of the hearing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 466/467
B. A brief description of the land which is the subject of the matter to be heard.
C. The purpose of the hearing and the proposed uses for the land.
D. Any other information, required by the administrator, which is necessary or desirable in the public
interest. (Ord. 1279 § 1, 2007)
18.01.080: COMMISSION REVIEW:
A. Subject to its bylaws, the commission shall conduct a public hearing to review the application for
annexation. The commission shall review the particular facts and circumstances of a proposed
annexation for the purpose of determining:
1. Whether the proposed annexation will be harmonious and in accordance with specific goals and
policies of applicable components of the Payette comprehensive plan; and
2. Whether the proposed annexation generally complies with the Payette comprehensive plan. The
commission shall also make a recommendation that the property sought to be annexed should
be zoned as one or more particular zoning districts, as more fully described in the Payette
zoning ordinance.
B. The commission shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law relating to the application's
general compliance with the Payette comprehensive plan and to the commission's
recommendation for zoning. The commission shall forward those findings and conclusions in
writing to the council and the applicant. (Ord. 1279 § 1, 2007)
18.01.090: COUNCIL REVIEW:
A. Conduct And Notice Of Council Hearing: Upon receipt of the commission's findings of fact and
conclusions of law, the council shall schedule a public hearing to review the application for
annexation. Notice of the public hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as the notice for a
commission hearing pursuant to section 18.01.070 of this chapter. The council shall have the right
to request further information deemed necessary by the council at any time during the
proceedings.
B. Fiscal Impact: To assist the council in the determination whether an annexation will have any
negative fiscal impact, the council may, in its discretion, require the applicant for annexation, at the
applicant's expense, to submit a fiscal analysis or an updated fiscal analysis by a qualified and
independent person or firm acceptable by the council and the applicant and in a format acceptable
by the council, to determine the proposed annexation's impact and to recommend the base
amount of annexation fees. The council retains the right to require further monetary or
nonmonetary contributions for additional costs associated with the annexation. The applicant has
the right to seek the city's approval of such a fiscal impact study at any point in the annexation
process.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=822 467/467
C. Findings: During the public hearing process of the application for annexation, the council shall
make its own findings of fact and conclusions of law to determine:
1. Whether the proposed application will be harmonious and in accordance with specific goals and
policies of applicable components of the Payette comprehensive plan; and
2. Whether the proposed annexation generally complies with the Payette comprehensive plan; and
3. To the extent possible, whether the proposed annexation will have a negative fiscal impact upon
the existing citizens of Payette at the time of an annexation and in the future.
If the council finds general compliance with the Payette comprehensive plan, the council shall
then consider the application for a zoning classification and consider any and all factors it
deems, in its discretion, important to determine whether an application for annexation shall be
granted or denied. If the commission made negative findings related to the comprehensive plan
under section 18.01.080 of this chapter and therefore did not make a recommendation on zoning
classification for the property sought to be annexed, but the council subsequently made
favorable findings related to the comprehensive plan and wishes to proceed with the annexation,
the council shall remand the proceedings to the commission for its recommendation on zoning
classification.
D. Decision: The council has the discretionary right to approve, approve with conditions or deny an
application for annexation. In addition, the council is authorized to require, as a condition of
approval, that the applicant and the city enter into an annexation or development agreement
providing for the terms and conditions of an approved annexation. In the event a subsequent
development proposal materially differs from the development shown in the approved annexation,
the annexation agreement shall provide that the proposed development may be denied, that the
applicant shall be responsible for any increased annexation fees and/or that the property may be
deannexed. There shall be no right of an appeal by an applicant or by an affected party from an
adverse recommendation by the commission or from an adverse decision of the council on an
annexation application. If the council elects to approve the application for annexation with or
without conditions, the council shall also establish the appropriate zoning district(s) for the annexed
property in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Payette zoning ordinance. (Ord. 1279
§ 1, 2007)