City of Salmon
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
Subject Chapter
Official City Code .............................................. 1
Saving Clause .................................................. 2
Definitions ........................................................ 3
General Penalty ............................................... 4
Official and Corporate Provisions ..................... 5
Mayor and City Council .................................... 6
City Officers and Employees ............................ 7
Clerk ................................................................ 7A
City Treasurer ................................................ 7B
City Attorney ................................................... 7C
Public Works Superintendent ......................... 7D
City Engineer .................................................. 7E
City Personnel System ..................................... 8
Elections .......................................................... 9
City Initiative and Referendum ......................... 10
City Planning and Development ....................... 11
City of Salmon
1-1-1 1-1-3
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE: Upon the adoption by the City Council, this City Code
is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of Salmon. This City Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the SALMON CITY CODE and is hereby published by authority of the Council and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the City as provided in Section 1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this City Code by title in any legal documents. (2007 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE: The City Code, as hereby presented in
printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section 1-2-1 of this Title. (2007 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS: Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the
section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall immediately be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such
City of Salmon
1-1-3 1-1-4
replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the City Code. (2007 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS: It shall be deemed unlawful for any
person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk. Any person having custody of a copy of the City Code shall make every effort to maintain said Code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered or made available to such person through the office of the City Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to the office of the Clerk when directed to do so by order of the City Council. (2007 Code)
City of Salmon
1-2-1 1-2-2
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways and Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES: All general
ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the City; and all special ordinances. (2007 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES: No
ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as the City Code may contain provisions for such matters, in which case, this City Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2007 Code)
City of Salmon
1-2-3 1-2-4
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
B. This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this City Code. (2007 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE: If any section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2007 Code)
City of Salmon
1-3-1 1-3-2
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
A. Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the singular number only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the opposite gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this City Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
B. The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been changed in the content of this City Code to “Title”, "Chapter", "Section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory; “may" is discretionary. (2007 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL: Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have such meanings
City of Salmon
1-3-2 1-3-2
herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either expressly or by implication.
CITY: The City of Salmon, County of Lemhi, State of Idaho.
CODE: The City Code of the City of Salmon.
COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the City Council of the City of Salmon.
COUNTY: The County of Lemhi, State of Idaho.
DAY/MONTH/ "Day" shall be any twenty four (24) hour period
QUARTER/YEAR: from midnight to midnight; "month" shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise expressed; "quarter" shall mean any three (3) month period, ending with the last day of March, June, September and December; and "year" shall mean any one calendar year unless otherwise expressed.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of Salmon".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the City shall commence on October 1 of each year1.
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
1 I.C. §50-1001.
City of Salmon
1-3-2 1-3-2
INFRACTION: A civil public offense, not constituting a crime, punishable by a penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and for which no incarceration may be imposed1.
KNOWINGLY: "Knowingly" imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or omission within the provisions of this Code. It does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense not defined as a felony or infraction under State law 2.
NEGLIGENCE: The terms "neglect", "negligence", “negligent” and "negligently” import a want of such attention to the nature or probable consequences of the act or omission as a prudent person ordinarily bestows in acting in such person's own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of inhabitants of the City, or any activity which by its perpetuation can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or persons within the community.
OATH/SWEAR: The word "oath" includes "affirmation" and the word "swear" includes the word "affirm". Every mode of oral statement under oath or affirmation is embraced in the term "testify" and every written one in the term "depose".
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part
1 I.C. §§18-111 and 18-113A. 2 I.C. §§18-111 and 18-113.
City of Salmon
1-3-2 1-3-2
of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words “of the City of Salmon”.
OFFICIAL TIME: Whenever used, this term shall mean standard time or daylight savings time as may be in current use within the City.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
PERSONAL Includes every description of money, goods,
PROPERTY: chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or interest therein.
PROPERTY: Includes both real and personal property.
REAL ESTATE, REAL Includes lands, tenements, hereditaments, water
PROPERTY, LAND: rights, possessory rights and claims.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
City of Salmon
1-3-2 1-3-3
merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
SIGNATURE: Includes any name, mark or sign written with the intent to authenticate any instrument of writing.
STATE: The State of Idaho.
STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT OR As applied to a building or land, shall include any
OCCUPANT: person who occupies the whole or any part of such
building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: The terms “wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN May include printing and any other mode of
WRITING: representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such person's proper mark. (2007 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES: The catchlines of the several sections of the
City Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. (2007 Code)
City of Salmon
1-4-1 1-4-1
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability of Officer
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY1:
A. Misdemeanor: Unless specifically provided elsewhere, any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this City Code deemed a misdemeanor may be fined in a sum not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) for any offense and may be confined in jail for a period of not more than six (6) months. Either or both such fine and imprisonment may be imposed; and in addition thereto, any person so convicted shall pay such costs as the court may assess.
B. Infraction: When the offense is designated as an infraction by any section or provision of this City Code or by State law, it is punishable only by a penalty not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and no incarceration may be imposed.
C. Criminal or Civil Penalty: Any city which is participating in a federally mandated program, wherein penalties or enforcement remedies are required by the terms of participation in the program, may enforce such requirements by ordinance, to include a criminal or civil monetary penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for criminal offenses not to exceed six (6) months or to include both a fine and imprisonment for criminal offenses. (2007 Code)
1 I.C. §50-302.
City of Salmon
1-4-2 1-4-3
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. The penalty provided in this Chapter shall be applicable to every section of this City Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
B. In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this City Code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
C. Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this City Code and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply. (2007 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS: No provision of this City Code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so
construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the City Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (2007 Code)
City of Salmon
1-5-1 1-5-1B
CHAPTER 5
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-5-1: Corporate Limits
1-5-1A City Map Adopted
1-5-1B Annexation Ordinances
1-5-2: Corporate Seal
1-5-3: Official Depositories
1-5-4: Official Newspaper
1-5-1: CORPORATE LIMITS: The corporate limits of the City are described in an updated legal description compiled by Wade
Surveying from the original 1987 legal description and field notes, and is recorded by the Lemhi County Clerk. The updated legal description and amendments thereof shall be kept on file in the office of the Lemhi County Clerk, and a copy of such kept in the office of the City Clerk. (Amd. Ord. 10-764; 8-18-2010)
1-5-1A: CITY MAP ADOPTED: A certain map recorded by the Lemhi County Clerk compiled and drawn by Wade Surveying from the
updated legal description and field notes as shown thereon and bearing official signatures is declared to be the official map of the City. The original said recorded map and amendments thereof shall be kept on file in the office of the Lemhi County Clerk, and a copy of such in the office of the City Clerk.
As the legal description of the corporate boundaries of the City are from time to time legally changed, said changes shall be drawn upon the recorded map of the City in accordance with applicable provisions of Title 50, Chapter 13 of the Idaho Code, and shall be so indicated by amending the legal description and recorded map. The cost for such updates to the legal description and map shall be the responsibility of the petitioner for the changes.
1-5-1B: ANNEXATION ORDINANCES: As additions to the city are from time to time legally annexed or de-annexed, existing or
future annexation ordinances shall be recorded and kept on file in the office of the Lemhi County Clerk, and a copy of such in the office of the City Clerk.
City of Salmon
1-5-2 1-5-4
1-5-2: CORPORATE SEAL:
A. Design: The Corporate Seal of the City shall be circular in form with four (4) circles. The outer circle shall be a line one and fifteen-sixteenths inches (115/16) in diameter. The next inner circle shall be a rope design and shall be one and thirteen-sixteenths inches (113/16) in diameter. The third inner circle shall be a line one and eleven-sixteenths inches (111/16) in diameter. The inner circle shall be a dotted circle one and three-sixteenths inches (13/16) in diameter. On the top half of the Seal, between the third circle and the inner circle, in Roman type, shall appear the words "CITY OF SALMON, IDAHO". In the lower half of the Seal, between the third circle and the inner circle, in Gothic style type, shall appear the words "INCORPORATED A.D. 1892". In the top center of the Seal shall appear the miners' crossed pick and shovel. In the center of the circle shall appear a large salmon and, below this, to the left, shall be a farmer's plow, and to the right a sheaf of grain. (1959 Code §1-4-1)
B. Adoption of Seal: The Seal described hereinabove in this Section is hereby adopted as a Corporate Seal of the City of Salmon, Idaho. (1959 Code §1-4-2)
C. Custodian of Seal: The Clerk of the City shall be the custodian of the Corporate Seal of the City and shall affix such Seal's imprint upon all official documents, records and licenses.1 (1959 Code §1-4-3, amd. 2007 Code)
1-5-3: OFFICIAL DEPOSITORIES: Any FDIC-insured institution, along with the Local Government Investment Pool, are hereby
designated as the official depositories of the funds for the City. The City Treasurer/Finance Director is hereby ordered, required and directed to keep monies belonging to, or in the care of, the City, coming into his or her hands and into the hands of the City, in the best interest of the City, with City Cuoncil approval. (1959 Code §1-6-1; amd. 2007 Code; amd. Ord. 12-777; 1-4-2012)
1-5-4: OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER: The Recorder-Herald, a newspaper of general circulation, is hereby designated the official
newspaper of the City. (1959 Code §1-5-1)
1 See also subsection 1-7A-2J of this Title
City of Salmon
1-6-1 1-6-2
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Election of Officers
1-6-2: Mayor
1-6-3: Councilmembers
1-6-4: Salaries of Elective Officers
1-6-5: Meetings of the City Council
1-6-6: Quorum, Attendance of Members
1-6-7: Ordinances of the City
1-6-1: ELECTION OF OFFICERS: The City Council of the City shall be composed of a Mayor and six (6)
Councilmembers who shall be elected at the time and in the manner as provided by the State1. (2007 Code)
1-6-2: MAYOR:
A. Qualifications: Any person shall be eligible to hold the office of Mayor who is a qualified elector of the City at the time of his or her election and remains a qualified elector during his or her term of office.
B. Term of Office: The term of office of the Mayor shall be for a period of four (4) years, except as otherwise specifically provided. The Mayor shall take office at the time and in the manner provided for installation of Councilmembers.
C. Vacancy in Office: In case of a temporary vacancy in the office of Mayor due to absence or disability, the President of the Council shall exercise the office of Mayor during such disability or temporary absence and until the Mayor shall return. When a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor by reason of death,
1 I.C. §§50-701 and 50-401 et seq.
City of Salmon
1-6-2 1-6-4
resignation or permanent disability, the City Council shall fill the vacancy from within or without the Council as may be deemed in the best interests of the City, which appointee shall serve until the next general City election, at which election a Mayor shall be elected for the full four (4) year term.
D. Powers and Duties: The Mayor shall have those powers and duties as provided by State law1. (2007 Code)
1-6-3: COUNCILMEMBERS:
A. Qualifications; Terms of Office: Any person shall be eligible to hold the office of Councilmember of the City who is, at the time of election, and remains a qualified elector under the Constitution and laws of the State. Each Councilmember elected at the general City election shall be installed at the first meeting in January following election.
B. Vacancies in Office: A vacancy on the Council shall be filled by appointment made by the Mayor with the consent of the Council, which appointee shall serve only until the next general City election, at which election the vacancy shall be filled for the balance of the original term.
C. Powers and Duties: The City Council shall have such powers and duties as are now or may hereafter be provided under the general laws of the State. (2007 Code)
1-6-4: SALARIES OF ELECTIVE OFFICERS:
A. Mayor: The salary of the Mayor shall be as determined from time to time by the City Council.
B. Councilmembers: The salary of each member of the City Council shall be as determined from time to time by the City Council. (2007 Code)
1 I.C. §50-602 et seq.
City of Salmon
1-6-5 1-6-6
1-6-5: MEETINGS OF THE CITY COUNCIL:
A. Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the first and third Wednesday of each month at six o'clock (6:00) P.M., at the City Hall. If such day be a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held on the day following such holiday. The Mayor of the Council may convene the Council at any time. (Amd. Ord. 02-629, 4-03-02)
B. Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the Mayor upon notice to each councilmember. One-half (½) plus one of the Council shall have the power to call special meetings of the City Council, the object of which shall be submitted to the Councilmembers, in writing, at least twenty four (24) hours before the meeting. Notice of the meeting shall also be posted. Special meetings shall be held at such place in the City as is designated in the notice. (Ord. 90-535, 12-17-90; 2007 Code)
C. Emergency Meetings: Emergency meetings may be called for an emergency which is hereby declared to exist by the Mayor upon notice to each Councilmember. (Ord. 90-535, 12-17-90)
D. Meetings Open to the Public: All meetings of the City Council shall be open to the public; except, that executive sessions may be closed upon a two-thirds (2/3) vote recorded in the minutes of the meeting by individual vote pursuant to Idaho Code, section 67-2345.
E. Presiding Officer: In the event of the Mayor's absence, the City Council meetings shall be presided over by a Council President to be selected by the Council from its members each January. Such position shall rotate yearly. (2007 Code)
1-6-6: QUORUM, ATTENDANCE OF MEMBERS: At all meetings of the City Council, a majority of the members shall
constitute a quorum to do business. Whenever at or during any meeting less than a quorum shall be present, the members present may, by order entered upon the minutes, direct any absent member or members to attend forthwith or at a stated time and place and cause said direction to be communicated orally or in writing to, or served upon, such absent member or members. Successive directions may be ordered, communicated or served. (2007 Code)
City of Salmon
1-6-7 1-6-7
1-6-7: ORDINANCES OF THE CITY: All ordinances of the City shall be presented and voted upon in the manner and style and shall be
subject to the terms and conditions of Idaho Code, section 50-901 et seq. (2007 Code)
City of Salmon
1-7-1 1-7-3
CHAPTER 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Appointment and Removal of Officers
1-7-2: Terms of Office (Repealed)
1-7-3: Bonds of Officers
1-7-4: Salaries of Appointive Officers
1-7-5: Code of Ethics
1-7-1: APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF OFFICERS:
A. Appointment: The Mayor shall, with the consent of the City Council, appoint a Clerk, Treasurer/Finance Director, Attorney, Chief of Police, Superintendent of Public Works, Engineer/Surveyor, and other officers as may be deemed advisable for the efficient operation of the City. (1959 Code §1-11-1; 2007 Code)
B. Removal: Any appointive officer may be removed by the Mayor for any cause by him or her deemed sufficient, but such removal shall be by and with the affirmative vote of one-half (1/2) plus one of the members of the full Council; provided, that the City Council, by the unanimous vote of all its members, may, upon its own initiative, remove any appointive officer. (2007 Code)
1-7-2: TERMS OF OFFICE: Repealed (Ord 15-804, 09-16-15)
1-7-3: BONDS OF OFFICERS: The following officers shall give bonds to the City with two (2) or more sufficient sureties in
the penal sums as follows; provided, that surety bonds may
be furnished at the expense of the City in lieu of personal bonds:
City Clerk $200,000.00
City Treasurer/Finance Director $200,000.00
(2007 Code)
City of Salmon
1-7-4 1-7-5
1-7-4: SALARIES OF APPOINTIVE OFFICERS: Salaries of
appointive officers shall be as set from time to time by the City Council. (1959 Code § 1-11-2; 2007 Code)
1-7-5: CODE OF ETHICS:
A. Declaration of Policy:
1. The public judges its government by the way public officials and employees conduct themselves in the posts to which they are elected or appointed.
2. The people have a right to expect that every public official and employee will conduct himself or herself in a manner that will tend to preserve public confidence in and respect for the government he or she represents. Such confidence and respect can best be promoted if every public official and employee, whether paid or unpaid, and whether elected or appointed, will uniformly:
a. Treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness and equality under the law; and
b. Avoid both actual and potential conflicts between their private self-interest and the public interest.
B. Definitions: The terms used in this Section are hereby defined as follows:
FINANCIAL Any interest which shall yield, directly or
INTEREST: indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit (other than the duly authorized salary or compensation for his or her services to the City) to the official or employee or to any person employing or retaining services of the official or employee.
OFFICIAL OR Any person elected or appointed to, or EMPLOYEE: employed or retained by, any public office
or public body of the City whether paid or unpaid and whether part-time or full-time.
City of Salmon
1-7-5 1-7-5
PERSON: Any person, firm, association, group, partnership or corporation, or any combination thereof.
PERSONAL Any interest arising from blood or marriage
INTEREST: relationships or from close business or political association whether or not any financial interest is involved.
PUBLIC BODY: Any agency, board, body, commission, committee, department or office of the City.
C. Fair and Equal Treatment:
1. Impartiality: No official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large.
2. Use of Public Property: No official or employee shall request, use or permit the use of any publicly-owned or publicly-supported property, vehicle, equipment, labor or service for the personal convenience or the private advantage of himself or herself or any other person. This rule shall not be deemed to prohibit an official or employee from requesting, using or permitting the use of publicly-owned or publicly-supported property, vehicle, equipment, material, labor or service which it is the general practice to make available to the public at large or which are provided as a matter of stated public policy for the use of public officials and employees in the conduct of official business.
D. Conflict of Interest:
1. Public Disclosure of Financial or Personal Interest:
a. No official or employee, either on his or her own behalf or any other person, shall have any financial or public interest in any business or transaction with any public body unless he
City of Salmon
1-7-5 1-7-5
or she shall first make full public disclosures of the nature and extent of such interest.
b. Whenever the performance of official duties shall require any official or employee to deliberate and vote on any matter involving his or her financial or personal interest, he or she shall publicly disclose the nature and extent of such interest and disqualify himself or herself from participating in the deliberation as well as in the voting.
c. No official or employee shall engage in private employment with, or render services for, any private person who has business transactions with any public body unless he or she shall first make full public disclosure of the nature and extent of such employment or services.
2. Representation of Private Persons: No official or employee shall appear on behalf of any private person, other than himself or herself, before any public body in the City.
3. Receiving Gifts: No official or employee shall accept any gift, whether in the form of money, thing, favor, loan or promise, that would not be offered or given to him or her if he or she were not an official or employee.
4. Disclosing Confidential Information: No official or employee shall, without prior formal authorization of the public body having jurisdiction, disclose any confidential information concerning any other official or employee, or any other person, or any property or governmental affairs of the City.
5. Nepotism: No elected official shall appoint or vote for appointment any person related to him or her by blood or marriage to any clerkship, office, position, employment or duty when the salary, wages, pay or compensation is to be paid out of public funds as provided in section 59-701, Idaho Code. (2007 Code)
City of Salmon
1-7A-1 1-7A-2
CHAPTER 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
ARTICLE A. CLERK
SECTION:
1-7A-1: Appointment
1-7A-2: Duties and Responsibilities
1-7A-3: Claims Against the City
1-7A-1: APPOINTMENT:The Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the Council. The City Clerk may be removed by the mayor for any cause by him deemed sufficient; but such removal shall be by and with the affirmative vote of one half (1/2) plus one (1) of the members of the full council; provided, that the city council, by the unanimous vote of all its members, may upon their own initiative remove any appointive officer. (1959 Code §1-12-1; amd. Ord. 15-804, 09-16-15)
1-7A-2: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Duties: The Clerk performs administrative and management work in serving as Clerk to the City Council; directs records management and City Code maintenance; directs business, animal licensing and Code enforcement; directs the billing and collections for City sewer and water utilities; directs the conduct of municipal elections for the City; conducts City Business; other related work as required. (2007 Code; amd. Ord. 10-767, 10-20-2010)
B. City Council and Municipal Elections: The Clerk directs and approves the compilation and distribution of weekly City Pre-Council and Council agendas, minutes and public hearing schedules; attends City Council meetings to record minutes, maintains all exhibits for the public record, and provides other assistance for the Mayor and Council as needed; maintains a legislative history file of council actions; maintains the City’s Internet page which allows public access to Council minutes, agendas and other City information and records; serves as “Official” for signing contracts and agreements, notices and the distribution and record keeping for Urban Renewal Plan changes, LID’s, etc.,
City of Salmon
1-7A-2 1-7A-3
ensures proper legal notice and publication; budgets, monies for election expenses during election years; accepts and certifies candidate petitions; hires precinct workers; arranges polling places; announces official election returns; administers oaths of office. (2007 Code; amd. Ord. 10-767, 10-20-2010)
C. Licensing and Records Management: The Clerk serves as Licensing Officer to manage the procession of all City business regulatory licenses; develops policies and procedures for issuing business and occupational licenses; oversees the enforcement of licensing code requirements and analyzes fee schedules and community licensing trends; participates on community committees to address licensing issues; manages the City’s Records Archival Center; supervises the City’s Document Information System and the conversion of City records to electronic format, accessibility, storage and preservation; develops policies and procedures for automated City-wide records management; directs maintenance of the City Code book.
D. Office Management: Develops and manages the City Clerk’s office budget; supervises clerical staff; develops office policies and procedures; coordinates operating procedures with other departments; provides information to the public and media through interviews or in written format.
Manages and coordinates the collection of water and sewer payments. Communicates with the Public Works Department in resolving service and payment issues.
Manages and coordinates the sale of cemetery plots, burial, etc. with the Cemetery Sexton.
Manages and coordinates the work activity of the Utility Clerk.
(Ord. 10-767, 10-20-2010)
E. Custodian of Official Seal: The Clerk shall be the custodian of the Official Seal of the City1 . (1959 Code § 1-12-7)
1-7A-3: CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY:
A. Filing; Approval: All claims against the City must be filed in writing with the Clerk. Claims must present a full account of the
1 See also subsection 1-5-2C of this Title.
City of Salmon
1-7A-3 1-7A-3
items and damages. (1959 Code §1-12-13 amd. 2007 Code)
B. Claims for Damages: All claims for damages against the City must be filed with the Clerk within 180 days after such time as the damage is alleged to have occurred. All such claims shall specify the time, place, character and cause of damage. The Clerk shall oversee submission of documents to the City’s Risk Management Program. (2007 Code)
C. Payment of Claims: Final decision of payment or denial of claims will be made by the City’s Risk Management Program. (2007 Code)
City of Salmon
1-7B-1 1-7B-2
CHAPTER 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
ARTICLE B. CITY TREASURER/FINANCE DIRECTOR
SECTION:
1-7B-1: Appointment
1-7B-2: Duties
1-7B-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE: The City Treasurer/ Finance Director shall be appointed by the Mayor
subject to the approval of the City Council. The City Treasurer/Finance
Director may be removed by the mayor for any cause by him deemed
sufficient; but such removal shall be by and with the affirmative vote of one
half (1/2) plus one (1) of the members of the full council; provided, that the
city council, by the unanimous vote of all its members, may upon their own
initiative remove any appointive officer.
(2007 Code; amd. Ord. 15-804, 09-16-15)
1-7B-2: DUTIES:
A. Generally: The Treasurer/Finance Director shall oversee the City’s financial management programs, prepare and manage enterprise, capital and operating budgets, implement fiscal policies and administer fiscal controls and develop and oversee the City’s internal finance policy. The Treasurer/Finance Director shall coordinate end-of-year auditing activities with designated auditors and execute other fiscal duties. The Treasurer/Finance Director will adhere to all City and State policies, regulations and ordinances that affect the City’s fiscal operations; exercising supervision over permanent and temporary staff as assigned and provide fiscal assistance to other department directors as required.
B. Accounts and Funds: The City Treasurer/Finance Director shall:
1. Accurate Accounting: Administer all aspects of the City budget in accordance with applicable governmental accounting standards to include fund accounting, revenue administration and asset
City of Salmon
1-7B-2 1-7B-2
inventories. Be responsible for development and maintenance of all fiscal records. Administer and manage all aspects of the City’s
fiscal software program. Schedule, coordinate and implement
municipal year-end fiscal closing activities and ensure compliance with required auditing principles and regulations.
2. Receive and Disburse Funds: Coordinate receipt or payment of funds with State agencies, Lemhi County, Federal agencies and all other organizations with which the City does business. Manage all municipal debt accounts to include taxes, leases, bonds, warrants, coupons and loans. Be responsible for investment of funds, debt management, grants administration, City-owned utility billing operations, business licensing and purchasing. Manage all accounts payable and receivable and disburse monies upon approval by the Salmon City Council.
3. Demand and Receive Funds: Manage daily and monthly city finances that include the actions of posting, balancing, reconciliation and depositing and administer all aspects of the City’s utility fiscal operations. Demand and receive all monies and fees owing to the City whenever any person is indebted to the City in any manner, and the means of collection of such debt is not otherwise provided for by law. When any claim shall not be collectible by other methods, the Finance Director shall report the same to the City Attorney for prosecution.
C. Monthly Report: The Treasurer/Finance Director shall make a detailed report to the City Council during the first meeting of each month showing the business of his or her office during the last month closed, showing the balance on hand to the credit of different funds, the amounts received during the month and on what account, together with such information as may be required by the City Council.
D. Employee Payroll and Benefits: The Treasurer/Finance Director shall prepare and oversee employee payroll operations, manage employee benefits, classifications, sick leave and vacation accrual, insurance, personal information, exemptions, and deductions. Management of all employee fiscal inquiries and oversight of the City’s Risk Management program.
E. Deliver Records to Successor: The Treasurer/Finance Director shall deliver to his or her successor in office all material, records and resources of the office. (1995 Code, amd. 2007 Code)
City of Salmon
1-7C-1 1-7C-2
CHAPTER 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
ARTICLE C. CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-7C-1: Appointment
1-7C-2: Duties
1-7C-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE: The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the
approval of the Council. The City Attorney may be removed by the
mayor for any cause by him deemed sufficient; but such removal shall be by
and with the affirmative vote of one half (1/2) plus one (1) of the members of
the full council; provided, that the city council, by the unanimous vote of all
its members, may upon their own initiative remove any appointive officer.
(2007 Code; amd. Ord. 15-804, 09-16-15)
1-7C-2: DUTIES:
A. Legal Advisor: The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the City and shall render advice on all legal questions affecting the City whenever requested to do so by any City official. Upon request by the Mayor or by the Council, the City Attorney shall reduce any such opinion to writing.
B. Special Assessments and Condemnation Proceedings: It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to see to the completion of all special assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings.
C. Ordinance and Document Preparation: It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to draft or supervise the phraseology of any contract, lease or other documents or instruments to which the City may be a party and, upon request of the City Council, to draft ordinances covering any subjects within the power of the City. (2007 Code)
City of Salmon
1-7D-1 1-7D-2
CHAPTER 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
ARTICLE D. PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT
SECTION:
1-7D-1: Appointment
1-7D-2: Duties
1-7D-1: APPOINTMENT: The Mayor may appoint, with approval of the City Council, a Public Works Superintendent. The Public Works Superintendent may be removed by the mayor for any cause by him deemed sufficient; but such removal shall be by and with the affirmative vote of one half (1/2) plus one (1) of the members of the full council; provided, that the city council, by the unanimous vote of all its members, may upon their own initiative remove any appointive officer. (1959 Code §1-17-1; amd. Ord. 15-804, 09-16-15)
1-7D-2: DUTIES: The Public Works Superintendent will be responsible for coordinating and overseeing the
administrative and executive activities of the Salmon Public Works
Department:
A. Streets and Alleys: Supervise the grading, surfacing, repairs and maintenance of all streets and alleys.
B. Sewer: Supervise the installation and maintenance of all sewer lines in the City except the installation of sewer projects which are accomplished by contract.
C. Water: Supervise the installation and maintenance of all water mains and water services, except the installation of water mains so accomplished by contract.
D. Equipment: Have charge of and supervise the repair and upkeep of all City owned equipment.
E. Employment and Supervision: Employ, with the consent of the City
City of Salmon
1-7D-2 1-7D-2
Council, such help as is needed to carry on the work of the City, including contractor and volunteer recruitment, such help to be
directly under his or her supervision. Supervision over permanent and temporary staff as assigned.
F. Budget: Oversight and management of the Public Works budget, grant accounting and management, department materials and professional services procurement and expenditures,
G. Other Duties: Management and maintenance of traffic signage, City parks, city-owned lands, the city cemetery and the storm water collection system. Project and program development and oversight; adherance to all Federal, City and State Policies, regulations and ordinances. Development of key partnership agreements for on-going public works programs, projects and events. Completing planned and assigned projects; developing and implementing a department strategic plan that addresses long-term community public works needs and goals. Conducting public works communication initiatives that include writing press releases, interacting with the public and the media, website maintenance, conducting public meetings and responding to resident, visitor, agency and partner comments and concerns. Coordinating projects with partners and volunteers, facilitating committee meetings, workshops and public meetings as required. Be responsible for the accomplishment of such other work of the City which the City Council may from time to time assign to him or her.
H. Reports: Make such reports as are requested by the Mayor or the City Council. (1959 Code §1-17-2, amd. 2007 Code)
City of Salmon
1-7E-1 1-7E-2
CHAPTER 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
ARTICLE E. CITY ENGINEER/SURVEYOR
SECTION:
1-7E-1: Appointment: Term of Office
1-7E-2: Qualifications
1-7E-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE: The Mayor may
appoint, with the approval of the Council, an engineer/surveyor who shall hold office for the duration of such appointment or until such time as removed by the Mayor with the concurrence of the Council. (1959 Code §1-18-1, amd. 2007 Code)
1-7E-2: QUALIFICATIONS: Any person appointed as Engineer/Surveyor shall be a competent engineer and
surveyor and shall be duly licensed as such by the State of Idaho. (1959 Code §1-18-3, amd. 2007 Code)
City of Salmon
1-8-1 1-8-1
CHAPTER 8
CITY PERSONNEL SYSTEM
SECTION:
1-8-1: Purpose
1-8-2: Classified Service
1-8-3: Administration
1-8-4: Personnel Committee
1-8-5: Adoption of Personnel Policies and Procedures
1-8-6: Agreements Authorized
1-8-7: Prohibition Against Political Activity
1-8-8: Unlawful Acts Prohibited
1-8-1: PURPOSE: The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a system of personnel administration. The system herein
established shall be consistent with the following principles:
A. Recruiting, Selecting and Advancing Employees: Recruiting, selecting and advancing employees on the basis of their relative ability, knowledge and skills, including open competition of qualified applicants for initial appointment;
B. Establishing Pay Rates: Establishing pay rates consistent with the principles of providing equal or comparable pay for equal or comparable work;
C. Training Employees: Training employees, as needed, to assure high quality performance;
D. Retaining Employees: Retaining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their performance, correcting inadequate performance and separating employees whose inadequate performance cannot be corrected;
E. Fair Treatment of Applicants and Employees: Assuring fair treatment of applicants and employees in all aspects of personnel
City of Salmon
1-8-1 1-8-2
administration without regard to political affiliation, race, color, creed, national origin or ancestry, age, sex, religion, handicap, sexual orientation or affectional preference, or marital status. (Ord. 91-543, 12-18-91)
1-8-2: CLASSIFIED SERVICE:
A. Exceptions: The classified service shall be a permanent service to which this law shall apply and shall include all employees serving in continuing positions, now existing or hereafter established, except the following:
1. Members of elective offices;
2. Members of appointed boards or commissions, Public Works Superintendent, Clerk, Police Chief, Finance Director, and City Attorney;
3. Persons employed to conduct a temporary or special inquiry, investigation or examination on behalf of the City Council or a committee thereof;
4. Volunteer personnel who receive regular compensation;
5. Persons employed to work less than full time;
6. Temporary positions scheduled for less than one year's duration unless specifically covered by the action of the City Council;
7. Persons performing work under contract for the jurisdiction who are not carried on the payroll as employees;
8. These exceptions are not to imply that these positions (subsections A1 through A7) will not adhere to the policies and procedures set forth in the adopted policies and procedures of the City.
B. Use of Service: Nothing herein shall be construed as precluding the City from filling any accepted position in the manner in which positions in the classified service are filled. (Ord. 91-543, 12-18-91, amd. 2007 Code)
City of Salmon
1-8-3 1-8-3
1-8-3: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Designation of Position for Duties of Personnel Officer: At the first regular Council meeting after the beginning of a new fiscal year, the City Council shall designate the position to which the duties of Personnel Officer are to be assigned. The incumbent in the position so designated may have other staff members designated to assist him or her or may designate any member of his or her staff to assist.
B. Personnel Officer Duties and Responsibilities: The Personnel Officer is responsible for the personnel administration system and shall direct all of its administrative and technical activities. His or her duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Encourage and Exercise Leadership: Encourage and exercise leadership in the development of effective personnel administration practices within the jurisdiction;
2. Investigation of Law and Policies: Investigate from time to time the operation and effect of this law and the policies made thereunder and to report the findings and recommendations to the City Council;
3. Personnel Records: Establish and maintain comprehensive personnel records for each employee; including for each employee the classification, pay rate, date of employment and other relevant data;
4. Advise City Council: Advise the City Council on matters affecting the most effective use of human resources;
5. Annual Report: Make an annual report to the City Council regarding the status of their personnel administration program. Such report shall be submitted at least two (2) months prior to beginning of each fiscal year;
6. Programs for Improvement: Foster and develop programs for the improvement of employee effectiveness, including training, safety, health, welfare, supportive services and other appropriate areas;
7. Enforcement of Policies: Apply and enforce this law and the policies thereunder and to perform any other lawful acts which
City of Salmon
1-8-3 1-8-5
may be necessary to carry out the purposes of the provisions of this law.
C. Personnel Committee: The Personnel Committee shall with the assistance of the department heads draft, or cause to be drafted the personnel policies and procedures for the City. Such rules shall become effective upon passage of an appropriate ordinance.
D. Meetings: The City Council shall hold two (2) meetings during the fiscal year with all City employees, one meeting in October, the other in March. The meeting will be to discuss the policies and procedures of the City noting any changes or problems therein. (Ord. 91 -543, 12-18-91)
1-8-4: PERSONNEL COMMITTEE: The City Council may appoint a
Personnel Committee made up of Councilmembers, the City Clerk, and the Personnel Officer (unless the City Clerk is appointed to handle the duties of Personnel Officer) to serve in an advisory capacity in personnel problems; to conduct grievance hearings for classified employees upon their request and to render final decisions to the City Council; and to hear appeals in the case of any employee in the classified service being suspended, reduced or removed and to report its decisions to the City Council. (Ord. 91-543, 12-18-91)
1-8-5: ADOPTION OF PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:
A. Adoption: The City hereby adopts and will review annually Personnel Policies and Procedures for the City which sets forth the policies and procedures for the following:
Employee examination/selection process; employment and benefits; employee relations; interpretation; enforcement and administration; selection and appointments; probationary periods; employee performance evaluations; application and examinations; separations; disciplinary actions; training and welfare activities; records and
reports; attendance and leave; overtime; appeals and grievance procedures.
B. Copies on File: In accordance with Idaho Code, section 50-901A, this
City of Salmon
1-8-5 1-8-7
section contains a summary of the principal provisions of the entire Personnel Policies and Procedures ordinance and three (3) copies of the full text are available and on file for the use by the public in the office of the Clerk of the City. A full text of the ordinance on Personnel Policies and Procedures for the City shall be provided by the City Clerk to any citizen of the City on personal request.
C. Administration of the Policies and Procedures: The policies and procedures adopted above will be administered in accordance with the provisions contained therein and in accordance with this Chapter. (Ord. 91-544, 12-18-91, eff. 12-18-91)
1-8-6: AGREEMENTS AUTHORIZED:
A. Reciprocal Agreements: The City is authorized and empowered to enter into reciprocal agreements upon such terms as may be agreed upon, for the use of equipment, materials, facilities and services with any public agencies or bodies for purposes deemed of benefit to the public personnel system.
B. Cooperate with Governmental Agencies: The Personnel Officer, coordinating with department heads and acting on behalf of the City Council, may cooperate with other governmental agencies charged with public personnel administration responsibilities in conducting or validating personnel tests, recruiting personnel, training personnel, and for the interchange of personnel and their benefits. (Ord. 91-543, 12-18-91)
1-8-7: PROHIBITION AGAINST POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
A. While in the City's employment an employee may not:
1. Use his or her official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the result of an election or a nomination for office;
2. Directly or indirectly coerce, attempt to coerce, command or advise a State or local officer or employee to pay, lend, or contribute anything of value to a party, committee, or organization, agency or person for political purposes; or
3. Politic on City time or property.
City of Salmon
1-8-7 1-8-8
B. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to restrict the right of employees in the classified service to hold membership in, and support a political party, to vote as he or she chooses, to express privately his or her opinions on all political subjects and candidates, to maintain political neutrality, and to attend political meetings after working hours. (Ord. 91-543, 12-18-91)
1-8-8: UNLAWFUL ACTS PROHIBITED:
A. Falsifying Statements or Certificates: No person shall falsify statements, certificates, marks, ratings or reports with regard to any test, certification or appointment made under any provision of this law or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution of this law and policies.
B. Influencing of Appointment or Promotion:
1. No person shall, directly or indirectly, give, render, pay, offer, solicit, or accept money, service or other valuable consideration for any appointment, proposed appointment, promotion to or any advantage in, a position in this jurisdiction's government service.
2. No employee of the Personnel Department, examiner, or other person shall defeat, deceive or obstruct any person in his or her right to examination, eligibility, certification or appointment under this law, or furnish to any person any special or secret information for the purpose of affecting the rights or prospects of any person with respect to employment by the City. (Ord. 91-543, 12-18-91)
City of Salmon
1-9-1 1-9-3
CHAPTER 9
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-9-1: City Elections
1-9-2: Precincts
1-9-3: Polling Locations
1-9-1: CITY ELECTIONS: City elections shall be held at the time and in the manner as provided by Idaho Code,
section 50-401 et seq. (2007 Code)
1-9-2: PRECINCTS:
A. Number One: Number One Precinct shall consist of all that portion of the City lying southerly from the center line of Main Street and easterly from the center of the Salmon River.
B. Number Two: Number Two Precinct shall be all that portion of the City lying northerly from the center line of Main Street and easterly from the center line of the Salmon River.
C. Number Three: Number Three Precinct shall be all that portion of the City lying westerly from the center line of the Salmon River. (1959 Code §1-2-1)
1-9-3 POLLING LOCATIONS:
A. Precinct 1 polling location shall be at the American Legion Hall at 212 South Andrews Street.
B. Precinct 2 polling location shall be at the Salmon Valley Center at 200 Main Street.
C. Precinct 3 polling location shall be at the Lemhi County Brooklyn Annex at 200 Fulton Street. (Ord. 09-741, eff. 9-02-2009)
City of Salmon
1-10-1 1-10-4
CHAPTER 10
CITY INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
SECTION:
1-10- 1: Creation of Rights
1-10- 2: Number of Petitioners Required
1-10- 3: Requirements
1-10- 4: Time for Filing Petitions
1-10- 5: Special Election on Petition
1-10-1: CREATION OF RIGHTS: The people of the City shall have
the right to enact ordinances through the initiative process, and to repeal ordinances through the referendum process, according to the procedures set forth herein. (Ord. 79-430, 7-2-79; amd. Ord. 15-800, 04-15-15)
1-10-2: NUMBER OF SIGNATURES: To enact an ordinance by initiative or to repeal an ordinance by referendum, there shall be attached or appended to the petition the signatures of the legal voters of the City equal to at least twenty percent (20%) of the total number of electors who cast votes at the last general municipal election in the City of Salmon. (Ord. 79-430, 7-2-79; amd. Ord. 15-800, 04-15-15)
1-10-3: REQUIREMENTS: Requirements for signatures, verification of valid petitions, printing of petition, and time
limits shall be as specified in Idaho Code Title 34, Chapter 18, except
as modified by Idaho Code §50-501.
1-10-4: TIME FOR FILING REFERENDUM PETITIONS: Referendum petitions with the requisite number of signatures shall be filed with the City Clerk not less than sixty (60) days following the final adoption of the ordinance to be subject to referendum. (Ord. 79-430, 7-2-79; amd. Ord. 15-800, 04-15-15)
City of Salmon
1-10-5 1-10-5
1-10-5: ELECTION: An election for initiative or referendum shall be provided as prescribed in Idaho Code §34-106. (amd. Ord. 15-800, 04-15-15)
City of Salmon
1-11-1 1-11-2
CHAPTER 11
CITY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
1-11-1: Comprehensive Plan
1 -11- 2: Area of City Impact
1-11-3: Development Code
1 -11 - 1: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
A. Adoption: Pursuant to section 67-6509(c), Idaho Code, the City adopts by reference that certain document entitled the "Salmon Comprehensive Plan" as the Official Comprehensive Plan for the City.
B. Signatures; Copies on File: The Comprehensive Plan shall be signed by the Mayor and City Council and kept on file with the City Clerk and be made available to the public at reasonable times for viewing at the Clerk’s office. (Ord. 92-547, 2-19-92)
1-11-2: AREA OF CITY IMPACT:
A. Area of City Impact Boundaries: The area of City impact for the City of Salmon is established within the boundaries illustrated on the map attached to Ordinance 94-578 on file in the office of the Clerk, which is hereby made a part of this Chapter.
B. Comprehensive Plan for the Salmon Area of City Impact:
1. The Lemhi County Comprehensive Plan, including future amendments, shall apply within the area of City impact established by this Section.
2. The Lemhi County Comprehensive Plan shall provide that subdivision and land development within the area of City impact established by this Section proceed sequentially (or nearly so) outward from the City limits.
City of Salmon
1-11-2 1-11-3
C. Zoning Ordinance for the Salmon Area of City Impact: The Lemhi County Development Code, including future amendments, shall apply within the area of City impact established by this Section, except as provided in subsection 1-11-2D, below.
D. Subdivision Ordinance for the Salmon Area of City Impact: The Salmon Development Code, including future amendments, shall apply to all proposed subdivisions within the area of City impact established by this Section.
E. Notice of Development Activity and Reciprocal Notice of Changes in Plans and Ordinances:
1. Lemhi County shall provide Salmon with written notice of all proposed zoning changes, subdivisions, and other significant land development activity proposed within the area of City impact established by this Section.
2. Salmon shall provide one copy of all changes in its Comprehensive Plan Development Code to Lemhi County and the County shall reciprocate in kind.
F. Transfer of Jurisdictions: Any developer may, upon filing a complete and properly prepared petition for annexation to the City, request that planning, zoning, and Building Code jurisdiction be immediately transferred to the City, in advance of the actual approval of the annexation. This request shall be made, in writing, to the County Zoning Administrator, who shall independently confirm that the request for annexation has been properly filed and notify the City Zoning Administrator of the transfer. (Ord. 94-578, 12-7-94, eff. 12-7-94)
1-11-3: DEVELOPMENT CODE:
A. Adoption: Pursuant to section 67-6511, Idaho Code, the City adopts by reference that certain document entitled the “Salmon
City of Salmon
1-11-3 1-11-3
Development Code" as the official zoning and subdivision regulations of the City. This Development Code consists of the following Chapters:
Chapter I Establishes the purpose of the ordinance pursuant to the Local Land Use Planning Act to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the State of Idaho.
Chapter II Provides for the duties of the City Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Zoning Administrator and Floodplain Administrator.
Chapter III Establishes general provisions, continuation, repair or maintenance, change in and/or additions to nonconforming uses, nonconforming signs and nonconforming lots or parcels.
Chapter IV Requires a permit for all land development and building activity in the City and establishes procedures for the administration of this Ordinance, including the procedures for processing permit applications and the hearing procedures.
Chapter V Creates zoning districts and overlay zoning districts for use in the City and adopts an Official Map for these districts.
Chapter VI Establishes the purpose of each zoning district and lists the uses permitted in each district.
Establishes performance standards for land and building activity in the City. Certain performance standards apply to all developments, while others apply only to developments for which a special use is required.
Chapter VII The Special Use Permit procedure implements the Comprehensive Plan by requiring a public review of specific uses and developments to assure compatibility with applicable performance standards.
City of Salmon
1-11-3 1-11-3
Chapter VIII Provides procedures and criteria for the division of land and development.
Chapter IX A Planned Unit Development allows a measure of design flexibility by permitting variation of the distribution of land use density, variation of building plalcement standards, individual lot area, lot frontage requirements, access requirements, and variation of other performance standards required within a zoning district or combination of zoning districts when a development is planned in its entirety and when the variations can be demonstrated to benefit the development for those who will reside and conduct business affairs within the proposed development and for the community in general. The intent of the PUD process is to allow innovation in design that should prove superior to compliance with standard development requirements that are not the product of site-specific integrated design.
Chapter X Establishes performance standards for all development activity in the city.
Chapter XI Provides regulations for the placement of manufactured homes and development of manufactured home parks.
Chapter XII Defines tools to require that an owner or developer make a written commitment concerning the use or development of a subject parcel and may include provisions governing the creation, form, recording, modification, enforcement and termination of conditional commitments.
Chapter XIII Support the use of sugns to be maintained in a safe and attractive condition, to promote public health, safety and welfare of the community. To preserve, promote, and enhance the City’s scenic and commercial environment.
City of Salmon
Chapter XIV To assure that negative impact of special uses is mitigated through the use of buffering. The purpose of landscaping is to enhance the esthetic values and appearance of the properties within the city.
Chapter XV To protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare of the public by estaablishing regulations and a process of review for exterior lighting.
Chapter XVI To provide for orderly allocation of land into the city limits and provide assurances that the annexation of land into the city limits will not have an adverse effect on the City’s ability to provide and maintain a high level of municipal sevice. That there will not be an adverse effect on the existing infrastructure, will not have an adverse fiscal impact to the city, and will provice and maintain a high level of municipal service.
Chapter XVII To identify floodplains and minimum floodplain development standards to minimize flood hazards and protect human life, health, and property.
Chapter XVIII To prevent traffic congestion on public streets by requiring provision of adequate off-street parking and loading areas.
Chapter XIX To provide standards for the construction or reconstruction of roads.
Chapter XX To control the development within the area of City impact.
Appendix A. Provides models for the hearing notices required by ordinance.
Appendix B. Provides uses for zoning districts.
Appendix C. Provides definitions for important terms.
City of Salmon
1-11-3 1-11-3
B. Copies On File: The full text of the Salmon Development Code will be kept on file by the City Clerk and be made available to the public at reasonable times for viewing at the City Clerk’s office. (Ord. 92-561, 12-16-1992; amd. Ord. 95-580, 1-18-1995; Ord. 96-586, 10-07-1996; Ord. 97-589, 2-05-1997; Ord. 97-595, 9-17-1997; Ord. 98-602, 4-15-1998; Ord. 2000-613, 7-05-2000; Ord. 2001-621, 9-05-2001; Ord. 2002-628, 3-20-2002; Ord. 02-648, 2-05-2003; Ord. 04-668, 4-21-2004; Ord. 06-703, 7-05-2006; Ord. 07-721, 10-17-2007; Ord. 07-722, 10-17-2007; amd. Ord. 17-819, 03-01-17; amd. Ord. 17-822, 06-21-17; amd. Ord. 17-825, 08-16-17).
City of Salmon
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Subject Chapter
Planning and Zoning Commission ..................... 1
Park Board ( Repealed) .................................... 2
Fair Housing ...................................................... 3
City of Salmon
2-1-1 2-1-2
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Definitions
2-1-2: Creation of Commission
2-1-3: Appointing Commission
2-1-4: Rules; Organizations and Meetings
2-1-5: Duties
2-1-1: DEFINITIONS: As used in this Chapter:
APPOINTIVE All members of the Commission.
MEMBERS:
COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission created by this Chapter. (Ord. 79-433, 10-1-79)
2-1-2: CREATION OF COMMISSION: The Commission shall consist of at least three (3) and not more than
nine (9) members. They shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City and confirmed by a majority vote of the City Council. All members must have been residents of the county in which they are residing for at least two (2) years prior to their appointment and must reside within the City while serving on the Commission; provided, however, that at least one (1) and no more than three (3) of the Commission shall reside outside the City limits, provided they reside within the City impact area, but at no time shall a majority of members live outside the city. The terms of office for the appointive members shall be for three (3) years, except those members initially appointed who shall serve terms, as set by lottery, of one, two, and three years, in order to provide for annual appointment of at least one member. All vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments. Members may be removed for cause after public hearing by a majority vote of the City Council. However, members who are absent from one-half (½) or more of regularly scheduled meetings within any calendar year may be removed by majority vote of the Council. (Ord. 88-519, 2-16-88; amd. Ord. 92-561, 12-16-1992)
City of Salmon
2-1-3 2-1-5
2-1-3: APPOINTING COMMISSION: The existing Planning Commission is hereby declared to be the City of Salmon
Planning and Zoning Commission, and the existing members of the Planning Commission are hereby appointed members of the City Planning and Zoning Commission. The terms of the existing members shall continue as the terms of the City Planning and Zoning Commission. New members when needed, may be appointed as stated herein for the unexpired terms of the resigning or retiring members. (Ord. 79-433, 10-1-79)
2-1-4: RULES; ORGANIZATIONS AND MEETINGS: The
Commission shall elect its own chairman and create and
fill such offices as it may determine necessary for the proper conduct of the affairs and business of the Commission. Meetings of the Commission shall be held when duly called by the chairman by written or oral notice. At least one regular meeting shall be held each month for not less than nine (9) months in a year. A majority of voting members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. All meetings shall be open to the public. Written rules consistent with this Chapter and the laws of the State for the transaction of business of the Commission shall be adopted. Written records of meetings, hearings, resolutions, findings, studies, permits and actions shall be maintained and open to the public. (Ord. 79-433, 10-1-79)
2-1-5: DUTIES: It shall be the duty of the City Planning and
Zoning Commission to conduct a comprehensive planning process designed to prepare, implement, and review and update a comprehensive plan for the city and area of city impact as required by I.C. 67-6508. The commission shall exercise all powers granted to it by the Local Planning Act and fulfill all duties required by this ordinance. (Ord. 92-561, 12-16-1992)
City of Salmon
2-2-1 2-2-1
CHAPTER 2
PARK BOARD
REPEALED (Ord.15-805, 09-02-15)
City of Salmon
2-3-1 2-3-2
CHAPTER 3
FAIR HOUSING
SECTION:
2-3-1: Title and Purpose
2-3-2: Definitions
2-3-3: Unfair Housing Practices Forbidden
2-3-4: Exclusions
2-3-5: Salmon Fair Housing Commission
2-3-6: Remedies for Persons Accused of Unfair Housing Practices
2-3-7: Judicial Review and Penalties
2-3-1: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
A. This shall be known as the SALMON FAIR HOUSING CHAPTER and will hereinafter be referred to as this "Chapter".
B. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish fair housing practices by
ordinance in the City and to avoid discrimination and segregation in
housing on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, disability, marital status, and/or sexual orientation or affectional preference. (Ord. 74-426, 8-21-74)
2-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
COMMISSION: The Salmon Fair Housing Commission established by this Chapter.
DWELLING: Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
City of Salmon
2-3-2 2-3-2
DWELLING UNIT: A suite of rooms for occupancy by one family containing space for living, sleeping, and preparation of food, and containing toilet and bathing facilities.
HOUSING Shall include any dwelling house, building,
ACCOMMODATIONS: apartment, dwelling unit, or other structure,
facility, lot or parcel of land in the City which is
used or intended to be used for the accommodation of one or more human beings,
and shall include rooming units in dwellings or
boarding houses.
LENDER: Banks, insurance companies, savings or building and loan associations, credit unions, trust companies, mortgage companies, or other
persons engaged wholly or partly in the business of lending money for the financing or acquisition, construction, repair, or maintenance of a housing accommodation.
MANAGER: A person who operates, manages, controls, has charge of, or has the right of management or control over housing accommodations on behalf of another, but does not own housing accommodations.
OWNER: A person who owns a housing accommodation.
PERSON AGGRIEVED: Any person against whom any alleged unfair housing practice has been committed.
PERSONS: One or more individuals, partnerships or other organizations, corporations, legal represen-tatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, and receivers.
PROSPECTIVE A person who seeks to borrow money to
BORROWER: finance the acquisition, construction, repair, or
maintenance of a housing accommodation.
PROSPECTIVE A person who seeks to purchase, lease, rent,
OCCUPANT: or sublease a housing accommodation.
City of Salmon
2-3-2 2-3-3
REAL ESTATE Any person employed by a real estate broker
AGENT, to perform or assist in the performance of any
SALESPERSON OR or all of the functions of a real estate broker.
EMPLOYEE:
REAL ESTATE Any person who, for a fee, commission, or
BROKER: other valuable consideration, lists for sale, sells, purchases, exchanges, leases, or subleases or negotiates or offers or attempts to negotiate the sale, purchase, exchange, lease, rent or sublease of a housing accommodation of another, or hold himself or herself out as engaged in the business of selling, purchasing, exchanging, listing, leasing, renting, or subleasing of a housing accommodation of another, or collects the rental for the use of a housing accommodation of another.
RESPONDENT: Any person who is alleged to have committed an unfair housing practice.
ROOM OR ROOMING Includes individual sleeping rooms with or
UNITS: without private bath in a home, boarding house
or rooming house. A room in which two (2) or more persons sleep constitutes a single room or rooming unit.
SEX: Refers to gender, male or female.
UNFAIR HOUSING Any act prohibited by this Chapter. (Ord.
PRACTICE: 74-426, 8-21-74)
2-3-3: UNFAIR HOUSING PRACTICES FORBIDDEN:
A. An owner or manager shall not, because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, disability, marital status and/or sexual orientation or affectional preference of an occupant, purchaser, prospective occupant, or prospective purchaser:
1. Refuse to sell, lease, rent, or sublease a housing accommodation to a prospective occupant.
2. Expel or evict an occupant from a housing accommodation.
City of Salmon
2-3-3 2-3-3
3. Discriminate against an occupant or prospective occupant in the price, terms, conditions, or privileges of sale, lease, rent, or sublease, or occupancy of a housing accommodation, or in the furnishing of any related facilities or service.
B. A real estate broker, agent, salesman, or employee shall not, because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, disability, marital status and/or sexual orientation or affectional preference of an occupant, purchaser, prospective occupant, or prospective purchaser:
1. Refuse or intentionally fail to list a housing accommodation for sale, lease, rent, or sublease.
2. Refuse or intentionally fail to show to a prospective occupant the
housing accommodation listed for sale, lease, rent, or sublease.
3. Refuse or intentionally fail to transmit to an owner any reasonable offer to purchase, lease, rent, or sublease a housing accommodation.
C. A lender shall not, because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, disability, marital status and/or sexual orientation or affectional preference of a borrower or prospective borrower:
1. Deny a prospective borrower a loan for the acquisition, construction, repair, or maintenance of a housing accommodation.
2. Discriminate against a borrower or prospective borrower in the terms, conditions, privileges of such a loan.
D. An owner, manager, real estate broker, agent, salesman, employee, or lender shall not:
1. Require any information, make or keep any record, or use any form of application containing questions or entries concerning race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, disability, marital status and/or sexual orientation or affectional preference in connection with the sale, lease, rent, or sublease of any housing accommodation.
2. Post, publish, circulate, or cause to be posted, published or circulated any notice, statement or advertisement which relates to the sale, lease, rent, or sublease, acquisition or financing of any housing accommodation which indicates directly or indirectly a preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination, based on
City of Salmon
2-3-3 2-3-4
race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, disability, marital status and/or sexual orientation or affectional preference.
3. Discriminate against a person in any manner because such person has complied or proposes to comply with the provisions of this Chapter or has filed a complaint, testified, or assisted in any proceeding under this Chapter.
4. Induce or attempt to induce for profit, any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, disability, marital status and/or sexual orientation or affectional preference.
5. Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, disability, marital status and/or sexual orientation or affectional preference that any dwelling is not available for inspections, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. (Ord. 74-426. 8-21-74; 1995 Code)
2-3-4: EXCLUSIONS:
A. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to include, or to apply to
any bona fide club, fraternal or religious organization but where public use for the purpose of profit is carried on by a bona fide club,
fraternal or religious organization such use is banned by this Chapter.
B. Nothing in this Chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit any person from making a choice from among prospective purchasers and tenants of property on the basis of factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex. age, disability, marital status and/or sexual orientation or affectional preference.
C. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the use of lawyers, escrow agents, title companies, and such other professional assistance as may be necessary to perfect or transfer the title to property.
D. Nothing in this Chapter shall limit an owner's right to expel or evict an occupant or tenant from a housing accommodation for any reason permitted by law, or lawfully agreed upon by contract; provided, that such action is not based on race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, disability, marital status and/or sexual orientation or affectional preference of the occupant. (Ord. 74-426, 8-21-74; 1995 Code)
City of Salmon
2-3-5 2-3-5
2-3-5: SALMON FAIR HOUSING COMMISSION:
A. Creation, Membership, Term: There is hereby created the Salmon Fair Housing Commission. This Commission shall consist of seven (7) members, each to be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council, to serve without compensation for a term of three (3) years, subject to removal by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. Not more than one member of the Commission shall be an officer or employee of the City. If a vacancy occurs on the Commission, it shall be filled by the Mayor before the next regular meeting of the Fair Housing Commission.
B. Original Terms: The original appointees to said Commission shall
serve staggered terms with the terms of three (3) expiring January 1, 1982, the term of two (2) expiring January 1, 1981, and two (2) terms expiring January 1, 1980. The term of the Commissioners shall expire January 1. No member of the Commission may serve more than two (2) successive terms.
C. Chairman: The Mayor shall appoint one member of the Commission to serve as the chairman for the period of one year. No person may serve as the chairman for more than two (2) successive years. After January 1, 1981, no person may be appointed chairman until such person has served a year or more on the Commission.
D. Counsel: The City Attorney shall serve as counsel for the Salmon Fair Housing Commission and the Commission shall be empowered with permission of the City Council to employ legal and clerical personnel and pay for the transcripts of testimony in connection with hearings conducted by the Commission.
E. Powers and Duties: The Salmon Fair Housing Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
1. Rules and Regulations: The Commission shall adopt the rules and regulations for its own procedures not inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter or any other ordinance of the City. These rules shall provide for notification of Commission members by the chairman in advance of meetings.
2. Meetings, Quorum: Meetings of the Commission shall be held at least once every four (4) months, at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Commission may determine. A quorum of four (4) or more members shall be necessary before the Commission may transact business.
City of Salmon
2-3-5 2-3-5
3. Complaints: Any person aggrieved by an unfair housing practice may file with the Commission a statement of complaint upon form prescribed by the Commission and sworn to under oath by the person aggrieved. Such statement of complaint shall state the name of the person who is alleged to have committed the unfair housing practice, the address of the housing accommodation concerning which the alleged unfair housing practices have been committed, and a brief statement of the facts giving right to the statement of complaint.
4. Investigation and Review: The Commission shall investigate and
review as soon as possible, each statement of complaint to determine whether there are reasonable grounds for believing that an unfair practice has been committed.
5. Issuance of Complaint by Commission: If fifty one percent (51) or more of the Commission members present at a Commission meeting having a quorum, determines that such reasonable grounds exist, it shall issue its complaint against the person who is alleged to have committed the unfair housing practice. Such complaint need not be limited to matters contained in the aggrieved person's statement of complaint, but such complaint issued by the Commission shall be limited to matters which are pertinent to offenses under this Chapter. Such complaint shall state the name of the respondent, his or her address, the name of the person aggrieved, the address of the housing accommodation concerning which the alleged unfair housing practice has been committed, a statement that the Commission has reasonable grounds to believe that the respondent has committed an unfair housing practice, and a brief statement of the facts upon which the Commission bases such belief.
6. Service of Complaint(s): The Commission shall cause a copy of the complaint or complaints to be served upon the respondent by certified or registered mail, or by personal service, stating the time and place of hearing on a complaint or complaints.
7. Attempt to Eliminate Unfair Practice: The Commission shall attempt, by means of education, conference, conciliation, mediation, negotiation and persuasion, to eliminate any unfair housing practice which is the subject of a statement of complaint filed with the Commission.
The Commission is specifically authorized and encouraged to engage in informal discussions with the respondent, or the
City of Salmon
2-3-5 2-3-5
respondent's representative, for the purposes of reaching an agreement to the effect that any violation of this act will not be continued or repeated. Upon arriving at such an agreement satisfactory to the Commission, further proceedings shall be terminated as long as the termination agreement is not violated. The terms of conciliation agreed to by the parties may be reduced to writing and incorporated into a conciliation agreement to be signed by the parties, which agreement is for conciliation purposes only and does not constitute an admission by any party that the law has been violated. The chairman of the Commission shall sign such agreement on behalf of the Commission. It shall be an unfair housing practice to violate or fail to adhere to any provision contained in a conciliation agreement.
8. Hearings: The Commission may hold hearings, call witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and request the production of examination of any books, papers, documents, or records relating to any proceeding before the Commission. However, these powers will not be invoked in informal discussions as described in subsection E7 above. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to permit searches without permission of the owner of a house, apartment, or other housing accommodation for the administration of this Chapter.
9. Probative Evidence: The Commission, at any hearing, shall admit and give probative evidence which would commonly be accepted by a reasonably prudent person in the conduct of his or her affairs as having probative value.
10. Record of Evidence: The Commission shall make a record of evidence admitted at the hearing, including a verbatim transcript if requested by the person aggrieved, the respondent, or Commission; provided, that the Commission may require that the cost of any such transcript or of the reproduction thereof shall be borne by the party requesting such transcript or reproduction.
11. Findings: The Commission shall, as soon as possible, make findings and determine whether or not an unfair housing practice has been committed.
12. Order Directed to Respondent: If fifty one percent (51) or more of the Commission members present at a Commission meeting having a quorum find that an unfair housing practice has been committed, it shall issue an order directed to the respondent setting forth the findings of the Commission and directing the respondent to cease the practices set forth in the order. Failure to comply with
City of Salmon
2-3-5 2-3-5
said order shall constitute a violation of this Chapter punishable under Section 5-4-7 of this Chapter.
13. Order Dismissing Complaint: If the Commission finds that the respondent has not engaged in an unfair housing practice, the Commission shall issue an order dismissing the complaint.
14. Service of Order: The Commission shall serve its order on the person aggrieved and the respondent in accordance with the procedure set forth in subsection E6 of this Section.
15. Power to Summons: To administer Sections 5-4-5 and 5-4-6 and other sections of this Chapter, the Salmon Fair Housing Commission shall have the right to summon persons making accusation and persons accused of unfair housing practices and other persons as witnesses. Any peace officer of the City must serve a summons at the request of the Commission. Any person who willfully refuses to obey a summons to appear before the Salmon Fair Housing Commission shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code.
16. Research and Study: The Commission may conduct research on and study unfair housing practices in order to develop more effective methods for eliminating unfair housing practices, and may publish or cause to be published the results of such research and study when in the judgment of the Commission such publications will aid in the elimination of unfair housing practices. However, the Salmon Fair Housing Commission shall not expend City funds for research or call in an outside consultant for this research without the approval of the Salmon City Council.
17. Federal and State Law: The Commission shall keep abreast of Federal and State law affecting open housing and make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council of changes in the Salmon Fair Housing ordinances necessary to keep the ordinances
in conformity with Federal and State law. The Commission shall render to the Mayor at least once per year a written report of the activities of the Commission since the last report of the Commission.
The Fair Housing Commission is authorized to accept Federal, State, or other assistance in formulating or carrying out programs to
prevent or eliminate discriminatory housing practices, and to cooperate with Federal, State and local agencies in carrying out such programs.
City of Salmon
2-3-5 2-3-7
F. Time Limitation: No statement of complaint may be filed with the Commission more than six (6) months after the alleged unfair housing practice has been committed; provided, that in the event of a continuing violation of alleged unfair housing practice, such period shall not commence until after the last day upon which the alleged unfair housing practice has been committed. (Ord. 74-426, 8-21-74)
2-3-6: REMEDIES FOR PERSONS ACCUSED OF UNFAIR HOUSING PRACTICES: It is the intent of this Chapter to
protect persons unfairly accused of discrimination as well as persons who may be discriminated against in the matter of unfair housing practices. Any person aggrieved by an act prohibited or alleged to be prohibited by this Chapter is given the right under Section 5-4-5 of this Chapter to file with the Commission a statement of complaint. If such person does not file a complaint under Section 5-4-5 of this Chapter and continues to make public his or her complaint in speech, writing, or demonstration, the person or group accused of discrimination in matters pertaining to this Chapter shall have the right to bring this accusation to the attention of the Salmon Fair Housing Commission. The Salmon Fair Housing Commission shall hear the views of the person or group accused of discrimination and the person making the accusation, shall investigate the accusation, and shall render an opinion as soon as possible as to whether the accusation was true or false. The Salmon Fair Housing Commission may request the person making the accusation and the person or group accused of discrimination to refrain from airing their controversy to the public during the period of investigation of the complaint by the Salmon Fair Housing Commission. The records of the Salmon Fair Housing Commission shall be open to any court in libel or other proceedings resulting from an unfair accusation made under this Chapter. (Ord. 74-426, 8-21-74)
2-3-7: JUDICIAL REVIEW AND PENALTIES:
A. Any person against whom an order is issued or directed by the Commission shall have a right to seek review of the Commission's order by trial de nova, in the Magistrate Court of Lemhi County, State of Idaho.
B. Where any person or owner refuses to comply with an order issued by the Commission within ten (10) days following the effective day of the order, then and in that event the Commission shall submit and file a written report of the complaint or complaints, and the proceedings had thereon with the City Prosecutor as a basis for the
City of Salmon
2-3-7 2-3-7
issuance of a criminal complaint against such person or owner and the prosecution thereunder in the same manner as violations of other criminal ordinances are prosecuted.
The person aggrieved shall make, sign, and swear to the complaint before the City Prosecutor.
C. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense up to a total of three (3) days. However, each new violation will constitute a separate offense also subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code.
D. Continuance of an alleged unfair housing practice on any day or days during the pendency of a hearing before the Magistrate Court,
Lemhi County, State of Idaho, during a subsequent appeal to a higher court shall not constitute an offense for the purpose of this Chapter.
E. In the event that the Commission finds that a violation of this Chapter will result from a pending or threatened sale or transfer which violates this Chapter as contemplated herein, said Commission, by and through the City Attorney, shall have the right to apply to the District Court of the State to enjoin such pending or threatened transfer or sale. Such action shall be predicated upon:
1. Finding by the Commission that the person aggrieved will be irreparably injured unless the court issues such order.
2. That said person aggrieved has no adequate remedy at law. (Ord. 74-426, 8-21-74; 1995 Code)
City of Salmon
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Subject Chapter
Liquor Control ............................................... 1
Liquor by the Drink ..................................... 1A
Beer Regulations ...................................... 1B
Wine by the Drink ...................................... 1C
Itinerant Merchants ....................................... 2
Junk Dealers ................................................. 3
Business License .......................................... 4
City of Salmon
3-1-1 3-1-1
CHAPTER 1
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
3-1-1: Adoption of State Laws
3-1-1: ADOPTION OF STATE LAWS:
A. Adoption: There are hereby adopted for the purpose of governing the licensing, sale and use of alcoholic beverages within the City, the laws of the State, being particularly title 23, Idaho Code, as presently in effect or as may hereafter be amended by the Legislature. The same is hereby adopted and incorporated as an ordinance of the City as fully as though set forth at length herein.
B. Copies on File: Three (3) copies of the said statutes, together with all amendments thereto, all duly certified by the City Clerk, shall be kept on file in the office of the Clerk for use and examination of and by the public. (1995 Code)
City of Salmon
3-1A-1 3-1A-2
CHAPTER 1
LIQUOR CONTROL
ARTICLE A. LIQUOR BY THE DRINK
SECTION:
3-1A-1: License Required
3-1A-2: Application for License
3-1A-3: Applicant, Location Restrictions
3-1A-4: Conditions of License; Fee
3-1A-5: Hours of Sale of Liquor
3-1A-6: Access to Premises
3-1A-7: Prohibited Sales and Conduct
3-1A-8: License Revocation; Hearing
3-1A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED: It shall be lawful to sell liquor by the drink as provided by the laws of this State1, provided a
license shall first be obtained as provided in this Article and the rules and
regulations, and provisions concerning the licensing and operation of a place of business for the sale of liquor are adhered to as herein provided. (2007 Code)
3-1A-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. Required Information: Before there shall be any lawful sale of liquor by the drink, an application by the proposed licensee must be made for such license and filed with the City Clerk in form and manner herein provided. Such application shall provide for the
1 I.C. §23-901 et seq.
City of Salmon
3-1A-2 3-1A-4
name of the applicant, the location of the proposed business and such other information as may be prescribed and required by the Mayor and City Council. At the time said application is filed, the applicant shall also present the license issued by the State and Lemhi County for the sale of liquor by the drink at retail. No license will be issued until a license is first obtained from the State and Lemhi County. (1995 Code, amd. 2007 Code)
B. Approval: All applications shall be reviewed by the City Clerk and the Police Chief. Upon approval of the application and receipt of the license fee, which is to be paid at the time of filing of the application, a license will be issued to the applicant. If it is determined that further review is warranted, the renewal/new application shall be forwarded to the Salmon City Council for discussion at their next regular City Council Meeting. (2007 Code; amd. Ord. 17-828, 12-06-17)
3-1A-3: APPLICANT, LOCATION RESTRICTIONS: No license shall be issued for the sale of liquor by the drink to any
person not qualified for a license under State law nor upon any premises in any neighborhood which is predominantly residential nor within three hundred feet (300') of any school, church or other place of public worship. (2007 Code)
3-1A-4: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE; FEE:
A. License Fee: The license fee required of any applicant for the sale of liquor by the drink shall be as set by the City Council, not to exceed the maximum allowed by State law, payable in advance. The payment shall be made with said application for the balance of the term of license as set by Idaho Code, Title 23. (1995 Code, amd. 2007 Code)
B. Term of License, Renewals: All licenses issued shall expire at twelve o’clock (12:00) midnight on August 31 of each calendar year. Renewals may be granted upon application if the record of the applicant is satisfactory to the City Clerk and Police Chief and in accordance with the provisions of the law and this Article and upon payment of the abovementioned fee for the ensuing year. Any operation under an expired license shall constitute a violation of this Code, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each such day of operation. (1995 Code, amd. 2007 Code; amd. Ord. 17-828, 12-06-17)
C. License Transferable: Licenses issued under the provisions of this Article may be transferred with the consent of the City Clerk and Police Chief. (amd. Ord. 17-828, 12-06-17)
City of Salmon
3-1A-5 3-1A-5
3-1A-5: HOURS OF SALE OF LIQUOR:
A. No liquor shall be sold, offered for sale, or given away upon any licensed premises, and all liquor not in sealed bottles must be locked in a separate room or cabinet during the following hours:
1. Sunday, Memorial Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas from one o'clock (1:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. the following day; provided, however, that on any Sunday not otherwise being a prescribed holiday, it shall be lawful for a licensee having banquet area or meeting room facilities, separate and apart from the usual dispensing area (barroom) and separate and apart from a normal public dining room unless such dining room is closed to the public, to therein dispense liquor between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) P.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to bona fide participants of banquets, receptions or conventions for consumption only within the confines of such banquet area or meeting room facility.
2. On any other day between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M.
3. There is no prohibition against the sale of liquor by the drink during general, primary, or City elections unless the City enacts an ordinance prohibiting such sales. (amd. Ord. 15-806, 09-02-15)
B. Any patron present on the licensed premises after the sale of liquor has stopped as provided in subsection A above shall have a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, to consume any beverages already served.
C. Any person who consumes or intentionally permits the consumption of any alcoholic beverage upon licensed premises after the time provided for in subsection B shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
D. It shall be the duty of every person who is employed at or upon a licensed premises or who owns or manages a licensed premises and is present upon the licensed premises during the hours and at the time set forth in subsection A of this Section to lock up and keep locked up in a locked room or locked cabinet all unsealed containers of liquor during the hours and at the times set forth in subsection A of this Section, and any such person who fails to perform the duty provided herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (2007 Code)
City of Salmon
3-1A-6 3-1A-8
3-1A-6: ACCESS TO PREMISES: All peace officers appointed
by the State or the City or the County shall have free access at all times to the licensed premises, and any information touching the manner and method of the operation of said premises or the sale of liquor may be submitted to the Mayor and City Council as a result of the investigation made of said licensee. (2007 Code)
3-1A-7: PROHIBITED SALES AND CONDUCT: The following are
declared as prohibited acts, and any violation of the provisions of this Article shall be considered and shall likewise be grounds for the cancellation and revocation of the license:
A. Underage, Intoxicated or Disorderly Persons: No sale of liquor shall be made to:
1. Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
2. Any person actually, apparently or obviously intoxicated.
B. Gambling: No gambling of any kind or character shall be operated upon said premises, and no gambling device shall be maintained thereon. (1995 Code, amd. 2007 Code)
3-1A-8: LICENSE REVOCATION; HEARING: If any licensee or
employee of a liquor by the drink establishment violates any of the provisions of this Article or is convicted of the violation of any of the provisions of State law, the Mayor and City Council are hereby authorized and empowered to revoke the license issued to said licensee. Provided, however, that when it is brought to the attention of the Mayor and City Council that a violation has taken place, before revoking such license, they shall cause notice to be served upon the licensee setting forth in general terms the violation or violations claimed to have been committed, and such notice shall provide a time for hearing thereon by the Mayor and City Council, which date of hearing shall be not less than five (5) days nor more than ten (10) days from the date of the service of notice that the provisions of this Article or the provisions of the laws of the State have been violated. The Mayor and City Council shall revoke such license, and no refund of any unused portion of the license fee shall be made to the licensee. Should the Director of the Department of Law Enforcement of the State revoke any license issued by such Director, said licensee shall automatically have the license issued by the City revoked and no refund of any fee paid shall be made. (2007 Code)
City of Salmon
3-1B-1 3-1B-2
CHAPTER 1
LIQUOR CONTROL1
ARTICLE B. BEER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-1B-1: License Required
3-1B-2: Application for License
3-1B-3: License Classification and Fees
3-1B-4: Investigation of Applicant
3-1B-5: License Period; Grant or Denial of Application
3-1B-6: Record of Proceedings
3-1B-7: Limitations and Conditions of License
3-1B-8: Hearings and Appeals on License Denials, Suspension or
Revocation
3-1B-9: Violation and Penalty
3-1B-1: LICENSE REQUIRED: It shall be unlawful for any person
to sell beer at retail within the City without first obtaining a license therefor as herein provided. The license requirement contained herein shall include the sale of draught beer, bottled or canned beer to be consumed on the premises. (2007 Code)
3-1B-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE: All applications for
licenses shall be in writing, filed with the City Clerk and accompanied by the affidavit of the applicant showing such applicant to be qualified by this Article and by the laws of the State to receive a license2. Such application must state the place of business with respect to which the license is to be issued and must be accompanied by the license fee. Provided, however, that before a license shall be issued, the licensee must have procured a license from the proper official of the State of Idaho and Lemhi County, Idaho. (2007 Code)
1 See Section 3-1A-1 of this Chapter for Adoption of State laws.
2 I.C. §23-1005.
City of Salmon
3-1B-3 3-1B-5
3-1B-3: LICENSE CLASSIFICATION AND FEES:
A. Fees: License fees shall be as set by the City Council, not to exceed the maximum allowed by State law.
B. Classifications of Licenses: There are basically two (2) types of licenses, one for bottled or canned beer, to be consumed on or off the premises; and the other for bottled, canned and draught beer to be consumed on the licensed premises only. (2007 Code)
3-1B-4: REVIEW OF APPLICANTION: No license shall be
granted hereunder until there has been a review of the application by the City Clerk and Police Chief. Upon approval of the application and receipt of the license fee, which is to be paid at the time of filing the application, a license will be issued to the applicant. If it is determined that further review is warranted, the renewal/new application shall be forwarded to the Salmon City Council for discussion at their next regular City Council meeting. (amd. Ord. 17-828, 12-06-17)
3-1B-5: LICENSE PERIOD; GRANT OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION: All licenses shall be granted by the
for a period of one year beginning September 1 and ending August 31. A full year’s license fee shall be collected after September 1. If forwarded to the City Council for review, City Council shall grant or deny the application within sixty (60) days of the time it is filed with the City Clerk. Whenever the Mayor and City Council deny an application, they shall specify, in writing:
A. The reason for the denial.
B. The actions, if any, that the applicant could take to obtain the license, transfer or renewal thereof.
All licenses shall be issued by the City Clerk. (1995 Code, amd. 2007 Code; amd. Ord. 17-828, 12-06-17)
City of Salmon
3-1B-6 3-1B-9
3-1B-6: RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS:
A. Retention of Record; Transcription: Upon written request and within the time period provided for retention of the record, any person may have the record transcribed at his or her expense. (1995 Code, amd. 2007 Code)
B. Minutes: The Mayor and City Council shall also provide for the keeping of the minutes of the proceedings. Minutes shall be retained indefinitely or as otherwise provided by law1.
1 I.C. §50-907.
² I.C. §23-1012.
3-1B-7: LIMITATIONS AND CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. License for One Location Only: The license fee shall permit the sale of such beer in but one place of business, such place of business to be designated in the license issued.
B. Transfer of License: Such license may be transferred with the consent of the Mayor and City Council.
C. License to be Posted: It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep such license posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business for which the license is granted.
D. Hours of Sale: No person licensed by the City shall sell or serve any beer during hours not allowed under the laws of the State². (2007 Code)
3-1B-8: HEARINGS AND APPEALS ON LICENSE DENIALS,
SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION: Prior to any revocation or suspension of a license or upon the denial of a license, the licensee shall be afforded a hearing according to Idaho Code, section 23-1016. If the decision is to revoke or suspend a license or to deny an application, the licensee or applicant shall have the right to appeal in accordance with Idaho Code, section 23-1016. (2007 Code)
3-1 B-9: VIOLATION AND PENALTY: Any violation hereof shall be
declared a misdemeanor and the offender shall be subject to penalties as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (2007 Code)
City of Salmon
3-1C-1 3-1C-3
CHAPTER 1
LIQUOR CONTROL
ARTICLE C. WINE BY THE DRINK
SECTION:
3-1C-1: License Required
3-1C-2: License Fee and Term
3-1C-3: Violation and Penalty
3-1C-1: LICENSE REQUIRED: Any person holding a valid and
Subsisting City and State retail beer license may procure
from the City a license for the retail sale of wine, authorizing wine to be sold by the drink in such premises during the same hours and under the same ordinances, rules and regulations as govern the sale of beer in such premises. (1995 Code)
3-1C-2: LICENSE FEE AND TERM: Such licenses shall run from
September 1 to August 31 of each year, and the license fee therefor shall be as set by the City Council, not to exceed the maximum allowed by State law. (1995 Code, amd. 2007 Code)
3-1C-3: VIOLATION AND PENALTY: Any violation hereof shall be
declared a misdemeanor and the offender shall be
subject to penalties as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (2007 Code)
City of Salmon
3-2-1 3-2-2
CHAPTER 2
ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND VENDORS
SECTION:
3-2-1: Purpose
3-2-2: Definition
3-2-3: Application, Required Information
3-2-4: Issuance of License
3-2-5: License Fee and Bond
3-2-6: Invitation to Peddle or Solicit Required
3-2-7: Prohibited Acts
3-2-8: License Revocation
3-2-9: Penalty
3-2-1: PURPOSE: The purpose of this Chapter is to assist in protecting consumers who purchase goods in the
City by requiring that all itinerant merchants and vendors, as defined in
Section 3-2-2 of this Chapter, register with the City Clerk before commencing business within the City. In addition, it is the policy of the city to promote the protection of the public health, safety, and to promote the economic base and general welfare of the community by the regulation of off-site itinerant merchants and vendors operating inside the city.(Ord. 83-470, 11-7-83; amd. Ord. 18-830, 06-20-18)
(A) Reasonable regulation of off-site itinerant merchant or vendors is necessary to ensure that any stand or structure design and construction for purpose of off-site vending is safe, orderly, and harmonious with the appearance and character of the neighborhood and the city, and provides for safe and adequate pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(B) Reasonable regulation of off-site itinerant merchants or vendors is necessary to protect and conserve the economic base of the community, including property values.
(C) The regulations contained in this chapter are not intended to prohibit or hamper speech which is protected by the first amendment, but merely to regulate specific activities which are commercial in nature.
3-2-2: DEFINITION: A Vendor under this ordinance shall be deemed and construed to mean a City resident who
operates in an itinerant fashion, such as moving from place to place.
An itinerant merchant is any person who engages in, does, or transacts
any temporary or transient business in the city and who, for the purpose of
carrying on such business, occupies any location for a period of less than
City of Salmon
3-2-2 3-2-2
125 days unless such person is one or more of the following:
A. An individual who is a permanent resident of the City of Salmon who is conducting such business activity as owner or consignee of the goods, wares or merchandise being sold or offered for sale.
B. A principal or an agent of a person, firm, or corporation whose principal has been continuously engaged in business within the City for the preceding two (2) calendar months.
C. An agent of a business properly licensed or exempt from licensing under this Chapter.
D. A member of a tax exempt charitable, fraternal, civic or religious organization selling or offering to sell goods, wares or merchandise on behalf of said organization for tax exempt purposes of the organization as defined by the Internal Revenue Code, which provides proof of authority to act on behalf of said tax exempt organization.
E. A person selling used furniture, household goods, sporting equipment and clothing of his or her family during a period not to exceed forty eight (48) hours.
F. A guardian, conservator or personal representative selling personal assets of the decedent or ward.
G. Those exempt from requiring a vendor's permit are school age children selling various fundraising items including, but not limited to, Scouting Organizations, school sponsored sporting or music events.
H. A person holding a vendor's permit or license which is part of another licensed street carnival or event during a special event issued by the organizers of such carnival or event, shall not be required to hold a permit issued by the city under this section.
I. A person who is a part of a craft fair, bazaar, or carnival shall not be required to hold a permit issued by the city under this section.
J. The city's or event organizer's permit shall in the case of a vendor be posted upon the stand at all times when the stand is open for business. The activities conducted by the vendor must conform to the description in the application for the permit. No sign shall be on or about a vendor's stand making any statement that is untrue or is at variance from the application; for one example: A sign shall not state "local produce" if either in fact or according to the application the produce was not grown on land in Lemhi County, Idaho, or Custer County, Idaho. If a statement made in the application for a vendor's
City of Salmon
3-2-2 3-2-5
license is false, or if a statement made by a sign at a vendor's stand is false, the permit shall be void. (Ord. 83-470, 11-7-83, amd. 2007 Code; amd. Ord. 18-830, 06-20-18)
3-2-3: APPLICATION, REQUIRED INFORMATION:
No person shall do business as a "vendor" or an “itinerant merchant” as defined in section 3.2.2 of this title within the City of Salmon without first obtaining a permit and paying a license fee for the permit from the city clerk. Excluded are vendors or itinerant merchants of farmers' markets and sales representatives. The application for such permit shall be filed with the city clerk during normal business hours not less than seventy two (72) hours prior to the first day upon which sales are intended to occur. An application for such license shall be made to the city clerk in such form and manner as provided by the city clerk's office. The application form shall be established by Resolution and updated from time to time by Resolution.(amd. Ord. 18-830, 06-20-18)
3-2-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
A. Issuance: Upon receipt of the completed registration form and the appropriate license fee, the City Clerk shall review the application to see if the required information has been provided. If the application has been properly submitted, the Clerk will issue a license indicating the dates for which the vendor or itinerant merchant is authorized to do business in the City, and said license shall constitute proof that the vendor or itinerant merchant named on the license is authorized to do business within the City during the dates indicated on the license.
B. Investigation: The Clerk shall file one copy of the application and receipt in the office of the Clerk and shall forward a copy of the application and license to the Chief of Police who may conduct such investigation of the applicant as the Chief or the Chief's authorized agent may deem appropriate for the protection of consumers within the City. (Ord. 83-470, 11-7-83; amd. Ord. 18-830, 06-20-18)
3-2-5: LICENSE FEE:
A. Fee: Each applicant shall pay to the City Clerk, at the time of submission of an application for a vendor’s license or an itinerant merchant license, the fee as having been set by Resolution and approved by the City Council.
B. Extension: An applicant who wishes to extend his or her license for additional days may do so after such license has been issued, by tendering the fee for such additional days to the Clerk prior to the
City of Salmon
3-2-5 3-2-7
expiration of the license. A new application shall not be required of the applicant if there have been no material changes in the information supplied when the license was first issued. Upon receipt of said fee, the Clerk shall issue a new license extending the time period by the number of days for which payment has been received and shall file a copy in the Clerk’s office and forward a copy to the Chief of Police.
C. Form of Payment: The Clerk shall have the right to refuse to accept personal or business checks in payment of registration fees and may insist upon cash or a cashier's check of a local bank or a postal money order. (Ord. 86-502, 11-3-86; amd. Ord. 18-830, 06-20-18)
3-2-6: INVITATION TO PEDDLE OR SOLICIT REQUIRED: The practice of going in and upon private residences in
the City by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient
vendors of merchandise, not having been requested or invited so to do
by the owner or occupant of said private residences, for the purpose of
soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, and/or for the purpose of disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and punishable as such nuisance as a misdemeanor, excluding fund-raisers for non-profit organizations for area youth.(1959 Code §5-6-1, amd. 2007 Code)
3-2-7: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a vendor or an itinerant merchant as defined in this Chapter, unless such person has registered as a vendor or an itinerant merchant for the dates in which said business activity is being conducted and has received a receipt showing payment of said license fee for the applicable dates.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as an agent or employee of an itinerant merchant who is not properly registered and licensed under this Chapter for the days in which such person conducts or attempts to conduct business for such principal. It shall be the duty of each such agent to determine whether the principal is in fact authorized to do business as an itinerant merchant by inquiring at the office of the Clerk, and the agent shall not be excused for violating this Chapter by reason of the fact that he or she received erroneous information from any other source.
C. A person may be charged in the alternative with violating subsection A or B of this Section, but such person may not be convicted both as a principal and agent in the same transaction. If a reasonable doubt is raised as to the person's status as an agent or employee of an
City of Salmon
3-2-7 3-2-9
unlicensed principal, such person shall be presumed to be a principal.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to submit false information on an application for an itinerant merchant license. (Ord. 83-470, 11-7-83; amd. Ord. 18-830, 06-20-18)
3-2-8: LICENSE REVOCATION: The City Clerk may revoke a license and registration receipt of an itinerant merchant upon discovering a materially false representation of fact on the application or upon dishonor of a check received in payment of license fees. Revocation shall be deemed effective twenty four (24) hours after notice if mailed to the permanent business address of the principal, as shown on the application, by certified mail with return receipt requested, postage prepaid, or by actual notice to the itinerant merchant or any agent of the itinerant merchant, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 83-470, 11-7-83)
3-2-9: PENALTY: Violation of any portion of this Chapter shall be a misdemeanor. Upon conviction of a violation of this Chapter, the
defendant shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. The conviction of an agent for violation of this Chapter shall not bar conviction of the principal nor shall conviction of a principal bar the conviction of an agent, if a person is charged. (Ord. 83-470, 11-7-83)
City of Salmon
3-3-1 3-3-1
CHAPTER 3
JUNK DEALERS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: License Required
3-3-3: Junk Enclosed Within Building or Fence
3-3-4: Noncompliance a Nuisance
3-3-5: Storage of Junk
3-3-6: Penalty
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
JUNK: Any worn out, castoff or discarded article or
material which is ready for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some other use.
JUNK CAR: Any used car or motor vehicle not in the process of reconditioning which has been abandoned for use as a motor vehicle on a public highway and which is in unsafe operating condition and shall have remained in such condition for a period in excess of thirty (30) days. Portions of junk cars, such as hoods, fenders, radiators, rims, motors, etc., not being utilized for the repair of a motor vehicle shall be considered as junk.
JUNK DEALER: Includes any person engaged in the processing or collecting of junk, waste, discarded or salvaged materials, machinery or equipment, including automobile wrecking and dismantling.
NUISANCE: Any person doing business as a junk dealer shall at all times maintain such place of business in a sightly and sanitary manner. (Ord. 68-370, 11-4-68)
City of Salmon
3-3-2 3-3-5
3-3-2: JUNK ENCLOSED WITHIN BUILDING OR FENCE: All material classified as junk, including motor vehicle
and/or motor vehicle bodies shall be maintained either in a building or shall be enclosed by a site obscuring fence not less than six feet (6') high or in accordance with the Salmon Development Code. (Ord. 68-370, 11-4-68, Amd. 2007 Code)
3-3-3: NONCOMPLIANCE A NUISANCE: The failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this Chapter shall be
constituted as a nuisance. (Ord. 68-370, 11-4-68)
3-3-4: STORAGE OF JUNK: No person shall deposit, store,
maintain, collect or permit the storage, deposit, maintenance or collection of any junk or junk cars in unenclosed areas on his or her premises or any premises under his or her control which are unenclosed open areas or in any other place within the City except as expressly provided by law. (Ord. 68-370, 11-4-68)
3-3-5: PENALTY: Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and on
conviction thereof shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 68-370, 11-4-68; 1995 Code)
City of Salmon
3-4-1 3-4-1
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS LICENSES
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: License Required
3-4-3: Exemptions
3-4-4: Application and Standards for License
3-4-5: License And Fee
3-4-6: Regulation of Licensed Businesses
3-4-7: Change of Location
3-4-8: Prohibition Against Doing Business Without a License
3-4-9: Right of Appeal
3-4-10: Enforcement and Penalty
3-4-11: Severability
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
BUSINESS OR OCCUPATION: All activities, trades, and pursuits
conducted or engaged in for profit, including without limitation wholesale businesses, retail businesses, personal service businesses and professions, and businesses conducted as home occupations in any and all situations where suppliers, vendors, customers, clients and/or members of the general public visit or frequent the premises where the business or occupation is conducted or the work performed.
CITY: The City of Salmon, Idaho.
CITY CLERK: The City Clerk of the City of Salmon, Idaho.
City of Salmon
3-4-1 3-4-3
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, company, corporation, joint venture, association or other business entity.
PREMISES: All real property and structures thereon in or upon which any business or occupation is conducted.
3-4-2 LICENSES REQUIRED: A business license shall be
required if any of the following are true:
A. You operate a storefront in the Salmon City limits
B. You conduct a home business within the Salmon City Limits
C. You conduct a trade to serve the local community
D. You are a building contractor, even if your home office is not in the City of Salmon, and you work on construction sites or projects in the City of Salmon
E. You operate a short-term (vacation rental or lodging for less than 30 days)
Any person conducting such a business or engaged in such an occupation shall apply for the required business license by filling out an application provided by the City Clerk. A separate business license, even if operated from the same address, shall be required for each branch establishment, type, and/or separate location of a business. (Ord. 04-670, 7-7-04; amd. Ord. 19-834, 02-20-2019)
3-4-3 EXEMPTIONS: None of the provisions of this ordinance shall apply to any agency of the United States
Government and political subdivisions of the State of Idaho, including counties, school districts, sewer districts, fire districts and other special districts. Charitable entities and organizations and religious organizations shall be exempt. Traveling salespersons, commercial travelers or the like who exclusively or primarily sell to, or solicit orders for future delivery from local retailers, local businesses, local governments, local schools, local wholesale firms or solicited orders from local customers shall be exempt. All businesses or occupations owned and operated by individuals under the age of eighteen (18) years of age shall be exempt. (Ord. 04-670, 7-7-04, amd. Ord. 04-674, 8-18-04; amd. Ord. 19-834, 02-20-2019)
City of Salmon
3-4-4 3-4-8
3-4-4 APPLICATION AND STANDARDS FOR LICENSE: An application shall be submitted to the City in writing,
signed, and sworn to by the applicant upon the most current application form furnished by the City. A license shall be issued only to applicants who meet the following requirements:
a. License Fee. The License fee identified in Section 5 has been paid in full.
b. Compliance with Building & Zoning Requirements. The business and premises for which the application is made are not in violation of any building and/or zoning regulations. (Ord. 04-670, 7-7-04; amd. Ord. 19-834, 02-20-2019)
3-4-5 LICENSE AND FEE: A business license and fee for the administrative costs of processing applications and issuing
licenses shall be fixed by resolution of the City Council. Said reduced fee shall also be fixed by resolution of the City Council. Said fees shall be paid by the applicant at the time of making application for the required business license and shall be renewed annually by the first day of January. (Ord. 04-670, 7-7-04, amd. Ord. 04-674, 8-18-04, amd. Ord. 18-833, 12-05-18)
3-4-6 REGULATIONS OF LICENSED BUSINESSES: Although nothing in this ordinance shall be interpreted to prohibit the
conduct of a lawful trade or business, the right shall be and remain at all times vested in the Mayor and Council of the City of Salmon to deny an application, or revoke or cancel any license for fraud or misrepresentation in this procurement, or for any fraudulent, deceptive, misleading, illegal, or other sham business tactic performed against the public in the City of Salmon. (Ord. 04-670, 7-7-04, amd. Ord. 04-674, 8-18-04)
3-4-7 CHANGE OF LOCATION: No licensee shall change the location of a licensed business without having applied
for and received a new business license pursuant to the terms of the ordinance. (Ord. 04-670, 7-7-04)
3-4-8 PROHIBITION AGAINST DOING BUSINESS WITHOUT A LICENSE: No person shall engage in any business or
occupation within the boundaries of the City of Salmon without first having obtained a business license as required by this ordinance. All business licenses required under this ordinance shall be displayed on the business premises in a location clearly visible to the general public. (Ord. 04-670, 7-7-04; amd. Ord. 19-834, 02-20-2019)
City of Salmon
3-4-9 3-4-11
3-4-9 RIGHT OF APPEAL: Any person aggrieved by a decision of the City Clerk, or other official or employee of the City,
as to the issuance of a license in accordance herewith shall have the right to appeal to the City Council by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days following the date of the action or decision giving rise to the appeal. (Ord. 04-670, 7-7-04)
3-4-10 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY:
A. Civil Liability: The City Attorney shall, at the direction of the City Council, institute civil suit in the name of the City of Salmon to enforce compliance with the provisions of this ordinance by
injunctive relief, declaratory relief or other civil remedy. No civil judgment, or any act by the City or the violator shall bar or prevent
a criminal prosecution for each and every violation of this ordinance.
(Ord. 04-670, 7-7-04, amd. Ord. 04-674, 8-18-04)
B. Criminal Liability: A person who violates any provision of this ordinance or operates a business or occupation for which a license is required by this ordinance without having first obtained a license, as herein provided, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of up to three-hundred dollars ($300). (Ord. 04-670, 7-7-04; amd. Ord. 19-834, 02-20-2019)
3-4-11 SEVERABILITY: The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable and if any provision of
this ordinance or the application of such provision to any person or circumstance is declared invalid for any reason, such declaration shall not effect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. (Ord. 04-670, 7-7-04)
City of Salmon
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Subject Chapter
Fire Department (Repealed)………………….1
Nuisances………………………………………2
Garbage and Refuse ......................................3
Self-Contained Portable Toilets ……………...4
City of Salmon
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
REPEALED (Ord. 15-807, 09-02-15)
City of Salmon
4-2-1 4-2-2
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Nuisances Prohibited
4-2-2: Nuisance Defined
4-2-3: Notice to Abate Nuisance
4-2-4: Contents of Notice to Abate
4-2-5: Method of Service
4-2-6: Abatement by City
4-2-7: Collection of Cost of Abatement
4-2-8: Request for Hearing and Appeal
4-2-9: Penalty
4-2-1: NUISANCES PROHIBITED: The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited. (Ord. 83-466, 9-6-83)
4-2-2: NUISANCE DEFINED: Whatever is injurious to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as
essentially to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, is a nuisance.
Examples of nuisances are:
A. Diseased Animals Running at Large: All diseased animals running at large.
B. Stagnant Water: All ponds or pools of stagnant water.
C. Carcasses: Carcasses of animals not disposed of within twenty four (24) hours after death as provided by law.
D. Refuse Accumulation: Accumulations of refuse.
City of Salmon
4-2-2 4-2-2
E. Pollution: The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes, or other substances.
F. Noxious Weeds: All noxious weeds and other rank growth upon public or private property.
G. Smoke, Noxious Fumes: Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable quantities.
H. Unsafe Buildings: All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise to an extent exceeding one-half (½) their original value, and which are so situated as to endanger the safety of the public.
I. Explosives, Inflammable Liquids: All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances stored in any manner or in any amount other than that provided by ordinance.
J. Noise, Unnecessary; Vibrations, Annoying: All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations.
K. Obstructions, Excavations: Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public of streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds except under such conditions as are provided by ordinance.
L. Uses Gathering Large Crowds: Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the streets or sidewalks.
M. Junk, Accumulations: Accumulations of discarded or junked items creating an unsightly appearance.
N. Abandoned Refrigerators: All abandoned, unattended or discarded ice boxes, refrigerator or other container which has a door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, upon public or private property.
O. Unlawful Conditions or Use of Property: Any unreasonable or unlawful condition or use of premises or of building exteriors which by reason of its appearance, as viewed at ground level from public streets or from neighboring premises, is detrimental to the property of others.
City of Salmon
4-2-2 4-2-4
P. Motor Vehicles, Disassembled: Allowing any disabled, partially assembled or disassembled motor vehicle to remain upon public or private property for more than thirty (30) days.
Q. Fire Hazards: All places in such a state of disrepair as to constitute a fire hazard, an attractive nuisance or a hazard of any sort. The specific nuisances enumerated herein shall not be construed as in any way limiting the definition of a public nuisance, but shall be construed as powers enumerated in addition to those conferred by the general definition. (Ord. 83-466, 9-6-83)
4-2-3: NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE: Whenever the Mayor,
City Clerk, Building Inspector, or such other officers as provided by law, finds that a nuisance exists, he or she shall cause to be served upon the owner, agent, or occupant of the property on which the nuisance is located, or upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance, a written notice to abate or to request a hearing as provided in Section 4-2-8.
"Person" includes, for purposes of this Chapter, any individual, firm,
corporation, trust, any other organized group, or any government. (Ord. 83-466, 9-6-83)
4-2-4: CONTENTS OF NOTICE TO ABATE: The notice to abate
shall contain:
A. Order to Abate or Request for Hearing: An order to abate the
nuisance or request a hearing as provided by Section 4-2-8 within a stated time which shall be reasonable under the circumstances.
B. Location: Location of nuisance if stationary.
C. Description: Description of what constitutes the nuisance.
D. Acts Necessary: Statement of act or acts necessary to abate the
nuisance.
E. Abatement by City: Statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the time prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the cost against such person. (Ord. 83-466, 9-6-83)
City of Salmon
4-2-5 4-2-8
4-2-5: METHOD OF SERVICE: The notice to abate shall be served personally, where practical, by certified United
States mail, or by posting such notice to abate on the premises. Return of service shall be made as provided by law for returns of personal service. (Ord. 83-466, 9-6-83)
4-2-6: ABATEMENT BY CITY: If the person so notified neglects or fails to abate the nuisance as directed, the Mayor, or other
officers initiating the notice, may cause the nuisance to be abated, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred. The expense account shall be fully itemized, verified and filed with the City Clerk. Such expenses shall be paid by the City. (Ord. 83-466, 9-6-83)
4-2-7: COLLECTION OF COST OF ABATEMENT: The
Clerk shall mail a statement of the total cost to the person failing to abide by the notice to abate and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one month, he or she shall pursue the levy of an assessment as provided by Idaho Code, sections 50-334 and 50-1008. (Ord. 83-466, 9-6-83)
4-2-8: REQUEST FOR HEARING AND APPEAL:
A. Request for Hearing: Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing with the officer ordering the abatement as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for hearing must be made in writing and delivered to the officer ordering the abatement within the time stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists and it must be abated as ordered.
B. Decision of Hearing Officer; Appeal: At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a written decision as to whether a nuisance exists. If he or she finds that a nuisance exists, he or she must order it abated within an additional time which must be reasonable under the circumstances. An appeal from this decision may be had by immediately filing a written notice with the hearing officer. This appeal will be heard before the City Council at a time and place fixed by the Council. The findings of the Council shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a time reasonable under the circumstances. (Ord. 83-466, 9-6-83)
City of Salmon
4-2-9 4-2-9
4-2-9: PENALTY: Anyone violating any of the provisions of this
Chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. Every day any condition is allowed to exist which is in violation of this Chapter shall be a distinct and separate offense. In addition, whenever it appears to the City Council that any person has engaged in any act or practice in violation of this chapter, the City Council may instruct the City Attorney, or his/her agent, to institute a civil action in the district court to enforce compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 83-466, 9-6-83; 1995 Code)
City of Salmon
4-3-1 4-3-2
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
4-3-1: Containers and Disposal
4-3-2: Burning Prohibited
4-3-1: CONTAINERS AND DISPOSAL: Each and every family
dwelling unit located in the City shall dispose of all putrescible, wet and loose garbage in a container with specifications as set from time to time by the Council.
A. Specifications: Said container shall be equipped with tight fitting lids and shall be leak proof.
B. Litter Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to litter property, and the area around garbage containers shall be kept clean and free of litter and pests, which shall be the responsibility of the owner of the container.
C. Compliance Required: All residents shall have six (6) months from the date of this Chapter to meet the above requirements concerning garbage containers. (Ord. 77-420, 12-19-77; 1995 Code)
4-3-2: BURNING PROHIBITED: It shall be unlawful for any resident of the City to burn garbage, rubbish, decaying
matter, dead animals or refuse of any kind; excepting, however, leaves
and needles dropped by trees, limbs, splinters, and bark from wood
cutting and splitting, and weeds and other vegetation, when in a safe
place and in compliance with all Lemhi County and State of Idaho
regulations. (Ord. 74-397, 6-3-74; amd Ord. 19-836, 5-15-19)
City of Salmon
4-4-1 4-4-1
CHAPTER 4
SELF-CONTAINED PORTABLE TOILETS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Self-contained Portable Toilets Defined
4-4-2: Allowed Uses
4-4-3: Prohibited Uses
4-4-4: Maintenance Requirements
4-4-5: American With Disabilities Act Requirements
4-4-6: Application for Waiver
4-4-7: Effect on Existing Self-contained Portable Toilets
4-4-8: Violation – Penalty
4-4-1: SELF-CONTAINED PORTABLE TOILETS DEFINED
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: ADA PORTABLE TOILET: Portable toilet meeting Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements that ensure access to and accommodations for the built environment for people with disabilities.
LONG-TERM USE: Any use of one or more self-contained portable toilets for a period of more than 10 consecutive calendar days.
SELF-CONTAINED One or more commercially manufactured PORTABLE TOILETS: or assembled self-contained toilet facility
that is portable and is not designed or intended for connection to a sewer system with a standard connection.
SITE: Any property or properties, consisting of one or more lots, whether developed or undeveloped, that make up an individual location. Examples of a site include but are not limited to a parking lot or lots, a business location consisting of one or more buildings, and a residential property consisting of one or more lots.
City of Salmon
4-4-1 4-4-2
TEMPORARY USE: Any use of one or more self-contained portable toilets for a period of 10 calendar days or less.
USE: The presence of one or more self-contained portable toilets on a site which are intended for use, even if not actually being used. This would include periods when the toilets are physically secured for security or maintenance periods. The storage of self-contained portable toilets at a commercial facility or business which are not intended to be used is not considered a use under this chapter.
4-4-2 ALLOWED USES: Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any use of self-contained portable toilets that is required by
another code or statute. Unless otherwise authorized by another code or statute, self-contained portable toilets shall be prohibited except as provided for herein.
(1) The use of self-contained portable toilets shall be allowed within the city boundaries subject to the following limitations:
(A) The temporary use of self-contained portable toilets for active construction, rehabilitation projects, special events, interruption of sewer service for emergencies or planned upgrades/repairs, and at sites or facilities that are not permanently inhabited and do not have installed toilet facilities such as city parks is allowed.
(B) The long-term use of self-contained portable toilets for active construction, rehabilitation projects, interruption of sewer service for emergencies or planned upgrades/repairs, and at sites or facilities that are not permanently inhabited and do not have installed toilet facilities such as city parks is allowed, subject to approval in accordance with Title 4, Chapter 4, Section 4-4-6 of the Salmon City Code.
(2) The use of self-contained portable toilets shall be allowed in the residential zoning districts subject to the following limitations:
City of Salmon
4-4-2 4-4-4
(A) The temporary use of self-contained portable toilets for active construction, rehabilitation projects, and interruption of sewer service for emergencies or planned upgrades/repairs is allowed. The use of self-contained portable toilets, limited to four calendar days or less, for special events such as wedding receptions or family reunions on private property is allowed.
(B) The long-term use of self-contained portable toilets for active construction, rehabilitation projects, and interruption of sewer service for emergencies or planned upgrades/repairs, is allowed, subject to approval in accordance with Title 4, Chapter 4, Section 4-4-6 of the Salmon City Code.
4-4-3 PROHIBITED USES
(1) The use of self-contained portable toilets in lieu of connection of a site or facility to the City’s sanitary sewer system is prohibited.
(2) The use of self-contained portable toilets for the purpose of providing sewer service to a site or facility when sewer and water service has been discontinued due to delinquency of the utility account is prohibited.
(3) The use of privately manufactured or constructed self-contained portable toilets is prohibited.
4-4-4 MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS: It is the responsibility of the property owner of the site where self-contained
portable toilets are located to ensure compliance with the maintenance requirements in this section. For special events that obtain a permit from the city, it is the event coordinator’s responsibility to ensure compliance with the maintenance requirements in this section.
The following maintenance requirements shall apply to all uses of self-contained portable toilets:
(1) For temporary and long-term uses, in addition to the requirements of subsection (3) of this section, the self-contained portable toilets must be in good working condition without any broken surfaces or leaks. Doors must be in good working condition and must be able to be securely latched while in use. The toilet(s) must be monitored and/or permanently secured, or serviced by a licensed disposal contractor if the holding tank becomes full during the period of use. The site around the portable toilets must remain clear of trash and debris at all times.
City of Salmon
4-4-4 4-4-6
(2) For all uses, in addition to the other requirements of this section, the following shall apply to the use of self-contained portable toilets. Toilet(s) shall be located on the site so as to be free from obstruction from, nor present an obstruction to, existing structures or driveways. The toilet(s) shall be located in such a manner as to not be potentially impacted by site conditions such as slopes, ditches, or prevailing winds. Toilet(s) located in residential zones shall be located to provide the maximum practical screening from roads and adjacent properties as the site allows.
(3) It is the property owner/event operator’s responsibility to ensure that toilet(s) are not used in a dangerous or inappropriate manner. This may be accomplished by monitoring or securing the toilet(s) during periods of inactivity, such as night time and weekend hours, or by other effective means as appropriate.
4-4-5 AMERICAN WITH DISABILITIES ACT REQUIREMENTS: Where multiple single user portable toilets are clustered at a single
location, no more than 5 percent of the toilet units at each cluster shall be
required to comply with 603; Clearances, Turning Space, and Door
Swing of the ADA Standards for Accessible Design. Portable toilet units
complying with 603 shall be identified by the International Symbol of
Accessibility.
4-4-6 APPLICATION FOR WAIVER: A request for the waiver of one or more conditions of this chapter may be made by
any affected party. The request shall be in writing in the form of a letter addressed to the city council. The letter must indicate the condition or conditions from which a waiver is being requested, the basis for the request, and the action requested. The council shall review the request and recommendations from appropriate staff at a regular meeting. The council may deny or grant a waiver, either partial or fully, from one or more conditions of this chapter where it finds the strict application of said condition(s) would create one or more of the following conditions:
(1) It is not practicable based on the circumstances of the event, activity, or physical conditions of the site.
(2) It would create an unusual hardship to the applicant that is not common to similar events, activities, or sites.
(3) It would not create an unsafe condition, nuisance, or hazard, either on site or to adjacent properties.
(4) The waiver is not simply for the convenience of the applicant, especially in circumstances where other similar events, activities, or sites have complied with the conditions of this chapter.
City of Salmon
4-4-7 4-4-8
4-4-7 EFFECT ON EXISTING SELF-CONTAINED PORTABLE TOILETS: Any self-contained portable toilet currently either
located on a site or in a manner which is in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be removed within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance.
4-4-8 VIOLATION – PENALTY
Violation of this chapter shall be declared to constitute a public nuisance and shall be processed in accordance with the applicable sections of Title 4, Chapter 2.
City of Salmon
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
Subject Chapter
Police Department .......................................................... 1
General Offenses ........................................................... 2
Animal Control ................................................................ 3
Animals ....................................................................... 3A
Dogs ............................................................................ 3B
Livestock; Wild Animals .............................................. 3C
Abandoned And Inoperable Vehicles ............................. 4
Curfew ............................................................................ 5
City of Salmon
5-1-1 5-1-2
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Department Created; Qualifications; Appointments
5-1-2: Chief of Police
5-1-3: Supervision of Police Officers
5-1-4: Powers and Duties of Department Members
5-1-5: Jurisdiction
5-1-6: Police Training Aid
5-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; QUALIFICATIONS; APPOINT-
MENTS: There is hereby created a Police Department of the
City, and members thereof shall be citizens of the United States and shall
be over the age of twenty one (21) years. Said Department shall consist of
a Chief of Police, appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City
Council, and such number of police as may be from time to time authorized by the Mayor and City Council and appointed with their consent, and such reserve officers as may from time to time be appointed by the Chief as exigencies arise. (2007 Code; amd. Ord. 15-809, 10)
5-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. Appointment: The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor
subject to the approval of the Council. The Chief of Police may be removed by the Mayor for any cause by him deemed sufficient; but such removal shall be by and with the affirmative vote of one half (1/2) plus one (1) of the members of the full council; provided, that the City Council, by the unanimous vote of all its members, may upon their own initiative remove any appointive officer. (1959 Code §1-15-1; amd. Ord. 15-809, 10-07-15)
B. Rank: The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Department and
have supervision over all the officers and members thereof. The
Chief of Police may, with the approval of the Mayor, appoint such
reserve officers as may be required from time to time. (1959 Code
§1-15-2; 2007 Code)
City of Salmon
5-1-2 5-1-4
C. Duties:
1. Records and Reports: The Chief of Police shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities of the Department as may be required by statute or by the Mayor. The Chief shall be responsible for the performance of the Police Department and of its functions and all persons who are members of the Police Department shall serve subject to the Chief's orders.
2. Enforcement of Code: It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to
see to the enforcement of all provisions of this Code and of all
applicable statutes and to preserve order and prevent infractions of
the law and arrest violators thereof. The Chief shall have authority to call upon any citizen or bystander to assist him or her in the
execution of the duties of such office. The Chief shall serve all
processes issued to him or her and enforce all orders and judgments of the Court. (1959 Code §1-15-3)
D. Custody of Recovered Property: The Chief of Police shall have the custody of all lost, abandoned or stolen property recovered within the City. (1959 Code §1-15-4)
5-1-3: SUPERVISION OF POLICE OFFICERS: All members of the
Department and reserve officers shall be under the direction
and supervision of the Chief of Police. (2007 Code)
5-1-4: POWERS AND DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
A. Generally: It shall be the duty of all members of the Department to
cause the public peace to be preserved and to see that all laws and
ordinances within the City are enforced.
B. Arrest Powers:
1. Whenever the violation of any law or ordinance shall be reported to them or come to their knowledge, they shall cause the informant, who is a competent witness, to testify against the accused and to sign the required complaint; provided, however, that when a violation of any law or ordinance is committed in their presence, the arrest may be made without a complaint and such complaint may be made by the arresting officer and filed in the proper court. It shall
City of Salmon
5-1-4 5-1-6
be the duty of members of the Department whenever arrests for the
violation of any law or ordinance have been made to see to it that all possible evidence is procured for prosecution of the offenders.
2. The officers and members of the Police Department shall have
power to arrest all offenders against the laws of the State of Idaho and ordinances of the City, by day or by night, in the same manner
as any sheriff or constable, and keep them in the Lemhi County jail
or other place to prevent their escape until trial can be had before
the proper court. (2007 Code)
5-1-5: JURISDICTION: Whenever police shall be in the fresh pursuit of an offender against any law of the State of
Idaho or ordinance of the City, and the offense has been committed within
the corporate limits of the City, such police or police officer, while in
fresh pursuit, may go beyond the corporate or geographical limits of the
City. The arresting officer may take such offender to and keep such
offender in the Lemhi County jail or other place to prevent escape until
trial can be had before the proper court, or may personally hand such
arrested person a notice in writing, or partly in writing and partly printed,
to appear in the proper court at a time specified in such notice. In
addition to such notice, whenever a proper judge is not available to fix
and accept bail for the appearance of such offender in a court of
competent jurisdiction, such arresting officer may accept a temporary
bail for the appearance of such offender at the time specified in said
notice, and which bail shall be by the arresting officer delivered to
the proper judge. (2007 Code)
5-1-6: POLICE TRAINING AID: The City declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid for police training from the
Idaho Police Officers' Standards and Training Council pursuant to Idaho
Code, section19-5101 et seq., and, while receiving such aid, will adhere to
the standards for recruitment and training established by that Council.
(2007 Code)
City of Salmon
5-2-1 5-2-2
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Code Adopted
5-2-2: Issuance Of Citations
5-2-3: Encouraging Delinquency
5-2-4: Loudspeakers Or Sound Trucks
5-2-5: Playing Ball On Streets Prohibited
5-2-6: Water Flowing Upon Streets
5-2-7: Discharge Of Firearms Prohibited
5-2-8: Possession, Consumption, and Transportation Of Open Alcoholic Beverages and Intoxicating Inhalants
5-2-9: Disturbing the Peace
5-2-1: CODE ADOPTED: Pursuant to the provisions of section
50-901 of the Idaho Code, there is hereby adopted title 18 of
said Idaho Code, being the criminal laws of the State, establishing
principles of liability for conduct; establishing general principles of
justification for conduct; defining offenses involving danger to persons;
defining offenses against property; defining offenses against the family;
defining offenses against public administration; defining offenses against
public order and decency; establishing a uniform system of penalties,
including fines, forfeitures and imprisonment; and establishing criteria for
imposing sentences upon those convicted of an offense, and said laws shall be and the same are hereby adopted as the criminal code of the City.
One copy of said laws shall be on file in the office of the City
Clerk for reference to and inspection by the general public.
(2007 Code)
5-2-2: ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS: Upon a violation of any provision of this Chapter or the laws hereinabove adopted,
the arresting officer shall execute the citation in the following manner:
Violation of Salmon City Code, Section 5-2-1 (being in
particular Section 18-(applicable code)___, of the Idaho Code).
(1995 Code; amd. 2007 Code)
City of Salmon
5-2-3 5-2-7
5-2-3: ENCOURAGING DELINQUENCY: It shall be unlawful for any person, by any act or neglect, to encourage, aid or
cause a child to come within the purview of the juvenile authorities; and it shall likewise be unlawful for any person, after notice that a driver's license of any child has been suspended or revoked, to permit such child to operate a motor vehicle during the period that such driver's license is suspended. (1959 Code §6-1-13)
5-2-4: LOUDSPEAKERS OR SOUND TRUCKS: It shall be unlawful to play, operate or use any device known as a
sound truck, loudspeaker or sound amplifier, radio or phonograph, with loudspeaker or sound amplifier or any instrument of any kind or character which emits loud and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle unless such person in charge of such vehicle shall have first applied to and received permission from the Chief of Police to operate any such vehicle so equipped. (1959 Code §6-1-29)
5-2-5: PLAYING BALL ON STREETS PROHIBITED: It shall be
unlawful for any person to play ball or throw any ball to and
fro upon any public thoroughfare in the City. (1959 Code §6-1-37)
5-2-6: WATER FLOWING UPON STREETS: It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any water to flow into or upon any
public thoroughfares. (1959 Code §6-1-46)
5-2-7: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED:
A. Definition Of Terms: As used in this Section:
FIREARMS: Wherever the term “firearms” is used in this section, the term shall mean any instrument used in the propulsion of shot, shell, or bullets or other harmful objects by the action of gunpowder within it, or by the action of compressed air within it, or by the power of springs and including what are commonly known as air rifles and B-B guns.
City of Salmon
5-2-7 5-2-8
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge firearms of any kind within the limits of the municipality; provided, however, that this shall not apply to police officers in the discharge of their duties.
C. The governing body may, at any time, upon receipt of proper application, grant permits to shooting galleries, gun clubs, and others for shooting in fixed localities and under specified rules. Such permits shall be in writing attested by the City Clerk, upon approval of the City Council, conforming to such requirements as the governing body shall demand, and the permit thus issued shall be subject to revocation at any time by action of the governing body and/or the Chief of Police. (Ord. 12-783, 6-20-2012)
5-2-8: POSESSION, CONSUMPTION AND TRANSPORTATION OF OPEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND
INTOXICATING INHALANTS: Possession, consumption, and transportation of open alcoholic beverages and intoxicating inhalants is prohibited on the public areas and rights of way within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to become or attempt to become intoxicated by inhaling the fumes of gasoline, toluene or any other solvent or product containing any such solvent.
A. Public Intoxication: Any person who is in public and intoxicated at a level that presents a danger to themselves and/or others or creates a disturbance of the peace, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. It is unlawful for any person to consume any of the following: beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverage or liquor, or any liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, or wine, either on foot or by other means of locomotion, on any of the public rights of way or public areas of the city. Public areas shall include parking areas and lots, sidewalks, building traffic areas, loading and unloading areas, alleys, public easements, rivers and ditches, rights of way for public utilities, school grounds, parking areas along and adjacent to public streets and similar such areas of public use. This ordinance shall be interpreted to exclude limited consumption of alcoholic beverages by individuals in city parks, ball fields, hockey rinks, city golf course, and other places incidental to private social gatherings.
C. It is unlawful for any person to breathe, inhale or drink any compound, liquid, chemical or other substance containing toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl acetate,
City of Salmon
5-2-8 5-2-9
methylethyl ketone, tricholoathane, isopropanol methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone, pentachlorophenol, petroleum ether, benzene, ethylene dichloride, trifluorethane, tetrafluorethane, difluorethane or any other toxic or intoxicating substance while present on the public areas or public rights of way within the city, as the same are set out hereinabove, whether on foot or by other means of locomotion. (amd. Ord. 18-832, 10-03-2018)
D. It is unlawful for any person to break open, or allow to be broken or opened, any container of beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverage; or to possess any container of beer, wine, or alcoholic beverage whose lid or cap is not securely fastened or, in the case of canned beverages, whose top has been popped open, while the person is present, either on foot or by other means of locomotion, upon the public streets or public areas of the city as the same are set out hereinabove.
E. Exceptions for consumption during special events may be requested from the sponsoring agency at the office of the City Clerk at least seventy two (72) hours prior to the event and the Police Chief is hereby authorized to review the request or deny said permit application. If alcohol is being sold, the application must be accompanied by a catering permit or Non-Profit Beer and/or Wine Permit issued by the State of Idaho. If approved, the permit shall then be issued by the City Clerk. (Ord. 12-784, 6-27-2012)
5-2-9: DISTURBING THE PEACE: Every person who maliciously and willfully disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood,
family or person, by loud or unusual noise, or by tumultuous or offensive conduct, or by threatening, traducing, quarreling, challenging to fight or fighting, or fires any gun or pistol, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
City of Salmon
5-3A-1 5-3A-3
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE A. ANIMALS
SECTION:
5-3A-1: Animals Running At Large Prohibited
5-3A-2: Poultry Running At Large Prohibited
5-3A-3: Impounding Of Animals; Fee
5-3A-4: Notice And Sale Of Animals
5-3A-5: Revenue From Sale
5-3A-6: Freeing Impounded Animals Prohibited
5-3A-7: Vicious Animals
5-3A-1: ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED: No animal
shall be permitted to run at large in the City at any time
during the year; and it shall be unlawful for anyone to herd or drive any animal through the streets without having said animal under control by means of a rope, strap or other device by which it may be led, unless such animal is being driven in harness or hauled. (Ord. 99-608, 4-8-1999)
5-3A-2: POULTRY RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED: It shall be
unlawful for any person to keep fowl or poultry unless such
fowl or poultry are at all times kept upon such person's own premises.
(1959 Code §6-2-2)
5-3A-3: IMPOUNDING OF ANIMALS; FEE: If any animal shall be
found running at large contrary to the provisions of this
Article, it is hereby made the duty of the Chief of Police or his designee to take up and confine the same at the Lemhi County Humane Society and such animal taken up and confined shall not be released until the owner or person entitled to the possession thereof shall pay to the Lemhi County Humane Society a fee for impounding and boarding said animal. Such fees shall be retained by the Lemhi County
City of Salmon
5-3A-3 5-3A-7
Humane Society and shall be established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 99-608, 4-8-1999; amd. 2007 Code)
5-3A-4: NOTICE AND SALE OF ANIMALS: If the owner or person
entitled to the possession of an animal does not pay the
charges and take it away within five (5) days from the time it is taken into
custody, the Chief of Police or his designee may sell such animal at public auction after having given at least five (5) days' notice of the time and place of such sale by publishing or by posting said notice in five (5) public places in the City as well as serving a copy of said notice upon the owner or possessor, if known, of said animal. Such animal may be redeemed at any time before the date of sale by payment to the officer in charge or his or her assistant of any fees, expenses and charges herein provided. (1959 Code §6-2-4, Amd. 2007 Code)
5-3A-5: REVENUE FROM SALE: In case any animal sold pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter be sold for more than is
sufficient to pay the fees and charges aforesaid, such excess shall, by the
officer or his or her assistant making the sale, be deposited with the City
Clerk, who shall pay such excess, under an order of the City Council, to the owner of such animal or animals or to the person entitled to the possession of the same upon claim and proper proof within one year from date of said sale. (1959 Code §6-2-5)
5-3A-6: FREEING IMPOUNDED ANIMALS PROHIBITED: It shall be unlawful to break open or in any manner, directly or
indirectly, aid or assist in the breaking open any pen or enclosure with intent of releasing any animal confined therein. (1959 Code §6-2-6)
5-3A-7: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
Title 25, Chapter 28, of Idaho Statutes shall apply in cases of Vicious Animals. (Amd. Ord. 15-809, 10-07-15)
City of Salmon
5-3B-1 5-3B-1
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE B. DOGS
SECTION:
5-3B-1: Definitions
5-3B-2: Licensing
5-3B-3: Leash Requirements
5-3B-4: Muzzling
5-3B-5: Rabies; Notice
5-3B-6: Prohibited Acts
5-3B-7: Nuisance
5-3B-8: Impoundment Procedures
5-3B-9: Disposition Of Unclaimed Or Infected Animals
5-3B-10: Authority Of Animal Control Officer
5-3B-11: Violation An Infraction
5-3B-1: DEFINITIONS: The following definitions used in this Article
Shall mean the following, unless the context indicates
otherwise:
AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owners, not confined in
a vehicle and not under control by leash
sufficiently strong to prevent the dog from
escaping from the owner or someone
representing the owner.
BREEDING OR A place where the owner or occupant of the
COMMERCIAL KENNEL: property keeps at least two (2) but not more than five (5) dogs over the age of eight (8) months and is engaged in the business of breeding dogs for sale. (Ord. 04-663, 7-21-2004)
City of Salmon
5-3B-1 5-3B-2
DOG: Animals of the canine family both male and
female.
NONCOMMERCIAL: A noncommercial kennel at a private residence where at least four (4) but not more than five (5) dogs over the age of eight (8) months are kept (See exemption in paragraph 12). (Ord. 04-663, 7-21-2004, amd. Ord. 05-694, 7-6-2005)
OWNER: Any person or persons, firm, association, or
corporation owning, keeping or harboring a dog
within the corporate limits of the City. (Ord.
93-568, 11-3-1993)
PRIMARY ENCLOSURE: Any outside run or pen used to contain dogs. (Ord. 04-663, 7-21-2004)
SHELTER: Any building or structure used to shelter dogs from inclement weather, preserve their body heat and keep them dry. (Ord. 04-663, 7-21-2004)
5-3B-2: LICENSING:
A. Dog License Required:
1. License Required; Fee: On or before January 1 each year, all
owners or keepers of dogs over four (4) months of age kept,
harbored or maintained shall procure a license from the City
Clerk and pay the assessed fee, which fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 99-608, 4-8-1999)
2. Proof Of Rabies Vaccination: The owner shall present at the time
application is made for such license, written proof of rabies
vaccination including the age, color, sex and breed of the dog, the
date of vaccination and the duration of immunity.
3. Exceptions: The provisions of this subsection shall not be
intended to apply to dogs whose owners are nonresidents
temporarily within the City nor to dogs brought into the City for the
City of Salmon
5-3B-2 5-3B-2
purpose of participating in any dog show nor to seeing eye dogs
properly trained to assist blind persons and such dogs are actually
being used by blind persons for the purpose of aiding them in going
from place to place.
B. Tag And Collar: Upon payment of the license fee, the owner of a dog will be issued a license certificate and metallic tag. Every owner shall be required to provide each dog with a collar to which the license tag must be affixed and worn constantly. In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued by the City Clerk upon presentation of a receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the current year, and the payment of a fee that shall be set by resolution for each duplicate. Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another and no refunds shall be made on any dog license fee because of death of the dog or the owner's leaving the City before expiration of the license period. (Ord. 87-509, 6-1-1987, amd. 2007 Code; amd. Ord. 15-809, 10-07-15)
C. 1. License Required: It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain, harbor or possess upon the premises of any household or business any number of dogs that fall within the kennel definitions of Section 5-3B-1, BREEDING OR COMMERCIAL KENNEL AND HOBBY KENNEL unless and until the owner or person in charge thereof shall have obtained a kennel license. In no event shall any dog kennel owner keep more than five (5) adult dogs over the age of eight (8) months on the licensed premises. The fee for such kennel license shall be fixed by resolution of the City Council and shall be issued only after compliance with existing zoning requirements and approval of the City Council and the Lemhi County Humane Society. Said fee is in addition to the tag and collar fee outlined in Section 5-3B-2, B. No license to operate a kennel shall be issued to anyone who has been convicted of cruelty to animals. (Ord. 99-608, 4-8-1999, amd. Ord. 04-663, 7-21-2004)
2. License Valid For: The dog kennel license is valid for twelve (12) months from the date of issue. Application for a renewal license must be received by the City at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the license. (Ord. 04-663, 7-21-2004)
3. Application for License: The application for a kennel license must contain a written statement from a licensed veterinarian stating that all animals listed on the kennel license application are current on all shots and are in good health with no contagious diseases and that every animal is receiving adequate care. Once
City of Salmon
5-3B-2 5-3B-2
the City Clerk has received said application, the City Clerk will set a public hearing at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting in order to receive public input. (Ord. 04-663, 7-21-2004)
4. Renewal: If after one year no complaints are documented, the City Clerk shall have the authority to renew the application without notice and hearing. Should there be documented complaints against the particular kennel, the original licensing procedure must be followed. (Ord. 05-694, 7-6-2005)
5. Public Notices: All notices to the public, including but not limited to, advertisements, flyers, posters and all other media venues, of animals for sale shall contain the kennel license number required under this ordinance. (Ord. 04-663, 7-21-2004)
6. Exemptions: The Lemhi County Humane Society Animal Shelter shall be exempt from all kennel license fees. Veterinary hospitals and grooming establishments shall be exempt from all license fees unless engaged in commercial breeding. (Ord. 04-663, 7-21-2004)
7. Kennels as Primary Enclosures and Shelters: All outside runs, pens or other containment areas shall be screened from view. There shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet side and rear set setback for runs, pens or other containment areas and no animals shall be housed within the front yard setback area. All buildings or structures shall conform to state and local building and zoning codes and will be kept clean, dry and in sanitary condition. All interior building or structure surfaces shall be constructed and maintained so that they are water resistant, have sufficient bedding material and can easily be sanitized. All outside runs, pens or other containment areas shall be maintained in a manner to protect the dogs from direct sunlight, allow for adequate ventilation and temperature control and be constructed in a manner to provide for proper containment of the animal. Dogs may not be housed on a temporary or permanent basis in a drum or barrel, regardless of the material of which the drum or barrel is constructed. (Ord. 04-663, 7-21-2004)
8. Kennel Structure Specifications: The interior height of all structures shall be at least six (6) inches higher than the head of the tallest dog in the shelter when it is in normal standing position. Primary enclosures shall be constructed and maintained to provide sufficient space to allow each dog to turn about freely and to stand erect, sit and lie down in a comfortable normal position. The
City of Salmon
5-3B-2 5-3B-2
structure shall afford each dog sheltered therein at least twenty-five (25) square feet for a dog weighing twenty five (25) pounds or less, fifty (50) square feet for a dog weighing between twenty-six (26) and forty-five (45) pounds and one-hundred (100) square feet for a dog weighing more than forty five (45) pounds. Each bitch with nursing puppies shall be provided with an additional amount of floor space, based on her breed and behavioral characteristics, and in accordance with generally accepted husbandry practices as determined in advance and in writing by the attending veterinarian. (Ord. 04-663, 7-21-2004)
9. Food, Water and Bedding Requirements: Dogs kept in kennels shall be fed at least once a day. The food shall be free from contamination, shall be wholesome, palatable and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirement for the condition and size of the dogs, unless the owner has a written letter from a licensed veterinarian stating otherwise. Fresh water is to be available at all times. Water receptacles shall be mounted or secured in a manner that prevents tipping. Food and water receptacles shall be accessible to dogs kept in the kennel and shall be located to avoid contamination. All bedding shall be kept clean, dry and free of contamination and excreta. (Ord. 04-663, 7-21-2004)
10. Sanitation: Excreta shall be removed from the primary enclosure and shelter, including any floor area or ground surface on a daily basis including under the shelter. Primary enclosures, shelters and under shelters shall be sanitized and disinfected a minimum of once daily and as often as necessary to prevent an accumulation of debris or excreta or a disease hazard. A dog may not be placed in a primary enclosure or shelter previously occupied unless the enclosure or shelter has been sanitized. (Ord. 04-663, 7-21-2004)
11. Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or fail to perform any requirement which is prohibited or required by this Section. Said violation may result in revocation of the kennel license and/or impoundment of animals at the owner’s cost. Violations are hereby declared to be an infraction. (Ord. 04-663, 7-21-2004; amd. Ord. 15-809, 10-07-15)
12. A noncommercial kennel owner having more dogs than this ordinance allows at the time of the enactment of this ordinance and who affirms the same within forty-five (45) days from the effective date of this ordinance with the City Clerk, may keep said number of
City of Salmon
5-3B-2 5-3B-4
dogs as a noncommercial kennel upon the following conditions: Said dogs may not be replaced at death or removal for any other cause. Eventually the number of dogs shall be reduced to not more than five (5) dogs. The owner must be licensed. (Ord. 04-663, 7-21-2004)
D. Unlicensed Dogs: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, or maintain, or feed any dog for which no license fee has been paid, or upon which no tag has been placed. The Animal Control Officer shall have the authority to take up and impound any dog not so licensed and tagged. (Ord. 87-509, 6-1-1987)
5-3B-3: LEASH REQUIREMENTS:
A. Leash Required: It shall be unlawful for any dog to run loose off of the owner's property or other private property where the dog is normally kept. When any dog is off of its owner’s property or
other private property where the dog is kept, said dog shall be properly secured by a leash in the hands of a person able to control the dog. It shall be unlawful for any dog owner or party in control of any dog to allow said dog to run loose off of said owner’s property or to fail to have said dog properly secured by a leash when on public property. (Ord 87-509, 6-1-1987)
B. Failure To Have Leash: Any dog or cat not secured by a leash, or not securely confined upon privately owned property, or in a City-owned park area designated as allowing dogs to run free and so marked by signs installed by the City, may be taken and impounded by the Animal Control Officer. (Ord. 99-608, 4-8-1999)
5-3B-4: MUZZLING: Whenever it becomes necessary to safeguard
the public from the dangers of hydrophobia, the Mayor, if he
or she deems necessary shall issue a proclamation ordering every person
owning or keeping a dog to confine securely on his or her premises unless
such dog shall have on a muzzle of sufficient strength to prevent its biting
any person. Any unmuzzled dog running at large during the time of the
proclamation shall be seized and impounded, unless noticeably infected
with rabies. All dogs so noticeably infected with rabies and displaying vicious propensities shall be killed by the order of the Chief of Police without notice to the owner. Dogs impounded during the first two (2) days of such proclamation shall, if claimed within five (5) days, be released to the owner, unless infected with rabies, upon payment of the impounding charges provided for herein. If unclaimed after that period, such dog may be summarily destroyed. (Ord. 87-509, 6-1-1987)
City of Salmon
5-3B-5 5-3B-7
5-3B-5: RABIES; NOTICE:
A. Suspicion Of Rabies: If a dog is believed to have rabies or has been bitten by a dog suspected of having rabies, such dog shall be confined and shall be placed under the observation of a veterinarian at the expense of the owner for a period of two (2) weeks. The owner shall notify the Animal Control Officer of the fact that his or her dog has been exposed to rabies and at his or her discretion the Animal Control Officer is empowered to have such dog removed from the owner's premises to a veterinary hospital and there placed under observation for a period of two (2) weeks at the expense of the owner.
B. Removal From City Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person knowing or suspecting a dog has rabies to allow such dog to be taken off his or her premises or beyond the limits of the City without the written permission of the Animal Control Officer or Chief of Police or his. Every owner, or other person, upon ascertaining a dog is rabid shall immediately notify the Animal Control Officer or a police officer who shall either remove the dog to the animal shelter or summarily destroy it. (Ord. 87-509, 6-1-1987, amd. 2007 Code)
5-3B-6: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Running At Large: It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, or harborer or any other person having the care, custody or control of any dog to permit such dog to run at large within the City at any time.
B. Dogs In City Park: It shall be unlawful for dogs to be in the City Park at any time out of any vehicle whether on or off a leash, tether or tie. (Ord. 87-509, 6-1-1987)
C. Dogs Unrestrained In Parked Vehicle or Conveyance: It shall be unlawful for any dog to be allowed in any parked vehicle or conveyance unless restrained in such a fashion to prevent the animal from extending beyond the confine of the vehicle or conveyance or from posing a danger to pedestrians. ( Ord.03-652, 8-6-2003)
5-3B-7: NUISANCE:
A. Destruction Of Property: No owner will allow a dog or cat to become a nuisance or destroy property of others, and any police officer or the Animal Control Officer may notify an owner upon investigation of a sworn complaint against the owner of any animal that said animal is a nuisance or has destroyed property other than the owner's, that the said owner or person in control of said animal
City of Salmon
5-3B-7 5-3B-09
must confine said animal to leash or kennel. (Ord. 99-608, 4-8-1999)
B. Biting, Chasing Or Barking: A dog that bites or chases persons not trespassing on the property of, or injuring or attempting to injure the
person, family or property of the owner may be declared a public nuisance. In addition any dog that chases vehicles in public streets, or howls, yelps or barks for prolonged periods, or by any other means causes annoyance or disturbances may be declared a public nuisance.
C. Harboring Nuisance Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to own,
harbor, keep or maintain any such nuisance animal.
D. Filing Of Complaint: Any person aggrieved by a nuisance animal may file a complaint in the Magistrate Court charging the owner with a violation of this Section. (Ord. 93-568, 11-3-1993)
E. Authority Of Animal Control Officer: The Animal Control Officer shall have the authority to take up and impound any dog or cat declared a nuisance by the Magistrate Court. (Ord. 99-608, 4-8-1999)
F. Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or fail to perform any requirement which is prohibited or required by this Section and said violation is hereby declared to be an infraction. (Ord. 93-568, 11 -3-1993; amd. Ord. 15-809, 10-07-15)
5-3B-8: IMPOUNDMENT PROCEDURES:
A. Unlicensed, Untagged Dog Running At Large: It shall be the duty of
the Animal Control Officer to impound dogs not wearing a license tag or dogs with tags that are running at large.
B. Licensed, Tagged Dog Running At Large: Whenever any dog wearing a license tag is impounded, the Animal Control Officer shall
immediately notify the owner thereof. No dog shall be released to the owner until payment of all monies due to the animal shelter as prescribed by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 87-509, 6-1-1987)
5-3B-9: DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR INFECTED ANIMALS:
A. Retention Of Animals: It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to keep all animals so impounded for a period of three (3) days.
B. Unredeemed Animals: If at the expiration of three (3) days from the
City of Salmon
5-3B-09 5-3B-11
date of notice to the owner the animal shall not have been redeemed, it may be destroyed. Any animal which appears to be suffering from rabies or affected with hydrophobia, mange or other infectious or dangerous disease shall not be released but may be forthwith destroyed. (Ord. 99-608, 4-8-1999)
5-3B-10: AUTHORITY OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The Animal Control Officer shall have the right to arrest and
cause to be arrested any person, and to serve summons, warrants of
arrest and notices to appear upon any person who violates any provisions
of this Article or laws of the City relating to dogs or other animals; and the Animal Control Officer shall have all necessary police powers incident to such authority. (Ord. 87-509, 6-1-1987)
5-3B-11: VIOLATION AN INFRACTION: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or fail to perform any requirement
which is prohibited or required by this Article, and said violation is hereby
declared to be an infraction. (Ord. 87-509, 6-1-1987; amd. Ord. 15-809, 10-07-15)
City of Salmon
5-3C-1 5-3C-1
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE C. LIVESTOCK; WILD ANIMALS
SECTION:
5-3C-1: Permit
5-3C-2: Running at Large Prohibited
5-3C-3: Cruelty to Animals Prohibited
5-3C-4: Impoundment
5-3C-5: Penalty
5-3C-1: PERMIT:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any wild animal, wild bird or reptile without a proper license, tag, or permit issued by the Idaho State Department of Fish and Game. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any mink, male goat over the age of six (6) months, or pig, under any circumstances. No person shall possess, own, or harbor a “miniature potbellied pig” unless and until obtaining a license from the City of Salmon for such animal in accordance with this chapter. Only two miniature potbellied pigs may be maintained or licensed at any single address or premises. Said license may be issued upon payment of the license fee, proof of required vaccinations and upon proving compliance with the standards established by this code. Any such potbellied pig shall be subject to the care, control, and licensing requirements established for dogs by the City Code. "Person" includes for purposes of this Article any individual, firm, corporation, trust, any other organized group, or any government. (Ord. 86-497, 6-2-86; amd. Ord 08-729, 6-04-2008; amd. Ord. 16-818, 11-16-2016)
B. Regulations: Areas where animals are kept shall be maintained so as not to create a nuisance impacting neighboring properties with noise, odors, insects, or dust. Square footage per lot area for keeping livestock must meet requirements as stated in the Salmon Development Code. (amd. Ord. 16-818, 11-16-2016)
City of Salmon
5-3C-1 5-3C-4
C. Application; Fee: Persons desiring a license, tag, or permit in order to keep wild animals, wild birds or reptiles shall apply for an application with the Idaho Department of Fish and Game and present a copy of the permit to the City Clerk. (amd. Ord. 16-818, 11-16-2016)
D. Term: The term of said permit for wild animals, wild birds or reptiles shall be determined by the Idaho Department of Fish and Game. (amd. Ord. 16-818, 11-16-2016)
E. Exception: The provisions of this Article shall not be intended to apply to animals whose owners are nonresidents temporarily in the City, nor to animals brought to the City and kept therein for purposes of rodeo, fair, livestock show, exhibition or any other recognized performance. "Temporary" shall be defined as not to exceed ten (10) days in a calendar year. (Ord. 83-472, 12-19-83, eff. 1-1-84; 1995 Code; amd. Ord. 16-818, 11-16-2016)
5-3C-2: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED: It shall be unlawful for
any person owning livestock or having control or possession
of said livestock to allow the same to run at large within the City. (Ord. 83-472, 12-19-83, eff. 1-1-84)
5-3C-3: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED: No owner, or custodian of an animal, shall fail to provide such animal with
good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the elements, veterinary care and humane care and treatment sufficient to
maintain said animal in good health. (Ord. 83-472, 12-19-83, eff. 1-1-84)
5-3C-4: IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Notice, Redemption, Fee: All animals kept or maintained in a manner unlawful under this Article shall be impounded by the City and maintained in a humane manner. The City shall notify the owner or custodian of the animal impounded of the impoundment, and said owner or custodian may recover possession of said animal upon payment to the City of fees and costs as set forth in this Article or otherwise. Notice shall be served personally, where practical, by certified United States mail, or by posting such notice to abate on the premises. Return of service shall be made as provided by law for returns of personal service.
City of Salmon
5-3C-4 5-3C-5
B. Failure to Redeem: Upon failure by the owner or custodian to pay fees and costs as required, or to take possession of such animals within five (5) days after service of notice, the animal may be disposed of by delivering said animal to any person who will pay the fees and costs, by destroying such animal in a humane manner, or by selling the animal at public auction to satisfy costs of impoundment. Receipts in excess of impoundment costs shall be paid to the owner or custodian.
C. Recovery of Possession: One claiming possession of an impounded animal may recover possession by exhibiting satisfactory proof of ownership and paying the fees set by the Humane Society with City Council approval. (Ord. 83-472, 12-19-83, eff. 1-1-84; 1995 Code)
5-3C-5: PENALTY: Anyone violating any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as
provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 83-472, 12-19-83, eff. 1-1-84;
1995 Code)
City of Salmon
5-4-1 5-4-2
CHAPTER 4
ABANDONED AND INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-4-1: Title
5-4-2: Definitions
5-4-3: Storing, Parking or Leaving Vehicles Prohibited; Nuisance;
Exceptions
5-4-4: Investigation of Premises
5-4-5: Notice to Remove
5-4-6: Responsibility for Removal
5-4-7: Notice Procedures
5-4-8: Request for Hearing
5-4-9: Removal of Vehicle from Property
5-4-10: Disposition of Vehicles
5-4-11: Redemption of Impounded Vehicles
5-4-12: Immunity from Damages
5-4-13: Liability of Owner or Occupant
5-4-14: Penalty
5-4-1: TITLE: This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the
ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLE ORDINANCE OF THE CITY. (1995 Code)
5-4-2: DEFINITIONS: For the purpose of this Chapter, the following
terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CITY: The City of Salmon, County of Lemhi, State of
Idaho.
City of Salmon
5-4-2 5-4-3
JUNKED VEHICLE: Any vehicle, as defined herein, which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate or plates and a current safety inspection certificate if such is required by law and the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property within the City which is privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this Section.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any street, which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly-owned property or facility.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers and trailers, and railroad engines, rolling stock, cabooses and utility cars. (1995 Code)
5-4-3: STORING, PARKING OR LEAVING VEHICLES PROHIBITED; NUISANCE; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Prohibited: No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled condition, whether attended or not, upon any public property within the City for a period of time in excess of seventy two (72) hours. The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or parts thereof on public property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
City of Salmon
5-4-3 5-4-5
B. Public Nuisance Declared: It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having custody of any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled vehicle to store or permit any such vehicle or accessories to remain on any private property within the City for a period of more than thirty (30) days after the receipt of a notice requiring such removal, and it shall be further unlawful for any person owning any private property within the City to store or to permit to remain any such vehicle or accessories on his or her property for more than a like period. Such storage is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
C. Exclusion: This Section shall not apply to any vehicle or vehicle accessories stored within an enclosed building or enclosed behind a privacy fence where such vehicles or accessories are not visible from any public property or adjacent private property or on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, in a storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner, or seasonal use vehicles such as snowmobiles, motorcycles, motor scooters and nonmotorized campers, or to any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways or any vehicle retained by the owner for antique collection purposes. Such business enterprises shall include auto junk yards, auto repair and auto body shops but shall not include automobile service stations or tire, battery and accessory sales stores. (1995 Code)
5-4-4: INVESTIGATION OF PREMISES: Any City police officer or the Lemhi County Sheriff or one of his or her duly constituted
deputies and/or any authorized City employee or agent on routine inspection or upon receipt of a complaint may investigate a suspected abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or partially
dismantled vehicle or vehicle accessories and record the make, model, style and identification numbers and its situation. (1995 Code)
5-4-5: NOTICE TO REMOVE:
A. Notice to Property Owner or Occupant: Whenever it comes to the attention of the City that any nuisance (junked vehicle), as defined in Section 5-5-2 of this Chapter, exists in the City, a notice, in writing, shall be served upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists or, in case there is no such occupant, then upon the owner of the property or his or her agent, notifying them of the
City of Salmon
5-4-5 5-4-8
existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal in the time specified in this Chapter.
B. Affixing Notice to Vehicle: In the case of vehicles in violation of Section 5-5-3 of this Chapter, such notice shall be affixed to the vehicle in a conspicuous place and manner. (1995 Code)
5-4-6: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL: Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and the owner or occupant of the private property on which the same is located, either or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the City, the owner or occupant of the private property where the same is located shall be liable for the expenses incurred. (1995 Code)
5-4-7: NOTICE PROCEDURES:
A. Action on Violation:
1. If action is to be taken for a violation of subsection 5-5-3B of this Chapter, the City shall give notice of removal to the owner or occupant of the private property where it is located at least thirty (30) days before the time compliance is required. It shall constitute sufficient notice when a copy of same is posted in a conspicuous place upon the private property on which the vehicle is located, and duplicate copies are sent by registered or certified mail to the owner or occupant of the private property at his or her last known address.
2. If action is to be taken for a violation of subsection 5-5-3A of this Chapter, removal of the violating vehicle shall not occur until after the end of the third full working day after notice has been posted upon the offending vehicle.
B. Contents of Notice: The notice shall contain a request for removal within the time specified in this Chapter, and the notice shall advise that upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, the City or its designee shall undertake such removal with the cost of removal to be levied against the owner or occupant of the property. (1995 Code)
5-4-8: REQUEST FOR HEARING: The persons to whom the notices are directed, or their duly authorized agents, may file
a written request for hearing before the Mayor and City Council within the thirty (30) day period of compliance prescribed in subsection 5-5-3B of this Chapter for the purpose of defending the charges by the City. (1995 Code)
City of Salmon
5-4-9 5-4-12
5-4-9: REMOVAL OF VEHICLE FROM PROPERTY:
A. Removal by Law Enforcement: If the violation of subsection 5-4-3B of this Chapter described in the notice has not been remedied within the thirty (30) day period of compliance, or in the event a notice requesting a hearing is timely filed, a hearing is had and the existence of the violation is affirmed by the Mayor and City Council, the City police or the Sheriff of Lemhi County or his or her designee shall have the right to take possession of the targeted vehicle and remove it from the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow such person to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Notice of Impoundment: Within forty eight (48) hours of the removal of any vehicle pursuant to the provisions above, the City shall give notice to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private property from which the vehicle was removed that said vehicle has been impounded and stored for violation of this Chapter. This notice shall give the location of where the vehicle is stored and the costs incurred by the City for removal. (1995 Code)
5-4-10: DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES: Upon removing a vehicle
under the provisions of this Chapter, the City shall cause the
vehicle to be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of chapter 18, title 49 of the Idaho Code entitled "Abandoned Motor Vehicles". (1995 Code)
5-4-11: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES: The owner of any vehicle seized under the provisions of this Chapter may
redeem such vehicle at any time after its removal but prior to sale or destruction thereof on proof of ownership and payment to the City of such sum as the City may determine and fix for the actual and reasonable cost of removal and storage and any preliminary sale advertisement expenses, plus ten dollars ($10.00) a day for administrative expenses. (1995 Code)
5-4-12: IMMUNITY FROM DAMAGES: The Sheriff, deputy sheriff and any police officer, towing service owner, operator or
employee shall not be held to answer or be liable for damage in any action brought by the registered owner or his or her legal representative or any person legally entitled to the possession of a vehicle removed and impounded, when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this Chapter. (1995 Code)
City of Salmon
5-4-13 5-4-14
5-4-13: LIABILITY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT: Upon the failure of the owner or occupant of property from which vehicle
have been removed pursuant to this Chapter to pay the unrecovered expenses incurred in such removal, a lien shall be placed upon the property for the unrecovered amount of such expense. Such lien shall be placed by the recording of a notice of lien in the office of the County Recorder of Lemhi County, with a copy of the notice of lien to be mailed to the property owner at his or her last known address. (1995 Code)
5-4-14: PENALTY: Any person violating any provision of this
Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1995 Code)
City of Salmon
5-5-1 5-5-2
CHAPTER 5
CURFEW
SECTION:
5-5-1: Age Limitations, Hours Of Curfew
5-5-2: Parental Responsibility
5-5-1: AGE LIMITATIONS, HOURS OF CURFEW:
A. From and after the effective date hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person of the age of seventeen (17) years or younger to loiter, stroll or drive upon the streets, alleys, avenues, parks or other places within the City after the hour of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and before the hour of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. unless accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other adult person having authority to accompany said person or unless said minor person is en route directly to or from an authorized activity connected with the public school, a church, civic organization or place of work.
B. Any police officer or other law enforcement officer is hereby authorized and empowered to take charge of any person seventeen (17) years of age or under violating the provisions of this Section, and it shall be the duty of such officers to take such person into custody, and notify immediately the parent, legal guardian or adult person having the care and custody of such minor of the violations of the terms of this Section and to inform said person that the minor will be held in an authorized holding facility or any other lawful place of detention until called for by such parent, legal guardian or legal custodian. (Ord. 95-584, 8-2-95)
5-5-2: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
A. It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other adult person having legal care and custody of any minor person of the age of seventeen (17) years or younger to allow or permit such person to act in violation of the provisions of this Section.
City of Salmon
5-5-2 5-5-2
B. It shall be unlawful and shall be considered a separate offense under this provision for any parent, legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care and custody of any person of the age of seventeen (17) years or younger to refuse, after being notified to do so by the police or law enforcement officer, to come immediately to the place of custody and take charge of such minor.
C. Any minor person seventeen (17) years or younger, any parent, legal guardian or other person having legal care and custody of such minor person violating the provisions of this Section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 95-584, 8-2-95)
City of Salmon
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Subject Chapter
General Traffic Provisions ................................. 1
Parking Regulations .......................................... 2
Restricted Routes .............................................. 3
(repealed: Ord.15-810, eff 10-15-15)
Snowmobile Operations .................................... 4
City of Salmon
6-1-1 6-1-2
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: State Laws Adopted
6-1-2: Certain Vehicles Restricted
6-1-3: Speed Limits
6-1-4: Funeral and Other Processions
6-1-5: Stopping for Loading or Unloading Only
6-1-6: Bus Regulations
6-1-7: Prohibited and Restricted Acts
6-1-8: Penalty
6-1-1: STATE LAWS ADOPTED: A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk, and designated as Idaho Motor Vehicle Laws, Rules of the Road, chapters 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 13 and 14, title 49 Idaho Code, published by authority of the Department of Law Enforcement, Boise, Idaho, is hereby adopted as the Motor Vehicle Code of the City for the regulation of motor vehicles within the City. (1995 Code)
6-1-2: CERTAIN VEHICLES RESTRICTED:
A. Load Restrictions: When signs are erected by authority of the City Council giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified.
B. Use Restrictions:
1. The Chief of Police or designee and the Public Works Department is hereby authorized to determine and designate those heavily traveled streets upon which shall be prohibited the use of the roadway by motor-driven cycles, bicycles, horse-drawn vehicles
City of Salmon
6-1-2 6-1-5
or other nonmotorized traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
2. When signs are so erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the restrictions stated on such signs. (1959 Code §2-1-14)
6-1-3: SPEED LIMITS: Every person operating a motor vehicle on the public streets or alleys of the City shall drive the
same in a careful and prudent manner, and, unless otherwise posted, the speed of said vehicle shall not exceed twenty (20) miles per hour in general; and, along school grounds, shall not exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour; and, in a public park, shall not exceed ten (10) miles per hour; and, in no case, at a rate of speed that will endanger the property of another for the life and limb of a person. (Ord. 73-390, 1-22-73; amd. Ord. 07-711, 2-07-2007)
6-1-4: FUNERAL AND OTHER PROCESSIONS:
A. Driving Through Funeral or Other Procession: It shall be, unlawful for a driver of a vehicle to drive between vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated.
B. Drivers in a Procession: Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.
C. Funeral Processions to be Identified: A funeral composed of a
procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by police or funeral home escort with headlights of all vehicles in the procession turned on or by such other method designated by the Chief of Police or designee.
D. When Permits Required for Parades and Processions: It shall be
unlawful for any funeral procession or parade containing persons or vehicles to occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police or designee and the Salmon City Council and such other regulations as are set forth. (1959 Code §2-1-7 amd. 2007 Code)
6-1 -5: STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY:
A. Chief of Police or Designee and Public Works Department to Designate Curb Zones: The Chief of Police or designee and
City of Salmon
6-1-5 6-1-6
Public Works Department is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and the Public Works Department shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this Section are applicable.
B. Permits for Curb Loading Zones: The Chief of Police or designee and Public Works Department shall not hereafter designate or sign any curb loading zone upon special request of any person unless such person makes application for a permit for such zone and for two (2) signs to indicate the ends of each such zone. Said permit fee shall be as set and designated by the City Council.
C. Standing In Passenger Curb Loading Zone: It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during the hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective and then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes.
D. Standing in Freight Curb Loading Zone: It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading or unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes.
E. Chief of Police or Designee and Public Works Department to Designate Public Carrier Stop and Stands: The Chief of Police or designee and Public Works Department is hereby authorized and required to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such manner as the Chief of Police or designee and Public Works Departments shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand or other stands shall be designated by appropriate signs. (1959 Code §2-1-12, amd. 2007 Code)
6-1-6: BUS REGULATIONS:
A. Stopping, Standing and Parking:
City of Salmon
6-1-6 6-1-7
1. The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than at a bus stand so designated.
2. The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so designated except in case of an emergency.
3. The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not farther than eighteen inches (18") from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to impede unduly the movement of other vehicular traffic.
B. Restricted Use of Bus Stands: It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stand, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or un-loading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus. (1959 Code §2-1-12)
6-1-7: PROHIBITED AND RESTRICTED ACTS:
A. Following Fire Apparatus Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any driver of any vehicle other than one on official business to follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred feet (500') or drive or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
B. Crossing Fire Hose: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or permit any vehicle to be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire Department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire without the consent of the Fire Department official in command.
C. Vehicles on Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. No vehicle shall be parked within any sidewalk area.
D. Limitations on Backing: It shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle to back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
E. Riding on Motorcycles: A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon a permanent and regular seat attached thereto,
City of Salmon
6-1-7 6-1-8
and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person.
F. Clinging to Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person riding upon a bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle to attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway. (1959 Code §2-1-7)
G. Use of Privately-Owned Property to Avoid Signs: It shall be unlawful for any person to use privately-owned property for the purpose of avoiding compliance with the traffic signs and signals within the City limits.
Nothing in this Chapter, however, shall be construed to prevent or prohibit the lawful use of said premises. (Ord. 68-368, 3-4-68)
6-1-8: PENALTY: Any violation of any of the provisions of the Idaho Motor Vehicle Laws as adopted in Section 6-1-1 hereof and
this Chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this
Code. (1995 Code)
City of Salmon
6-2-1 6-2-1
CHAPTER 2
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Standing or Parking Close to Curb
6-2-2: Angle Parking
6-2-3: Parking Prohibited in Specific Places
6-2-4: Obstructing Traffic
6-2-5: Prohibited Parking
6-2-6: Parking Time Limited
6-2-7: Parking Adjacent to Schools
6-2-8: Parking on Narrow Streets
6-2-9: Parking on One-Way Streets
6-2-10: Lights on Parked Vehicles
6-2-11: Leaving Vehicle Unattended
6-2-12: Parking Spaces for Persons with Disabilities
6-2-13: Parking Tickets and Procedures
6-2-14: Penalty
6-2-1: STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB:
A. Parallel Parking: Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within eighteen inches (18") of the right-hand curb. (Ord. 80-447, 11-3-80)
B. Permit for Loading or Unloading at Angle to Curb:
1. The Chief of Police or designee is authorized to issue special permits for the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle.
City of Salmon
6-2-1 6-2-3
2. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. (1959 Code §2-1-10, amd. 2007 Code)
6-2-2: ANGLE PARKING: The Chief of Police or designee shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and the Public Works Department shall mark or sign such streets. On those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such markings. (Ord. 80-447, 11-3-80)
6-2-3: PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIC PLACES: Except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device, no person shall:
A. Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
1. On a sidewalk or parkway;
2. Within an intersection;
3. On a crosswalk;
4. Within five feet (5') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
5. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
6. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
7. At any place where signs posted at the direction or under the
authority of the Chief of Police or designee prohibits such stopping;
8. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the Chief of Police or designee and Public Works Department has indicated a different length of a zone by signs or markings.
B. Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
City of Salmon
6-2-3 6-2-5
1. In front of a public or private driveway;
2. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
3. Within fourteen feet (14') of a corner, except at an intersection where a traffic-control signal is in operation;
4. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when properly signposted;
5. Within fourteen feet (14') upon the approach to any flashing signal,stop sign, yield sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
6. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
C. Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers:
1. At any place where official signs prohibit parking;
2. Along any yellow painted curb.
It shall be unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. (1959 Code §2-1-11; amd. Ord. 80-447, 11-3-80; amd. 2007 Code)
6-2-4: OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC: No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or highway in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than twelve feet (12') of such roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. (Ord. 80-447, 11-3-80; 1995 Code)
6-2-5: PROHIBITED PARKING:
A. Parking in Alleys: No person shall park a vehicle within an alley.
B. Extended Parking: No person shall park a vehicle upon any street, alley, or public property for a period of seventy two (72) hours or longer. (Ord. 80-447, 11-3-80; 1995 Code)
City of Salmon
6-2-5 6-2-6
C. Business District:
1. All Night Parking: The Chief of Police or designee is hereby authorized to direct the Public Works Department to erect signs prohibiting all night parking upon any street within the business district of the City.
2. Truck Parking: Parking of trucks and/or truck trailers is hereby prohibited within the business district.
D. Parking for Certain Purposes: It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of:
1. Displaying such vehicle for sale;
2. Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by any emergency.
E. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours: The Chief of Police or designee is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs placed in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles during certain hours of the day would create a hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. When signs prohibiting parking are erected as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such designated place.
F. Parking Near Hazardous or Congested Places:
1. The Chief of Police or designee is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs, places not exceeding one hundred feet (100') in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay in traffic.
2. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. (1959 Code §2-1 -11; amd. Ord. 80-447, 11 -3-80; amd. 2007 Code)
6-2-6: PARKING TIME LIMITED: The Chief of Police or designee is hereby authorized to determine places in which there is
Public demand or necessity for short-time parking and to designate such places by proper signs indicating the time limit for parking. When such signs are erected as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in such designated place for a time longer than indicated by such signs. (Ord. 80-447, 11-3-80)
City of Salmon
6-2-7 6-2-9
6-2-7: PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
A. The Chief of Police or designee is hereby authorized to have signs erected indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in the Chief's opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
B. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any such designated place. (1959 Code §2-1-11, amd. 2007 Code)
6-2-8: PARKING ON NARROW STREETS:
A. The Chief of Police or designee is hereby authorized to have signs erected indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet (20') or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet (30').
B. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such signs. (1959 Code §2-1-11; amd. 2007 Code)
6-2-9: PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS:
A. The Chief of Police or designee is authorized to have signs erected upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles and when such signs are in place, it shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park a vehicle upon such left-hand side of the street.
B. In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, it shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The Chief of Police or designee is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left- hand side of any such one-way roadway and to have signs erected giving notice thereof. (1959 Code §2-1-11; amd. 2007 Code)
City of Salmon
6-2-10 6-2-12
6-2-10: LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES:
A. Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any street within a business or residence district, no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle.
B. Whenever a vehicle is parked upon a street or highway outside of a business or residence district during the hours between one-half (½) hour after sunset and one-half (½) hour before sunrise, such vehicle shall be equipped with one or more lamps which shall exhibit a white light on the roadway side visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front of the vehicle and a red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear.
C. Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. (1959 Code §2-1 -10)
6-2-11: LEAVING VEHICLE UNATTENDED: No person having control or charge of a vehicle shall allow such vehicle
to stand on any street unattended without stopping the motor of the vehicle and effectively setting the brakes thereon. (Ord. 80-447, 11-3-80)
6-2-12: PARKING SPACES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
A. The City and owners of private property open to public use may designate parking zones and spaces to be used exclusively by vehicles displaying a special license plate for a person with a disability, or a special card as prescribed in section 49-410, Idaho Code. Any parking zones and spaces so designated shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Parking will conform to the requirements of Federal Public Law 101-336, Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
2. One parking space shall be designated for every thirty five (35) spaces available on each downtown street block. These parking spaces shall be parallel with the sidewalk where parallel parking is required, or at an angle to the sidewalk where angle parking is required. Should angle parking be used, the parking spaces so designated for use by a person with a disability shall conform to the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act. All accessible parking spaces shall be near curb cuts and ramps for wheelchair and other mechanical device usage. For the purposes of this Section, the term "downtown" means the business center of the City as
City of Salmon
6-2-12 6-2-13
designated by the City Council. The term "street block" means that portion of a City street between consecutive parallel intersections.
3. For each designated parking space or area, there shall be posted immediately adjacent to, and visible from each stall or space, a sign, which is at least thirty six inches (36") above the ground, consisting of the international accessibility symbol as shown in section 49-410, Idaho Code.
4. Should the City desire to modify any of the requirements of subsection A1 or A2 of this Section, the City Council may do so by ordinance, after complying with the following requirements:
a. The City Council, or any other body designated by the City Council by ordinance, shall receive a recommendation from a board, commission or committee created in conformity with section 50-210, Idaho Code, of which at least one-half (½) of the members shall be persons with a disability as defined in section 49-117, Idaho Code; and
b. The City shall cause notice of public hearing on the proposed ordinance modifying the standards specified in subsection A1 or A2 of this Section, to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least fourteen (14) days before the public hearing.
B. Parking a vehicle or the standing of a vehicle in a space reserved for a person with a disability, which space is signed in conformance with the requirements specified in subsection A3 of this Section, is prohibited, unless a vehicle is momentarily in the space for the purpose of allowing a person with a disability to enter or leave the vehicle, or unless special license plates or card or temporary card for a person with a disability is displayed on the vehicle. The registered owner of a vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of this subsection is guilty of an infraction, and punishable as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code.
C. Law enforcement officials are empowered to enter upon private property open to public use to enforce the provisions of this Section. (1995 Code)
6-2-13: PARKING TICKETS AND PROCEDURES: The Police Department shall have authority to issue parking tickets as
follows:
A. It shall be the duty of the Police Department upon observing a
City of Salmon
6-2-13 6-2-13
vehicle parked, standing or stopped in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, to leave at or upon such vehicle a notice that such vehicle has been parked or stopped in violation of the provisions of this Chapter. Among other things, the notice shall bear the date and hour of leaving the same at or upon the vehicle, make of the vehicle, and its license number, the specific code section violated and the amount of the fine, instructing the owner or operator of such vehicle to report to the City Clerk’s office. The notice herein mentioned shall be filed as follows: one copy shall be retained by the police officer leaving such ticket upon a vehicle, one copy shall be filed with the Clerk's office.
B. In order to eliminate burdening courts with violations of ordinances and to eliminate insofar as possible public inconvenience, each person receiving a parking ticket under this Chapter left upon his or her vehicle shall:
1. Within seven (7) days of the time of such notice, pay to
the Clerk's office in full satisfaction of such violation, a fee to be set by resolution for each notice left upon his or her vehicle;
2. Within ten (10) days from the date of said parking violation ticket, if same has not been paid within the seven (7) days above prescribed, pay to the Clerk's office an additional fee for each such notice left upon his or her vehicle, the additional fee as set by resolution for each said ticket being deemed necessary to defray administrative and clerical expenses. Payments may be made either in person or by mail. The failure of any operator to report and/or make such payments to the Clerk's office within the times prescribed above shall render the operator thereof subject to penalties as provided by Section 6-2-14.
C. If any vehicle is found stopped, standing or parked in any manner violative of the provisions of this Chapter and the identity cannot be determined, the owner or person or corporation in whose name said vehicle is registered or the named lessee in a rental or lease agreement of said vehicle shall be held prima facie responsible for said violation. (Ord. 80-447, 11-3-80)
City of Salmon
6-2-14 6-2-14
6-2-14: PENALTY: Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter or who shall
counsel, aid or abet any such violation or failure to comply, shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 80-447, 11-3-80; 1995 Code)
City of Salmon
CHAPTER 3
RESTRICTED ROUTES
(repealed: Ord.15-810, eff 10-15-15)
City of Salmon
6-4-1 6-4-2
CHAPTER 4
SNOWMOBILE OPERATIONS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Definition
6-4-2: Equipment
6-4-3: Operation Requirements and Restrictions
6-4-4: Penalty
6-4-1: DEFINITION: The term "snowmobile" shall mean any self-propelled vehicle under one thousand (1,000)
pounds unladened gross weight, designed primarily for travel on snow or ice or over natural terrain, which may be steered by tracks, skis, or runners, and which is not otherwise registered or licensed under the laws of the State of Idaho. (1995 Code)
6-4-2: EQUIPMENT: No snowmobile shall be operated in the City unless it is equipped with the following:
A. Headlamps: At least one and not more than two (2) headlamps
sufficient to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles at a
distance of two hundred fifty feet (250') ahead.
B. Tail lamps: Tail lamps, which when lighted shall emit a red light plainly visible at a distance of two hundred fifty feet (250') to the rear.
C. Brake: At least one brake which may be operated by hand or foot.
D. Muffler: A muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke; and no person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass or similar device. (Ord. 86-491. 10-6-86)
City of Salmon
6-4-3 6-4-3
6-4-3: OPERATION REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Operation on Sidewalks Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to drive, operate or park a snowmobile on any sidewalk in the City.
B. Speed: No snowmobile shall be operated at a speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour in the City.
C. Capacity: No snowmobile shall carry passengers or weights in excess of the capacity recommended by the manufacturer thereof.
D. Towing: No sled, toboggan, trailer or any other device shall be towed by a snowmobile except by means of a rigid tow bar connecting the same to such device.
E. Towing Person on Skis: No person on skis shall be towed behind a snowmobile.
F. Intoxicating Liquor: It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a snowmobile while under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
G. Designated Streets: No person shall operate, drive or park a snowmobile in or upon any street except as may be designated by resolution by the City Council and so designated on a map maintained in City Hall.
H. Careless Operation: No person shall operate a snowmobile carelessly and heedlessly, or without due caution and circumspection and at a speed or in a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property.
I. Traffic Controls: All snowmobiles shall conform to all vehicular traffic controls.
J. Manner of Operation: All snowmobiles shall be operated only in single file on the extreme right-hand side of the street, and in groups of not less than four (4) snowmobiles.
K. Ingress and Egress: Operation of snowmobiles on the streets of the City shall be limited to ingress and egress to and from the City; that City streets are not to be used as a place of recreation for snowmobiles.
L. Hours of Operation: No snowmobile shall be operated within the City limits after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. except for the purpose of
City of Salmon
6-4-3 6-4-4
going directly to or from the place of residence of the operator of such snowmobile or to its place of storage.
M. Driver's License: No person shall operate a snowmobile on the City streets without a valid driver's license1.
N. Age Limitation: No person, unless they are a certified licensed driver, shall drive or operate a snowmobile in the City.
O. Allowing Operation by Underage Person: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit, allow or encourage the operation or driving of a snowmobile by a person that is not a certified licensed driver.
P. Liability Insurance: All persons operating a snowmobile shall have proof of snowmobile liability insurance available for display when required to show same. (Ord. 86-491, 10-6-86)
6-4-4: PENALTY: Any person convicted of a violation of this Chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in
Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 86-491, 10-6-86; 1995 Code)
1 I.C. § 49-303
City of Salmon
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Subject Chapter
Streets, Sidewalks And Public Ways……...1
City Park ..................................................... 2
Use Of Public Ways .................................... 3
City Tree Care ............................................ 4
Use of City Facilities ................................... 5
City of Salmon
7-1-1 7-1-1
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Sidewalk Construction And Maintenance
7-1-2: Restricting Flow Of Storm Waters In Streets
7-1-3: Barbed Wire And Electric Fences
7-1-4: Street Excavations
7-1-5: Snow, Hail, Sleet, and Ice Removal
7-1-6: Vending on City Streets/Alleys or in City Parking Lots
7-1-1: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE:
A. Responsibility: The construction, repair and maintenance of sidewalks, curbs, and gutters located within the City limits is the responsibility of the abutting property owner. All fees and costs associated with such construction, maintenance and repair of sidewalks will be borne by the abutting property owner. The power of the City to regulate repairs and maintenance is set forth in Idaho Code, section 50-317. (amd. Ord. 15-810, 10-07-15)
B. Notification: The Public Works Superintendent, upon determining that a sidewalk is dangerous and unsafe, shall notify the abutting property owner of the defects, the repairs required and a time period within which the repairs must be completed. The notice shall require the repairs to be completed within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice by the property owner. If weather conditions do not allow the repairs to be completed in a workmanlike manner, the time period for completing the repairs may be extended upon a written extension agreed to by the Public Works Superintendent. Said notice shall be sent through the U.S. Postal Service certified mail. In the event the certified mail is refused, or undeliverable, the City shall mail notice through first class mail to the property owner. If the notice is mailed as first class mail, the property owner will then have thirty five (35) days from the date of the notice to effect the repairs or obtain an extension because of weather-related construction problems.
City of Salmon
7-1-1 7-1-4
C. Assessment Of Costs: In the event the property owner does not complete the repairs within the allotted time period, the City may repair, or cause to be repaired, said sidewalk. In this instance, the City shall assess the costs of such repairs to the property, as provided for in Idaho Code, section 50-1008.
D. Specifications: The construction, repair and maintenance of sidewalks shall conform to the standards set forth in the Idaho Standards for Public Works Construction. (Ord. 94-577, 11-2-1994)
7-1-2: RESTRICTING FLOW OF STORM WATERS IN STREETS:
A. No material or debris shall be allowed to be placed or allowed to accumulate in a matter that will restrict the flow of storm waters.
B. No persons shall cause debris to be placed in street gutters or on street corners which results in the constriction and/or restriction of the flow of storm waters.
C. Debris will not accumulate that restricts the efficiency of the storm drain system. (Ord. 84-481, 12-3-1984)
D. Any person violating this Section shall be guilty of an infraction, and subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 84-481, 12-3-1984; amd. 1995 Code; amd. Ord 15-810, 10-07-15)
7-1-3: BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any electric
fence or any fence constructed in whole or in part of barbed wire or to use barbed wire as a guard to any parking lot or parcel of land unless the said barbed wire shall commence at a height of at least six feet (6') above the ground. (Ord. 65-360, 5-7-1965)
7-1-4: STREET EXCAVATIONS:
A. City Authorization: It shall be unlawful for any person to break into or in any manner interfere with or molest any paving, street, alley, water line or sewer line within the corporate limits of the City unless first being duly authorized by the City. (Ord. 56-333, 3-19-1956)
City of Salmon
7-1-4 7-1-4
B. Excavation Permit: Any person, organization, company or entity wishing to make any excavation within any public right of way or any public property within the City limits shall first obtain an excavation permit from the City.
1. Application, Fee; Utility Placement: Application for such permits shall be made to the City at City Hall. Such permits for excavation shall be made not less than forty eight (48) hours prior to the beginning of such excavation. The permit shall be approved by the Public Works Superintendent of the City, or, in the Superintendent's absence, the City Clerk.
Each application for excavation shall be accompanied with a fee that will be set by resolution. The application will not be processed until this fee has been received by the City. (amd. Ord. 15-810, 10-07-15)
The application shall contain the following information: the name of person, organization or entity making application; type of utility to be installed; exact location of utility to be installed, date of the start of work; traffic-control plan, if required; depth of excavation; method of restoration of project area; map of project area, if so required by the Public Works Superintendent or City Clerk.
All utilities placed within public rights of way or on public property shall be placed a minimum of two feet (2') beneath the finished grade of the area in which placed. Directly over the utility a magnetic locator strip, at least four inches (4") in width, color coded for the utility being placed, shall be installed. Said strip shall be installed twelve inches (12") above the utility placement.
The person making the utility installation shall provide the City with a drawing showing the actual location of the installation at the completion of the project. Failure to do so shall result in no further permits being granted until such time as the as-built drawings are submitted to the City.
2. Site Condition: The site of the excavation shall be returned to a "as good or better" condition. The repair of the excavation shall conform to the standards established by the Idaho Standards for Public Works Construction as adopted by the City. All excess material shall be removed from the site. Failure to make proper excavation repairs or return the site to its previous condition will result in the City making the repairs and charging the person or organization responsible for the repairs the cost of work performed by the City. No further permits will be issued to this person or
City of Salmon
7-1-4 7-1-5
organization until previous excavations have been successfully completed and all costs associated with the repair have been paid.
3. Penalty: Any violation of this Section shall be deemed an infraction and the offender shall be subject to penalties as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 97-597, 10-15-1997; amd. Ord. 15-810, 10-07-15)
7-1-5: SNOW, HAIL, SLEET, AND ICE REMOVAL:
A. It shall be the property owner’s responsibility to remove snow, hail, sleet and/or ice from sidewalks to allow citizens to use the sidewalks in a safe manner.
B. Absent written permission from the City, no person shall place snow, hail, sleet and/ or ice removed from private property upon any public sidewalk, street, or other public right-of-way with the exception of the business district where buildings abut the sidewalk.
C. Snow, hail, sleet and/or ice from sidewalks in the business district area where buildings abut the sidewalk may be plowed, shoveled, or blown into the right-of-way of the abutting street. The Business District is defined as Main Street including the Salmon River Bridge east to Challis Street.
D. No person shall deposit or place any snow within two (2) feet of or block access to any fire hydrant.
E. The property owner shall be issued formal notification of violations to this ordinance with an appropriate timeframe for corrective action prior to issuance of an infraction citation.
F. Penalty: Any violation of this Section shall be deemed an infraction and the offender shall be subject to penalties as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 15-812, 12-17-15)
City of Salmon
7-1-6 7-1-6
7-1-6: VENDING ON CITY STREETS / ALLEYS OR IN CITY PARKING LOTS:
A. Definition: For the purpose of clarification Vending in Title 7, Section 7-1-6 shall be defined as “to engage in the sale of merchandise as one’s business or occupation, or to dispose of by sale”.
B. Vending is not permitted on city streets / alleys or in city parking lots unless temporary closure of a specific street / alley or parking lot is approved by City Council. ( Ord. 19-837, 5-15-19)
City of Salmon
7-2-1 7-2-2
CHAPTER 2
CITY PARKS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Definitions
7-2-2: Hours
7-2-3: Speed Limit
7-2-4: Pet Control
7-2-5: Camping
7-2-6: Bicycles and Motorized Vehicles
7-2-7: Operation of Concessions and Special Events
7-2-8: Other Fees
7-2-9: Penalty
7-2-10 Repealer
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS: Terms used in this Chapter shall have the meanings hereby given to them:
CITY PARKS: All City-owned, leased and managed property used for the purpose of parks and recreation.
ISLAND PARK: That strip of land forming an island surrounded by split channels of the Salmon River within the city limits of the City of Salmon. (After crossing channel onto Island). (Ord. 02-639, 11-06-2002)
7-2-2: HOURS: The hours for use of City Parks shall be from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Any other
use shall require permission from the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 79-431, 7-16-1979; amd. Ord. 04-669, 6-02-2004)
City of Salmon
7-2-3 7-2-5
7-2-3: SPEED LIMIT: The maximum speed limit for City Parks for any motorized vehicle in said park shall be ten (10) miles
per hour. (Ord. 79-431, 7-16-1979; amd. Ord. 04-669, 6-02-2004)
7-2-4: PET CONTROL: Pets are allowed on Island Park except for the hours of eleven-thirty (11:30) A.M. to one-thirty P.M.
daily. Pets are allowed at the Sacajawea Interpretive, Cultural and Educational Center on a leash. No pets shall be allowed in any other City Parks. The City Council shall have the authority to waive said restriction for special events held on City Parks. (amd. Ord. 07-711, 2-07-2007)
1) RESTRICTED LEASH REQUIREMENTS ON THE “ISLAND”: It shall be lawful for an owner to walk and exercise his dog (limit 2) on the Island without a leash. The owner or his agent must accompany the dog and be able to restrain the dog if necessary. This limited leash restriction shall not be in effect on days special events are scheduled on the Island. Unleashed dogs will not be allowed on the Island on days of special events. No dogs of fierce, dangerous or vicious propensities shall be allowed on the “Island”. (Ord. 02-639, 11-06-2002)
2) ACCOMPANIMENT AND CLEAN UP: The owner/agent of the dog must be with the dog off the leash at all times. The owner/agent must clean up all excrement left by the dog and remove the same from the Island and the Sacajawea Center. (Ord. 02-639, 11-06-2002; amd. 2007 Code)
3) DAMAGES: Any damage to persons or property by a dog or dogs on the Island or at the Sacajawea Center shall be the sole responsibility of the owner and or his agent. (Ord. 02-639, 11-06-2002; amd 2007 Code)
4) CITY WATER PUMP STATION: No owner/agent shall allow a dog or dogs to enter and/or swim in the west channel of the Salmon River within 100 feet of the Salmon City water pump station. (Ord. 02-639, 11-06-2002)
7-2-5: CAMPING:
A. Permit Required: Camping in City Parks is prohibited with the exception of the Sacajawea Interpretive, Cultural and Educational Center.
City of Salmon
7-2-5 7-2-7
Camping at the Sacajawea Interpretive, Cultural and Educational Center will be allowed only for educational groups or individuals that are participating in a Sacajawea Center Program that has been approved by the Sacajawea Center Director where overnight camping is part of the program. Two recreational vehicle sites west of the Police Department may only be used by volunteers working at least 20 hours each week on site at the Sacajawea Center after passing a background check and submitting a use and volunteer agreement. One recreational vehicle site by the main entrance of the Sacajawea Center may only be used by Tribal members who are presenting educational or interpretive programs specifically for the Center. The Mayor of the City of Salmon has the authority to grant permission to allow limited camping in all City parks or property; for Emergency or Security personnel only. No other permits for camping will be issued. (Ord. 79-431, 7-16-1979; amd. Ord. 04-669, 6-02-2004; amd. 2007 Code; amd. Ord 15-803, 09-02-15)
B. Fees: The fee for camping in City Parks shall be set by resolution by the City Council of the City of Salmon. The organization obtaining the permit from the City shall be responsible for payment of the fees to the City. The City Council shall have the authority to waive said camping fees.
7-2-6: BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED VEHICLES: Bicycles and motorized vehicles may be used in designated areas
only in City Parks. (Ord. 79-431, 7-16-1979; amd. Ord. 04-669, 6-
02-2004)
7-2-7: OPERATION OF CONCESSIONS AND SPECIAL EVENTS:
A. Definition. No person shall sell or offer for sale any food, beverage, candy or goods of any kind, within a public park, except for persons operating under a concession agreement approved by the Council or except for persons operating at a special event as determined by the City Clerk for which specific approval of limited duration has been given by said Clerk. (Ord. 03-651, 6-06-2003; amd. Ord. 04-669, 6-02-2004)
B. Limited Concession Operations. No individual or group may operate a concession that violates Idaho State Statute 18-4103 or any other State Statute within or on any City Park. (Ord. 03-651, 6-06-2003; amd. Ord. 04-669,6-02-2004
City of Salmon
7-2-7 7-2-10
C. Special Events Concession Primacy. When any of the City Parks have been approved by the City Clerk for special events, the entity that has reserved the Park has primacy for operation of concessions at that location. Individuals or groups that are not part of the special event, must seek the approval of the initial party for dual occupancy if for the purpose of concession. In order to avoid damage to buried sprinkler systems parking/driving on the grass within city parks is only allowed in designated areas which shall be determined by the city. (Ord. 03-651, 6-06-2003, amd. Ord.04-669, 6-02-2004; amd Ord. 19-837, 5-15-19)
D. Fee. Any entity or individual desiring to conduct operation of concessions or a special event on or within City Parks, must pay a fee as part of the concession agreement or special event request. The fee for such agreement shall be fixed by resolution of the City Council. The City Council shall have the authority to waive said camping fees. (Ord. 03-651, 6-06-2003, amd. Ord. 04-669, 6-02-2004)
7-2-8: OTHER FEES: All other fees associated with operations, administration and maintenance of City Parks shall be fixed
by resolution of the City Council. These fees will include but are not limited to the rate and fee schedule for the Sacajawea Interpretive, Cultural and Educational Center and for all other City Parks. (amd. Ord. 04-669, 6-02-2004; amd. Ord. 07-711, 2-07-2007; amd. Ord. 08-728, 4-16-2008; amd. Ord. 15-810, 10-07-15)
7-2-9: PENALTY: Any person violating any of the sections of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to
penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 79-431, 7-16-1979; 1995 Code) amd. Ord. 04-669, 6-02-2004; amd. Ord. 15-810; 10-07-15)
7-2-10: REPEALER: Ordinance 04-669, other ordinances, or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. (amd.
Ord. 07-711, 2-07-2007)
City of Salmon
7-3-1 7-3-2
CHAPTER 3
USE OF PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-3-1 Operation of Bicycles, Skateboards, Scooters, Unicycles, Roller Blades, and Wheeled Conveyances
7-3-2 Use In the Central Business District
7-3-3 Central Business District Definition
7-3-4 Salmon Pedestrian Bridge
7-3-5 Exceptions
7-3-6 Enforcement
7-3-7 Passage
7-3-8 Severability
7-3-9 Repealer
7-3-10 Effective Date
7-3-1 OPERATION OF BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS, UNICYCLES, ROLLER BLADES, AND
WHEELED CONVEYANCES: All bicycles, skateboards, scooters, unicycles, roller blades, and wheeled conveyances, operating within the city limits of the City of Salmon, Idaho, are to be regulated by the provisions of this ordinance and Idaho State Code.
7-3-2 USE IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT AND PATHWAY: It shall be unlawful to ride a bicycle, skateboard, scooter, unicycle, roller blades, or wheeled
conveyance (not including exceptions defined in Section 4) on any
sidewalk in the Central Business District of the City of Salmon as defined
in Section 3 of this code. Any bicycle, skateboard, scooter, unicycle, roller
blade or wheeled conveyance being propelled on the sidewalk in the
Central Business District must be walked along side of and be in complete
control, so as not to injure any person or property. It shall be unlawful for motorized vehicles (not including exceptions defined in Section 5) to drive
on or be parked on the pathway along Highway 28 running from Lemhi Street continuing into the Salmon City Park unless exiting or entering a driveway.
City of Salmon
7-3-3 7-3-10
7-3-3 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT: Shall be defined as Main Street including the Salmon River Bridge East to Challis
Street.
7-3-4 SALMON PEDESTRIAN BRIDGE: Bicycles, skateboards, scooters, unicycles, roller blades, or wheeled conveyances
are allowed on the Pedestrian Bridge. Pedestrians shall be given the right-of-way and control of such conveyances must be maintained at all times so as not to injure any person or property. Motorized vehicles are prohibited on the Pedestrian Bridge.
7-3-5 EXCEPTIONS: This Ordinance does not apply to wheelchairs, whether motorized or propelled, used by
someone who must use it because he/she is non-ambulatory, nor shall this apply to baby carriages, child wagons, walkers, strollers, or snow/debris removal equipment.
7-3-6 ENFORCEMENT: Any person violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be subject to the following penalties;
PENALTY: Violation will be considered an infraction. (amd. Ord. 15-810, 10-07-15)
7-3-7 PASSAGE: This ordinance shall become effective upon the passage, approval and publications as provided by
law.
7-3-8 SEVERABILITY: The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable and if any provision of
this ordinance or the application of such provision to any person or circumstance is declared invalid for any reason, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance.
7-3-9 REPEALER: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
7-3-10 EFFECTIVE DATE: This ordinance shall be effective upon its passage, approval and publication. (Ord. 06-
710, 12-20-2006; amd. Ord. 10-765, 9-01-2010; amd. Ord. 17-827, 10-04-2017)
City of Salmon
7-4-1 7-4-1
CHAPTER 4
CITY TREE CARE
SECTION:
7-4-1 Statement of Purpose
7-4-2 Definitions
7-4-3 Tree Department
7-4-4 Protection of Public Trees
7-4-5 Required Maintenance
7-4-6 Application to Prune, Plant or Remove Public Trees
7-4-7 Compensatory Payments
7-4-8 Topping Prohibited
7-4-9 Nuisance Trees
7-4-10 Work on City Property
7-4-11 Emergencies
7-4-12 Appeals
7-4-13 Penalties for Violation
7-4-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE: This chapter establishes regulations and standards necessary to ensure the City
continues to realize the benefits provided by its community forest. It is not intended to resolve or regulate disputes over private trees on private property that do not affect general public safety. This ordinance is enacted to:
A. Protect public safety, health, and welfare;
B. Preserve and enhance the City’s environmental, economic, and social character with mature trees;
C. Encourage site and utility planning, building, and development practices to prevent indiscriminate removal or destruction of trees and avoid unnecessary disturbance to trees within the City.
City of Salmon
7-4-1 7-4-2
D. Maintain trees in a healthy, non-hazardous condition through application of tree care standards contained in ANSI A300;
E. Establish and maintain appropriate species diversity and age classes in order to provide a stable and sustainable community forest;
F. Establish a process and schedule by which trees are to be planted, pruned, and removed.
7-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
ANSI: American National Standards Institute, specifically standards for tree care operations.
COMMUNITY FOREST: Trees located on city-owned or city-controlled property.
DRIP LINE: The area directly below the branches of a tree.
PRIVATE TREE: A tree whose stem is located entirely on private property within the City of Salmon.
PRUNING: The practice of cutting tree limbs according to standards in the latest revision of the American National Standards Institute for Tree Care Operations, a copy of which is on file with the City.
PUBLIC TREE: A tree whose stem is located partly or wholly on public property within the City of Salmon.
City of Salmon
7-4-2 7-4-3
REMOVE: To cut down or damage any tree, deliberately or by omission, causing the tree to die or become hazardous within 3 years.
SUPERINTENDENT: The Superintendent of Public Works or person designated by the Superintendent.
TOPPING: Severe cutting back of limbs within a tree crown to buds, stubs, or laterals not large enough to assume a terminal role as defined in ANSI A300.
TREE: Any self-supporting woody plant which has a well-defined stem with a diameter of at least 4” at 1.5’ from the ground; any conspicuously flowering woody plant as designated by the Tree Department that has a well-defined stem of at least 2” at 4.5’ from the ground; or any small seedling or sapling planted or protected specifically to become a large tree as described above.
7-4-3 TREE DEPARTMENT: The Salmon Tree Department shall serve as advisor to the City Council for all matters relating to
tree planting, community forestry planning, and the general care and maintenance of trees and shrubs within city limits. The department shall work with concerned citizens, people employed in horticulture, and city staff to assist in the development of tree program policies; manage community forestry events; assist in the implementation of work plans, city tree inventories, and tree plantings; serve as a citizens’ representative to city government; and advocate for trees to obtain public support for the program.
A. Members: The Tree Department, appointed by the Mayor, shall consist of the Public Works Superintendent and the Parks Foreman.
City of Salmon
7-4-4 7-4-6
7-4-4 PROTECTION OF PUBLIC TREES: It shall be unlawful for anyone not acting in an official capacity to:
A. Damage, cut, carve, prune, or remove a public tree;
B. Attach any device or structure to a public tree;
C. Allow any toxic substance to harm or damage a public tree;
D. Set fire to or otherwise injure by fire a public tree;
E. Damage any public tree through construction activities, including excavation, placement of fill, compaction of soil, or construction of any structure, street, sidewalk, driveway, pavement or public utility within the drip line of a public tree;
F. Transplant a public tree;
G. Spray, inject, or otherwise apply fertilizer or pesticide, to a public tree.
7-4-5 REQUIRED MAINTENANCE: Any owner of real property abutting a public right-of-way shall maintain his/her private
trees so that no tree obstructs or interferes with the view to oncoming traffic or pedestrians, with the view of traffic signs or signals, or with the extension or maintenance of utility lines. The minimum clearance shall be 7’ over sidewalk and 12’ over streets. All pruning must conform to ANSI standards for tree maintenance. Pruning standards will be made available to all property owners through a variety of media and always upon request.
Any person who has received from the City a grant to occupy the streets of the City for the purpose of erecting and maintaining poles, wires, fixtures, brackets, or supports, shall, upon written notification by the Superintendent that such item is interfering with a public tree, prune the tree or redesign or relocate its equipment at no expense to the city to remove the interference. Work must be performed within 30 days of written notification.
7-4-6 APPLICATION TO PRUNE, PLANT OR REMOVE PUBLIC TREES: To ensure that community tree selection and
City of Salmon
7-4-6 7-4-7
maintenance conforms to City standards, no person shall prune, plant, or remove a public tree without receiving permission from the Superintendent. Application shall be in a form prescribed by the Superintendent. The application shall include plans and specifications showing the location, size, species, and condition of all nearby existing trees; the location, size, and species of any trees to be planted; and any existing or planned buildings, street lights, traffic signals or signs, pavement, sidewalk, curb cut, or public utilities. Such plans and specifications shall be in such form and include such additional information as may be required by the community forestry regulations. No species other than those included on a list of approved trees shall be planted; all plantings shall conform to the concept of “Right Tree, Right Place”. All pruning and planting must conform to ANSI tree maintenance standards.
Trees that must be removed shall be replaced by new planting except in unusual circumstances. Wherever feasible, trees shall be planted near old and dying trees in anticipation of their removal. Coordination of planting of public trees with adjacent private landscaping is desirable. All trees to be planted on public property shall be inspected and approved by the Superintendent prior to and after planting.
Applications shall be approved or disapproved in writing within 10 business days after filing; if the application is rejected, the applicant shall be notified of the reason for the denial.
7-4-7 COMPENSATORY PAYMENTS: In the event any person removes, destroys or damages any public tree except as
otherwise required by law, that person shall be required to replace such tree with a tree(s) of equivalent dollar value on public property, unless otherwise determined by the City Superintendent. The value of a tree shall be determined by the City Superintendent in accordance with accepted plant appraisal methods as set forth in the 8th edition of The Guide for Plant Appraisal, published by the International Society of Arboriculture or the same as amended from time to time. If no suitable location exists in the vicinity of the tree removed or if the replacement tree(s) is of lesser value, the person causing the tree to be removed shall make a compensatory payment to the City of Salmon equal to the difference in value between the tree removed and any replacement tree(s). Any public tree that is determined by the Superintendent to be damaged, but not sufficiently to justify its removal, shall be considered to be devalued. The amount of devaluation shall be paid to the City by the person causing the damage. Compensatory payments shall be paid into a fund established for that purpose and restricted to use for community
City of Salmon
7-4-7 7-4-11
forestry programs. Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the City of Salmon from negotiating agreements with other governmental entities regarding penalties and compensatory payment for removal damage or destruction of public trees.
7-4-8 TOPPING PROHIBITED: No public employee or private citizen shall top or severely trim the branches and/or trunk of
a public tree in a manner that will substantially reduce the overall size of the tree so as to destroy the symmetrical appearance or natural shape of the tree. Only those pruning standards identified in ANSI shall be acceptable for the care and maintenance of all public trees within City limits.
7-4-9 NUISANCE TREES: Any tree located on private or public property that obstructs a street or sidewalk, or which suffers
from a communicable disease or insect infestation, as determined by the Superintendent, which threatens the public welfare or the health of public trees shall be declared a public nuisance.
When such a public nuisance exists, the Superintendent may cause a notice to be delivered to the owner of the property on which the tree is located. The notice shall specify what corrective work is necessary and shall direct the owner to perform corrective work to eliminate the nuisance within a specified time. If the work is not completed within the requisite time, the Superintendent shall cause the tree to be pruned, treated, or removed as necessary to eliminate the public nuisance. The Superintendent shall collect all expenses involved in such work from the person responsible for causing the correction to be required.
7-4-10 WORK ON CITY PROPERTY: The City of Salmon Public Works Department shall be responsible for any community
forestry work done on City property, except in emergencies defined herein.
7-4-11 EMERGENCIES: No application shall be required to remove any tree or part thereof which, because of damage by fire,
windstorm, or other calamity, poses an imminent threat to public health or safety or which obstructs any public way. In the event of such emergency, the Superintendent may exempt operations necessary to remove threats to public safety from the requirements of this chapter. The Superintendent
City of Salmon
7-4-11 7-4-13
may determine that a public or private tree is extremely hazardous and order it be immediately treated or removed to protect public health and safety.
7-4-12 APPEALS: All decisions of the Superintendent regarding private and public trees may be appealed to the Salmon City
Council. Such appeal shall be filed in writing within 15 days of the date of
notification of the Superintendent’s decision. Action of the Superintendent shall be stayed until the decision of the City Council is rendered and the applicant notified.
7-4-13 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
A. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter or who fails to comply with a lawful order of the City Superintendent shall be guilty of an infraction. (amd. Ord. 15-810, 10-810)
City of Salmon
7-5-1 7-5-1
CHAPTER 5
USE OF SALMON VALLEY CENTER
SECTION:
7-5-1 MEETING ROOM FEES
7-5-1 MEETING ROOM FEES: Fees for the use of the Salmon Valley Center to cover the direct administration,
management, and costs incurred will be set by Resolution as needed to cover the direct cost of services.
The applicant shall pay said fees to the City of Salmon at the time the application is filed with the Clerk.
City of Salmon
TITLE 8
WATER AND SEWER
Subject Chapter
Water Use Regulations………………………1
Cross-Connection Control…………………...2
Irrigation Water………………………………..3
Sewer Use Regulations………………………4
City of Salmon
8-1-1 8-1-1
CHAPTER 1
WATER USE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-1- 1: Definition of Terms
8-1- 2: Connection to Water System Required
8-1- 3: Refusal of Use of System
8-1- 4: Independent Water Service Line and Meter Required
8-1- 5: Existing Branch Service Lines
8-1- 6: Water Service Line and Meter Maintenance
8-1- 7: Injury to or Tampering with Water System Unlawful
8-1- 8: Duties of Public Works Superintendent Regarding Service
Lines
8-1- 9: Permits Required
8-1-10: Service Line Extension or Repair Permit Required
8-1-11: Installation and Maintenance of Water Service Lines
8-1-12: Installation and Maintenance of Water Meters
8-1-13: Right to Revoke Permission to Connect
8-1-14: Water System Construction, Plans, Specifications and
Inspection
8-1-15: Right to Enter Premises for Inspection
8-1-16: Extension of Water Mains Within City
8-1-17: Service Call Charge
8-1-18: Monthly Water User Fees
8-1-19: Billing Procedure and Periods
8-1-20: Due Date
8-1-21: Delinquent Accounts
8-1-22: Water Service Discontinuance
8-1-23: Water System Improvement Fund
8-1-24: Water System Materials and Installations
8-1-25: Water System Design
8-1-26: As-Built Drawings and Engineer's Certification
8-1-27: Subdivision Developer's or Property Owner's Responsibility
for Water Lines
8-1-28: Flood Plain Limitations
City of Salmon
8-1-1 8-1-1
8-1-29: Citation; Appearance
8-1-30: Failure to Appear Unlawful
8-1-31: Liability
8-1-32: Penalty
8-1-1: DEFINITION OF TERMS: Terms used in this Chapter shall have the meanings herein given to them:
APPROVING The Public Works Superintendent of the City of
AUTHORITY: Salmon or his or her duly authorized deputy(s),
agent(s), or representatives.
BACKFLOW: The flow other than the intended direction of flow, of any foreign liquids, gases or substances into the distribution system of the City water supply.
BACKFLOW A device to counteract back pressure or PREVENTION DEVICE: prevent back siphonage.
CITY: The City of Salmon, Idaho.
COMMERCIAL Any structure built for the support, shelter or
BUILDINGS: enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or
property of any kind or for any type of business or enterprise or for any other purposes not otherwise described or covered above under "dwellings."
COMMERCIAL USER: All persons not specifically classified as a domestic or as an industrial user.
CONTAMINATION: The entry into or presence in a City water supply of any substance which may be deleterious to health and/or quality of the water.
CROSS-CONNECTION: Any physical arrangement whereby the City water supply is connected, directly or indirectly,
with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing
City of Salmon
8-1-1 8-1-1
fixture or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage or other wastes or liquids of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting
contamination to the City water supply as a result of backflow.
DOMESTIC WATER Water that is used principally for dwellings,
USAGE: business buildings, institutions and the like.
DWELLINGS:
Auto Court, Motor The combination or group of two (2) or more
Court, Travel Trailer dwelling units occupying a building site or area
Court, Motel, Hotel, under one ownership, used for the purpose of
etc.: furnishing transient living accommodations.
Duplex: A building designed, built, renter or leased for
occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other.
Multiple-Family Any building or portion thereof which is
Dwelling or Apartment designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out
House: to be occupied or which is occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families
or persons living independently of each other and doing their own cooking within the premises, which shall include townhouses or condominiums.
Recreational Vehicle A place of business specifically operating for Park the use of recreational vehicles that can stay
overnight or a maximum of 30 days in allotted
spaces and is open seasonally where water and sewer services are not available year-round.
Single-Family A building designed for or occupied by one
Dwelling: family for living or sleeping purposes, and having one kitchen or set of cooking facilities.
Trailer House or Any vehicle used or so constructed as to permit
Mobile Home: its being used as a conveyance upon the public
streets or highways and constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons.
City of Salmon
8-1-1 8-1-1
MG: Million gallons.
MGD: Million gallons per day.
PARTS PER MILLION: A weight-to-weight ratio: the parts per million multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall be
equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, group or other entity.
PRIVATE WATER A water system serving two (2) or more
SYSTEM: buildings, residences or properties, constructed
by private contract outside of the public right of way and remaining under private ownership and jurisdiction and which shall be maintained by said private owners. Private water systems shall be designed, constructed and maintained by said private owners to the same design, construction and maintenance standards as are
public water systems.
PUBLIC WATER A water system provided by or subject to the
SYSTEM: jurisdiction of the City. It shall also include approved water systems within the City boundaries that serve one or more persons and obtain their water supply from the City water system, even though the water system may not have been constructed with City funds. All public water mains shall be located in dedicated public rights of way or easements. Public water mains shall be at least six inches (6") in diameter.
REPLACEMENT: Any expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the water system to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement.
SERVICE CHARGE: The charge levied on all users of the water system for the purpose of repayment of City indebtedness for the construction and
City of Salmon
8-1-1 8-1-1
installation of the system and for its efficient maintenance and operation. In establishing such rates and charges, the City has taken into account the cost and value of the system, operation and maintenance expenses, possible
delinquencies, proper allowance for depreciation, contingencies and any amounts necessary to retire all bonds payable from net revenues and the reserve required for these.
SERVICE A water line connected to the water main.
CONNECTION:
SERVICE LINE: The water line from the City Water meter to the structure using the water. This line is on private property and is the responsibility of the owner.
WATER: Potable water meeting the requirements of the
State of Idaho for public water systems.
WATER All facilities for transporting, pumping, storing
DISTRIBUTION AND and pressurizing of water, and includes water
SUPPLY SYSTEM: main as well as the supply system.
WATER MAIN: The pipe laid in a street, road, alley or easement and running approximately parallel to the street, road, alley or easement for the distribution of water to the customers and which is owned, operated, controlled and maintained by the City.
WATER METER: A device which is calibrated and constructed to measure the exact amount of water that flows through the device in total gallons. The water meter, when used, shall include the actual meter plus yoke, remote read-out device and meter box, if required.
WATER SERVICE The extension from the city water main hot tap LINE: to the city water meter or shutoff valve by the water meter. It is usually within the public right- of-way.
WATER The Public Works Superintendent of the City of
SUPERINTENDENT: Salmon.
City of Salmon
8-1-1 8-1-4
WATER SUPPLY An assemblage of creeks, rivers, wells, SYSTEM: pumps, devices, structures, equipment and tanks for providing water for domestic, commercial or industrial uses.
WATER SYSTEM: A water main line that conveys potable water to
a residence, commercial user, industry or other establishment for consumptive use, irrigation, process or similar uses. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-1-2: CONNECTION TO WATER SYSTEM REQUIRED: Every existing premises within the boundaries of the City that is
occupied or occupiable by any person or as a commercial business, shall be connected to the public water system if they are within 300 feet of an existing city water main. The owner or person in charge of such land shall make or cause to be made such connection through the application process before such land is occupied for a dwelling or commercial building. The property owner shall have the meter installed at his or her expense. The City shall make the hot tap connection to its main line and install the water service line to the city water meter for new construction. The property owner shall pay for all required excavation, backfill, street repair and all other service line and connection costs per the fee schedule as set by resolution. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92, amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
8-1-3: REFUSAL OF USE OF SYSTEM: The City may prohibit the connection to the public water system for any user that does not comply with the limitations set forth in this Chapter. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92, amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
8-1-4: INDEPENDENT WATER SERVICE LINE AND METER
REQUIRED:
A. The water main line and water service line(s) shall be so arranged that there is a separate and independent water service line and meter to each individual building, place of business or tract of land.
B. After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, a separate and independent water service line and meter shall be provided for every new building connecting to the water system of the City. Separate service lines and meters are not required for each trailer space in overnight trailer courts, nor for each cabin in
City of Salmon
8-1-4 8-1-8
cabin courts; however, separate water service lines and meters are required for trailer houses on individual lots or for long-term trailer rental units in mobile home courts. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-1-5: EXISTING BRANCH SERVICE LINES: Where water service is now provided through one water service line to several
customers (branch service lines), the City by resolution, may decline to continue to provide water for said premises until separate water service lines are provided at the owner's expense. Where more than one dwelling is served from one such service line, the established rate shall be charged for each customer in the same manner as if each did, in fact, have an individual water service line. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-1-6: WATER SERVICE LINE AND METER MAINTENANCE: All water users shall keep their individual water service lines in
good repair and shall keep them in such good condition that they shall not allow any leakage from the City's water system. The City shall be responsible for the maintenance of the water meters. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18 92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-1-7: INJURY TO OR TAMPERING WITH WATER SYSTEM
UNLAWFUL: It shall be unlawful to disturb, destroy, damage, adjust, molest, meddle or otherwise interfere with any portion of the City water distribution or supply system or its appurtenances, located on either public or private property. Should any damage result, either intentionally or unintentionally, from handling or otherwise tampering with said water system, the violator shall pay for all costs incurred in connection with the repairs of said system and/or for any damages that may result from the tampering with said system and may be subject to other civil and criminal fines and penalties. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-1-8: DUTIES OF PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT
REGARDING SERVICE LINES: The Public Works
Superintendent is hereby empowered, and it is hereby made his or her duty, in all cases where there is a public water supply system within three
hundred feet (300') to notify every owner or person in charge of land, or premises, requiring a service connection as specified in Section 8-1-2 of
City of Salmon
8-1-8 8-1-10
this Chapter, to comply with the provisions of that Section of this Chapter A lessee of land shall be deemed to be in charge. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92, amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
8-1-9: UTILITY APPLICATION REQUIRED:
A. Installation or Alteration of Water System or Service Line: It shall be unlawful to install or alter any water system or service line within the City, or to tap onto or connect to any water line whether lateral or main, without having first obtained from said City an approved utility application. (amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
B. Application for Connection: An application for a connection to the City water system shall be made to the City and no connection shall be made to any water main without an application having been approved by the Public Works Superintendent or his or her representative. (amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
C. Connection to Public Water Main Line: It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate, uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public water main line or appurtenance thereof, without first obtaining an approved utility application to perform said work from the City. (amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
D. Excavation Permit: No permit shall be granted to do water line work in any street, alley or public easement until the applicant has first obtained an excavation permit as required by the City. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-1-10: SERVICE LINE EXTENSION OR REPAIR PERMIT
REQUIRED:
A. Repair of Service Line: When any water service line or private water system connected with any public water main is leaking, broken or out of order, on private property (outside of any public right of way or easements) the owner, agent or tenant of such premises shall repair the same at his or her own expense. No person shall construct, re-lay, repair or extend any water service connection or private water system until the person doing said work has obtained the appropriate water permit for same. (amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
City of Salmon
8-1-10 8-1-12
B. Extension of Service: It shall be unlawful for any person to extend any private service line beyond the limits of the building or property for which approval has been given without submitting a new utility application for the desired extension. The existence of a water permit shall in no way be construed as making permissible any work for which an excavation permit may be required by the City. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92, amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
8-1-11: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF WATER
SERVICE LINES:
A. Installation and Maintenance by City: When an application is submitted for a water service line and has been approved, the water tap at the main line shall be installed by the City from the main water line to the meter. The service line from the main water line to the meter and all associated excavation, backfill, street repair and piping shall be completed by the city at the property owner’s expense. Thereafter, or after the water service line has been installed, each water service line within the public right of way or easement shall be maintained by the City at its expense and kept within and under its exclusive control and jurisdiction. (amd. Ord 15-811, 11-19-15)
B. Installation by Contract: Water service lines may also be installed by contract in conjunction with City-sponsored projects or when, in the opinion of the Public Works Superintendent, it is in the City's best interest to have or allow said water service lines to be installed by other than City personnel. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-1-12: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF WATER
METERS:
A. Cost: The City shall provide for a fee set by resolution to all property owners connecting to the water system an appropriately sized water meter, yoke, remote readout, and meter box. The total fee being calculated from the work described on the utility application. (amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
B. Readouts: Whenever possible, the water meter readout shall be installed at the curb or in the sidewalk adjacent to the City's right of way. In all other circumstances, the water meter remote readout shall be placed on an exterior wall of the building at least five feet
City of Salmon
8-1-12 8-1-15
(5') above ground and in a location next to a commonly used or maintained entrance way such that the remote readout will be accessible to the City's meter reader at all times during both summer and winter conditions.
C. Malfunctioning Meters: If the meter is determined to be malfunctioning by the City after proper inspection by the Public Works Superintendent, it shall be the City's responsibility to provide the property owner with a new water meter and/or remote readout facilities as replacements for the malfunctioning units. It shall thereafter be the City's responsibility to replace or repair the malfunctioning meter and/or remote readout facilities on the owner's private property. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-1-13: RIGHT TO REVOKE PERMISSION TO CONNECT:
Permission given to connect to the water main shall be
upon the express condition that the Public Works Superintendent may for good cause revoke the same and person making such connection or his or her successor in interest shall have no right to claim any damage in consequence of such permission being revoked. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-1-14: WATER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION, PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS AND INSPECTION:
A. Inspection: All construction or reconstruction of public, private and water service lines shall be in accordance with the City standards and subject to inspection by the City. (amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
B. Plans and Drawings Required: Plan and profile drawings stamped by a professional engineer licensed in Idaho shall be prepared for all new water mains (whether public or private) and for all water main extensions, reconstructions or renovations; and all such plan and profile drawings must be reviewed and approved by the Public Works Superintendent and the State of Idaho Division of Environmental Quality before any construction work on said water lines is started. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92, amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
8-1-15: RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES FOR INSPECTION: The
Public Works Superintendent and the City
Representative assigned to read the water meters shall have the right to enter upon any premises connected with the public water system at all reasonable hours to determine that there is compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. If conflict is noted, the owner of said premises or his or her
City of Salmon
8-1-15 8-1-17
agent shall be directed to alter, repair or reconstruct said water facilities to conform to the requirements of this Chapter within fifteen (15) days. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-1-16: EXTENSION OF WATER MAINS WITHIN CITY: The Public Works Superintendent shall be authorized to construct or
cause to be constructed extensions to the water system if one of the following conditions exists:
A. The annual anticipated revenue made available to the City from the customers to be immediately served by such extension is not less than one-tenth (1/10) of the actual cost to the City of said extension.
B. The Public Works Superintendent declares that the water main extension is needed for the overall benefit and improvement of the entire water distribution system.
C. The City approves a contract for the construction of the extension
with a party or parties desiring water service. Provided, however, that subdividers or developers within the City shall construct at their
own expense all water mains within their subdivisions or developments. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92, amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
8-1-17: SERVICE CALL CHARGE: The City may require a service charge in an amount not to exceed the actual cost to the
City, for service calls which are only for the convenience and benefit of the customer. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
A. Turning Water Services On and Off:
1. In an emergency, the City shall turn off the water, for the initial response, at no charge to the property owner. For the original emergency, the water will be turned back on, during normal business hours, once only, at no cost.
2. Additional trips during normal business hours, to turn the water on or off, shall be charged a fee per visit as set by resolution. Additional emergency trips to turn the water off or on after normal business hours will be charged a fee as set by resolution. (amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
City of Salmon
8-1-17 8-1-18
3. For normal repair and maintenance of water service, there will be no charge for the first turn off and return to service trip. Each succeeding trip will be charged at the rate per visit to be set by resolution. (amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
4. Outside normal business hours, there will be no service provided to turn the water on or off, except in an emergency. (Ord. 01-617, 2-21-2001)
8-1-18: MONTHLY WATER USER FEES:
A. General:
1. User Fee: Each water user shall be levied a monthly water user fee for the privilege of utilizing water from the City water system. The water user fee shall be levied on all users of the water to cover the actual or estimated cost of operation, maintenance, replacement and financing of the City's water system facilities. All water users and property owners who have water service shall be levied a water user fee beginning March 1, 1992, with their first payment being due April 1, 1992, for the first month of service. Billings will be levied regularly after March 1, 1992 at intervals set by the City Council, but no more often than monthly. In the event an owner fails to connect to the system, he or she will be assessed a monthly user base fee. (amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
2. Rate: The actual monthly water user rate fee to be billed to each property owner or customer shall be determined by the addition of the calculated monthly base rate fee and the calculated monthly water usage fee. A description of the base rate fee and water usage fees to be assessed by this Chapter shall be described in the subsequent subsections of this Section. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
B. Base Rate Fees: The water base rate fee for each user (or user class) shall be based on the user's potential water consumption in comparison to a standard equivalent connection defined below. Each user (or user class) shall be assigned a number of equivalent connections to be multiplied by a constant monthly water base rate factor to determine the base monthly fee. Special equivalent connections below do not apply, shall be individually calculated as provided below. The constant monthly water base rate factor per equivalent connection shall hereafter be set by a separate ordinance defining water user connection and usage fees. The monthly user base fee is, therefore, calculated by multiplying the number of equivalent connections assessed to each
City of Salmon
8-1-18 8-1-18
property times the constant monthly water base rate factor. The monthly base fee (residential equivalent unit) for the City may be amended by resolution. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-1992, eff. 11-1-1992; amd. Ord. 92-553, 9-16-1992, eff. 10-1-1992; Ord. 97-598, 10-15-1997, eff. Retroactive to 10-1-1997; amd. Ord. 02-624, 2-20-2002. eff. 5-1-2002 ; amd. Ord. 04- 662, 2-4-2004; amd. Ord. 07-714, 8-15-2007, eff. 10-01-2007; amd. Ord. 09-733 eff. 4-15-2009, amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
1. Equivalent Connection Definition: One equivalent connection shall be defined as a single-family dwelling unit or a user who will
experience equivalent benefits and monthly water usage. It is estimated that an equivalent user or connection in the City will use approximately fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons of water per month. The basic equivalent (a single-family dwelling unit) shall be subject to revision if population, water usage, and/or other information indicates flow rates significantly different from that defined herein. Revisions to the basic equivalent connection criteria shall normally only be made upon the recommendation of a registered professional engineer.
2. Equivalent Connection Determination: The number of equivalent connections to be assigned each user and/or user class shall be in accordance with the following equivalent connection schedule. Assignment of equivalent connections shall apply for one year until the next annual user charge review. Users so indicated or not included in this schedule shall be considered special users and shall be evaluated separately as provided below. Any of the users in the following schedule may be classified as special users if information on their water usage indicates a need to do so. The number of equivalent connections for a single user having more than one classification of equivalent use shall be calculated by adding the sum of all user classifications to a total number of equivalent connections. The minimum monthly water user charge shall be based on one equivalent connection.
3. Special User Definition: For any user whose classification is not detailed on the Equivalent Connection Schedule, the City shall determine his or her equivalent connection on the basis of his or her average monthly water usage. The number of equivalent connections shall be determined by dividing the total average monthly flow by a factor of fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons per month. This calculated equivalent number of connections may be adjusted by the City after the City has recorded the actual water usage over the first year.
City of Salmon
8-1-18 8-1-18
C. Special User Rate: A copy of the list of special users monthly base rate charge shall be kept on file at all times in the office of
the City Clerk. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-1992, eff. 11-1-1992)
The rate for each user shall be determined by the actual size of meter installed, or the size meter required for this type of service in the Uniform Plumbing Code, as adopted by the City of Salmon, whichever is larger. (Ord. 98-603, 8-19-1998; amd. Ord. 08-726. 2-06-2008)
D. Water Usage Fees: In addition to the monthly base rate fee as defined in subsection B of this Section, each water user shall be charged a monthly water usage rate that will be calculated by multiplying the number of gallons of water used each month from the meter reading times a gallonage charge. The gallonage charge shall be that rate per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water that was set by ordinance, hereafter, amended by resolution. The water usage fee for usage shall be calculated per thousand gallons of usage. Water meters shall be read monthly. In the event a meter cannot be read each month, because of weather related conditions, or meter failure, or if the City requires residents to run water to prevent freeze-ups of main lines, the meter reading will be estimated and charged according to the average usage of the preceding three months, or in the event of no available history of the preceding months, the billing shall be set according to the Special User Rate defined in Section 8-1-18(C) of the Salmon City Code. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-1992, eff. 11-1-1992; amd. 1995 Code; Ord. 97-590, 4-2-1997; Ord. 98-603, 8-19-1998; amd. Ord. 02-624, 2-20-2002, eff. 5-1-2002, amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
E. Review And Revision Of Rates: The water connection and usage fees shall, as a minimum, be reviewed annually and when required, updated by resolution of the City to reflect actual costs of operation, maintenance, replacement and financing of the water system. (amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
F. User Request For Rate Change: Any water user who feels his or her water charge is unjust and inequitable as applied to his or her
premises within the spirit and intent of the foregoing provisions, may make written application to the City requesting a review of his or her user charge. Said written request shall, where necessary, show the actual or estimated average flow water in comparison with the values upon which the charge is based, including how the measurements or estimates were made. Any flow measurements shall be approved in detail by the City and/or its Public Works
City of Salmon
8-1-18 8-1-19
Superintendent. Review of the request by the City shall determine if it is substantiated or not, including recommended further study of the matter for the City and/or user by a registered professional engineer.
G. Maximum Cap Limitation: There shall be a maximum cap which was set by ordinance and may be amended by resolution per household unit (hookup) for the period of one monthly billing cycle to allow for repairs of unknown water leaks and unknown water usage per calendar year. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-1992. eff. 11-1-1992; amd. 1995 Code, amd. Ord 15-811, 11-19-15)
H. When any person determines his or her home, business, etc. is destroyed and/or uninhabitable for an extended time due to circumstances beyond his control such as fire, flood, wind, or some other act of God, he or she may apply in writing to the City Utility Clerk for a waiver of payment of his/her City monthly water service fee and City monthly sewer fee. Said waiver must be approved by the City Council. Said approval is at the City Council’s discretion and is not automatic based upon the fact that a building is destroyed and/or uninhabitable. Said waiver shall not exceed six months’ time period. Said time period may be extended upon further application.
Criteria to be considered by the City Council shall include:
a. The cause of said damage
b. The extent of said damage
c. The property owner’s intent as to whether or not he/she plans to rebuild
d. Estimated time period to rebuild or repair damage
e. City services are not available
8-1-19: BILLING PROCEDURE AND PERIODS:
A. Rate: Accounts shall be charged for water service in accordance with the rate determination found in Section 8-1-18 of this Chapter or as such may hereinafter be amended and revised by the City.
B. Monthly Statement: The City shall furnish to each property owner,
landlord, tenant or agent, a monthly statement of the amount due for water service for that month. The failure of any water user to receive notice or statement will in no way affect the obligation of the user to remit monthly payment as required.
City of Salmon
8-1-19 8-1-19
C. Initial Billing: The initial billing for premises occupied less than one month shall be charged only for that portion of the month during which the premises were occupied. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-1992, eff. 11-1-1992)
D. Deposit Required:
1. Each owner, tenant or lessee of property, before utility services are furnished, must pay a refundable deposit. The amount collected may be amended by Resolution of the Salmon City Council.
2. All such deposits shall be placed in a reserve account managed by the City Treasurer/Finance Director.
3. Refundable deposits may be transferred to another physical address on the City of Salmon Utility system if current bill is paid in full and upon written request from the owner, tenant or lessee of notice of transfer of the account to a different address.
4. If your City of Salmon utility bills have been paid in full and on time for the last 12 consecutive months, you will receive a credit to your account in the amount of your deposit.
5. In the event that an account becomes in arrears for a period longer than sixty (60) days, the deposit will be applied to the amount in arrears. Before the service to the owner, tenant or lessee resumes, the amount in arrears must be paid in full and a new deposit shall be submitted to the City. If the deposit has previously been credited to the account in arrears, a new deposit and the amount in arrears shall be submitted before services are restored.
6. Upon vacating the premises, the City will be notified immediately. The owner, tenant, or lessee will, at that time, submit a written request, which shall be furnished by the City, for a refund and furnish a forwarding address. The refundable deposit will than be transferred to the appropriate Utility Fund of the City and credited to the account. The balance of the account, if any, shall be refunded to the person making the deposit, their heir, or a personal representative within thirty (30) days of the written request. No interest will be paid on funds to be returned. If such refund cannot be made within three (3) months because of the unknown whereabouts of the person making the deposit, the balance of the
City of Salmon
8-1-19 8-1-22
deposit shall be placed in the appropriate Utility Fund. (Ord. 05-700, 10-5-2005)
8-1-20: DUE DATE: Bills rendered for water service are payable upon receipt and become past due the 25th day of the month. When the past due date falls on a legal holiday or on a day when City offices are not open for business, the next regular business day is considered the past due date. When remittances are made by mail, bills shall be deemed paid upon receipt. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92 amd. Ord. 13-787, 2-20-13, eff. 2-28-13)
8-1 -21: DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS:
A. Notice: When the delinquent portion of utility bills are not paid by the 18th of the following month, the City shall discontinue water service to such delinquent customers without any further notice. In case service is discontinued for delinquency, it shall not be restored until the delinquency is paid in addition to a fee which shall be set by resolution for discontinuing and restoring service. After payment in full has been received by the city, the service shall be restored within 24 hours excluding weekends and holidays. A service charge of one and one-half percent (1.5) will be added to the unpaid balance at the end of each month.
B. Failure to Pay: In the event that a delinquent customer fails to pay his or her bill within the time set forth above, the City may discontinue City water service and enter upon the property for accomplishing such purposes. In cases where the property is occupied by a tenant, and the tenant moves out, the account must be paid in full before the City will restore and/or transfer water service for the property. This holds the tenant and homeowner equally responsible for the outstanding account. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92, amd. Ord. 13-787, eff. 2-28-13, amd. Ord. 15-797, eff. 2-26-15)
8-1-22: WATER SERVICE DISCONTINUANCE: When any person determines that his or her home, business, etc., is going to
be vacant, not used, shut down, etc., for an extended period of time, he or she shall notify the Utility Clerk. Under these circumstances, the Public Works Superintendent shall shut off the water service to the facilities. When the home, business, etc., is reoccupied, the Public Works Superintendent shall be notified by the Utility Clerk, and he or she shall
City of Salmon
8-1-12 8-1-24
restore water service once again to the facilities with a charge as set by resolution being levied for resumption of the service. Since there is a significant potential for freezing and thus damage to the service line in the event of a lengthy shut down period, the property owner
shall be responsible at his or her expense for any water service line repairs that may be needed to repair the water service line that is located on City right of way properties and also any associated repairs that are needed on his or her private property including the cost of replacing the water meter, meter readout, etc., if it becomes necessary to do so. Every residential and commercial connection to the City water distribution and supply system shall pay the minimum monthly base charge, set by the City Council in accordance with Section 8-1-18, for each month, or part thereof, for every month that water treatment services are available to the property by connection. The monthly minimum base charge shall only be waived upon complete disconnection from the City water distribution and supply system. All requests for disconnection must be approved by the City Council. The fee for reconnection, shall be the same as the new connection fee as set forth in Section 8-4-21. (Ord.92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92, amd. Ord. 04-680, 12-1-2004, amd. 2007 Code, amd. Ord 15-811, 11-19-15)
8-1-23: WATER SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT FUND: There is hereby established a Water System Improvement Fund
to be maintained by the Finance Director/Treasurer in managing the fiscal affairs of the City. All revenues derived from the charging of any fees, charges, rates, etc., as such are set forth herein shall be deposited in said Fund and shall be disbursed only for the purposes of paying existing or future indebtedness connected with or relating to maintaining, repairing, studying, controlling, enlarging, extending, enhancing or improving the water system of the City. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-1-24: WATER SYSTEM MATERIALS AND INSTALLATIONS:
A. Main Lines: All water main lines, valves, fire hydrants and fitting materials and their installation shall be in accordance with City standard specifications for the construction of water system improvements and the applicable standard drawings depicting various water line installation details.
B. Service Lines: All water service line materials and their installation shall be in accordance with the City standard specifications for the construction of water system improvements and the applicable
City of Salmon
8-1-24 8-1-25
standard drawings depicting the various water service line installation details.
C. Quality of Materials: All water system materials shall be of the class, strength, thickness, etc., necessary to accommodate or provide for the depth of cover over the pipe, the anticipated working pressure in the pipe, the type of material and bedding around the
pipe, and the type, magnitude and extent of the external loads being applied to the pipe.
D. City Approval: All materials must be approved by the Public Works Superintendent prior to their installation. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-1-25: WATER SYSTEM DESIGN:
A. Professional Engineer Required: The plans for all water lines, booster stations, etc., shall be designed, signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer licensed in the State of Idaho.
B. Compliance with the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality Requirements: All water lines, booster stations, etc., shall be designed in accordance with the State of Idaho Department of Environmental Quality requirements. (amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
C. Minimum Size: Minimum water main size shall be six inch (6") diameter. Larger sizes shall be as required by the City's overall water system master plan or as are needed to provide adequate water-carrying capacity for the area (and surrounding developable area) being developed and/or annexed to the City. Minimum building service line size shall be three-fourths inch (3/4") diameter.
D. Materials:
1. Pipe, fittings, valves and fire hydrants shall conform to the latest standards issued by the AWWA, if such standards exist, and be acceptable to the City. In the absence of such standards, materials meeting applicable product standards and acceptable to the City may be selected. Special attention shall be given to selecting pipe materials which will protect against both internal and external pipe corrosion.
2. Packing and jointing materials used in the joints of pipes shall meet the standards of the AWWA and the City. Pipe having mechanical joints or slip-on joints with rubber gaskets is preferred.
City of Salmon
8-1-25 8-1-25
E. Water Main Design:
1. Pressure: All water mains, including those not designed to provide fire protection, shall be sized after a hydraulic analysis based on flow demands and pressure requirements. The system shall be designed to maintain a minimum pressure of twenty (20) psi at ground level at all points in the distribution system under all conditions of flow. The normal working pressure in the distribution system should be approximately sixty (60) psi and not less than thirty five (35) psi.
2. Diameter: The minimum size of water main for providing fire protection and serving fire hydrants shall be six inch (6") diameter. Larger size mains will be required if necessary to allow the withdrawal of the required fire flow while maintaining the minimum residual pressure specified in subsection E1 above.
3. Fire Protection: When fire protection is to be provided, system design should be such that fire flows and facilities are in accordance with the requirements of the State Insurance Services office.
4. Small Mains: Any departure from minimum requirements shall be justified by hydraulic analysis and future water use, and can be considered only in special circumstances.
5. Hydrants: Water mains not designed to carry fireflows shall not have fire hydrants connected to them.
6. Dead Ends: Dead ends shall be minimized by looping of all mains whenever practical.
7. Flushing: Where dead-end mains occur, they shall be provided with a fire hydrant if flow and pressure are sufficient, or with an approved flushing hydrant or blow-off for flushing purposes. Flushing devices should be sized to provide flows which will give a velocity of at least two and five-tenths feet (2.5') per second in the water main being flushed. No flushing device shall be directly connected to any sewer.
F. Valves: Sufficient valves shall be provided on water mains so that inconvenience and sanitary hazards will be minimized during repairs. Valves should be located at not more than five hundred foot (500') intervals in commercial districts and at not more than one block or eight hundred foot (800') intervals in other districts.
City of Salmon
8-1-25 8-1-25
G. Hydrants:
1. Location and Spacing: Hydrants should be provided at each street intersection and at intermediate points between intersections as recommended by the State Insurance Service office. Generally, hydrant space may range from three hundred fifty feet (350') to six hundred feet (600') depending on the area being served.
2. Valves and Nozzles: Fire hydrants should have a bottom valve size of at least five inches (5"), one four and one-half inch (4½") pumper nozzle and two (2) two and one-half inch (2 ½") nozzles.
3. Hydrant Leads: The hydrant shall be a minimum of six inches (6") in diameter. Auxiliary valves shall be installed in all hydrant leads.
4. Drainage: Hydrant drains should be open. A gravel pocket or dry well shall be provided unless the natural soils will provide adequate drainage. Hydrant drains shall not be connected to or located within ten feet (10') of sanitary sewers or storm drains.
H. Air Relief Valves; Valve, Meter and Blow-Off Chamber:
1. Air Relief Valves: At high points in water mains where air can accumulate, provisions should be made to remove the air by means of hydrants or air relief valves. Automatic air relief valves shall not be used in situations where flooding of the manhole or chamber may occur.
2. Air Relief Valve Piping: The open end of an air relief pipe from automatic valves should be extended to at least one foot (1') above grade and provided with a screened, downward-facing elbow. The pipe from a manually-operated valve should be extended to the top of the pit.
3. Chamber Drainage: Chambers, pits or manholes containing valves, blow-offs, meters or other such appurtenances to a distribution system, shall not be connected directly to any storm drain or sanitary sewer, nor shall blow-offs or air relief valves be connected directly to any sewer. Such chambers or pits shall be drained to the surface of the ground where they are not subject to flooding by surface water or to absorption pits underground.
I. Installation of Mains:
1. Standards: Specifications shall incorporate the provision of the AWWA standards and/or manufacturer's recommended installation procedures.
City of Salmon
8-1-25 8-1-25
2. Bedding: A continuous and uniform bedding shall be provided in the trench for all buried pipe. Backfill material shall be tamped in layers around the pipe and to a sufficient height above the pipe to adequately support and protect the pipe. Stones found in the trench shall be removed to a depth of at least six inches (6") below the bottom of the pipe.
3. Cover: In general, water lines shall be sufficiently deep so as to provide frost protection. Water lines shall have at least six feet (6')
of cover (from the top of water line pipe to the ground or street surface) unless a special design is approved by the Public Works Superintendent.
4. Blocking: All tees, bends, plugs and hydrants shall be provided with reaction blocking, tie rods or joints designed to prevent movement.
5. Pressure and Leakage Testing: All types of installed pipe shall be pressure tested and leakage tested in accordance with the latest edition of AWWA Standard C600.
6. Disinfection: All new, cleaned or repaired water mains shall be disinfected in accordance with AWWA Standard C601. The specifications shall include detailed procedures for the adequate flushing, disinfection and microbiological testing of all water mains.
J. Separation of Water Mains, Sanitary Sewers and Storm Sewers:
1. General: The following factors should be considered in providing adequate separation:
a. Materials and type of joints for water and sewer pipes;
b. Soil conditions;
c. Service and branch connections into the water main and
sewer line;
d. Compensating variations in the horizontal and vertical
separations;
e. Space for repair and alterations of water and sewer pipes;
f. Off-setting of pipes around manholes.
2. Parallel Installation: Water mains shall be laid at least ten feet (10') horizontally from any existing or proposed sewer. The distance shall be measured edge to edge. In cases where it is not practical to maintain a ten foot (10') separation, the reviewing authority may allow deviation on a case-by-case basis, if supported by data from
City of Salmon
8-1-25 8-1-25
the design engineer. Such deviation may allow installation of the water main closer to a sewer; provided, that the water main is laid in a separate trench or on an undisturbed earth shelf located on one side of the sewer at such an elevation that the bottom of the water main is at least eighteen inches (18") above the top of the sewer.
3. Crossings: Water mains crossing sewers shall be laid to provide a minimum vertical distance of eighteen inches (18") between the outside of the water main and the outside of the sewer. This shall be the case where the water main is either above or below the sewer. At crossings, one full length of water pipe shall be located so both joints will be as far from the sewer as possible. Special structural support for the water and sewer pipes may be required.
4. Exception: The City must specifically approve any variance from the requirements of subsections J2 and J3 of this Section when it is impossible to obtain the specified separation distances.
5. Force Mains: There shall be at least ten foot (10') horizontal separation between water mains and sanitary sewer force mains. There shall be an eighteen inch (18") vertical separation at crossings as required in subsection J3 of this Section.
6. Sewer Manholes: No water pipe shall pass through or come in contact with any part of a sewer manhole.
K. Surface Water Crossings: Surface water crossings, whether over or under water, present special problems. The reviewing authority should be consulted before final plans are prepared.
1. Above-Water Crossing: The pipe shall be adequately supported and anchored, protected from damage and freezing and accessible for repair or replacement.
2. Under-Water Crossings: A minimum cover of five feet (5') shall be provided over the pipe. When crossing watercourses which are greater than fifteen feet (15') in width the following shall be provided:
a. The pipe shall be of special construction, having flexible watertight joints.
b. Valves shall be provided at both ends of water crossings so that the section can be isolated for testing or repair; the valves shall be easily accessible, and not subject to flooding, and the valve closest to the supply source shall be in a manhole.
City of Salmon
8-1-25 8-1-25
c. Permanent taps shall be made on each side of the valve within the manhole to allow insertion of a small meter to determine leakage and for sampling purposes.
L. Cross-Connections and Interconnections:
1. Cross-connections: There shall be no connection between the, distribution system and any pipes, pumps, hydrants or tanks whereby unsafe water or other contaminating materials may be discharged or drawn into the system.
2. Cooling Water: Neither steam condensate nor cooling water from engine jackets or other heat exchange devices shall be returned to the potable water supply.
M. Water Services and Plumbing:
1. Plumbing: Water services and plumbing shall conform to relevant local and/or State Plumbing Codes.
2. Booster Pumps: Individual booster pumps shall not be allowed for any individual service from the public water supply mains.
N. Location of Water Lines and Storm Drains: Sanitary water lines and water lines shall, wherever possible, be located on opposite sides of the street. Preferably, water lines shall be located thirteen feet (13') west or north of the street center line and the sanitary water at thirteen feet (13') east or south of the street center line. When storm drains are needed, these shall preferably be located along the street center line. The above-referenced locations and dimensions may be varied to accommodate unusual circumstances.
O. Requirements for Drawings: All drawings shall be on linen or mylar in ink and of such quality that they clearly show the dimensions, locations, sizes, etc., of all facilities represented thereon. All main lines, valves, fire hydrants, building service lines, etc., shall be clearly shown and identified by name and by station or other means of horizontal location. Water lines shall be shown in both plan and profile unless the length of said water line or water line extension is so short that the Public Works Superintendent waives this requirement. If a profile of the water line is not provided, it shall be located in the vertical plane by elevations on the flow line of the pipe at intervals as the Public Works Superintendent may require. Drawings shall be drawn on a scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') unless the amount of detail, topography, etc., necessitates their being drawn on a larger scale (i.e., 1" = 30') to provide the clarity and completeness needed on the drawings.
City of Salmon
8-1-25 8-1-27
P. Approval of Design: The design of all water lines and water line plans must be approved by the Public Works Superintendent. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92. eff. 11-1-92; 1995 Code)
8-1-26: AS-BUILT DRAWINGS AND ENGINEER'S CER-
TIFICATION:
A. Drawings: As-built or record drawings of water line plans shall be
prepared by a professional engineer and the corrected original drawings or a duplicate mylar copy of the corrected original drawing(s) shall be provided to the City.
B. Certification by Engineer: As-built plans shall include a certification thereon signed by the registered professional engineer in charge of the work that the as-built drawings of the water lines are true and correct and that the engineer has inspected the construction of the water line installation and that the materials and installation of the same were done in conformance with the City standard specifications for the construction of water line improvements. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92. eff. 11-1-92)
8-1-27: SUBDIVISION DEVELOPER'S OR PROPERTY OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER LINES:
A. Construction: The owner or developer of any piece of property or
tract of land is responsible for the construction of the water line (or for the water line costs) along any of the property sides or frontages of the property along which a water line is needed for the overall completeness and continuity of the City's water main system. If it is a large tract of land, the owner or developer shall also be responsible for the necessary and required system of water lines within the interior of the tract of land. The owner or developer of any piece of property shall construct all needed water lines (of the approved size) within and along all sides of frontages of any piece of property prior to the time any building constructed thereon is occupied or utilized unless phased construction of the water main system is specifically allowed or provided for in the annexation or development agreement. In lieu of actually constructing said required water line or water lines, the property owner or developer may deposit adequate monies with the City to fully cover the cost(s) of said required water line construction.
B. Line Over Six-Inch Diameter: The owner or developer of any property or subdivision will normally be responsible only for the cost of up to six inch (6") diameter water line. The additional cost of providing a water line of a size greater than six inches (6") will
City of Salmon
8-1-27 8-1-28
normally be a City responsibility. The City will reimburse the developer for the extra cost of the additional water line size (over the 6 inch diameter size referenced above) as set forth in the annexation or development agreement between the developer and the City. Provided further, however, that if any proposed subdivision or development is of such size or magnitude that it requires or necessitates a water main larger than a six inch (6") diameter line or if the type of development is such as to produce a water flow in excess of the capacity of a six inch (6") diameter water line, then the owner or developer of said subdivision or development shall be responsible for the entire cost of whatever size of water line is needed to accommodate said development.
C. Development on One Side of Street: If the property owner or developer owns or is developing the property on only one side (as compared to both sides) of any street, alley or easement where a water line is located or required, the owner/developer (or they) shall be responsible for only one-half (1/2) of the cost of said water line while the property owner on the other side of said street, alley or easement shall be responsible for the other half of the cost of said water line construction. However, in the absence of any mutual agreement between the property owners, the City may participate with the first owner or developer to the extent of paying for one-half (1/2) the cost of a six inch (6") diameter water line across said referenced property frontage. The second property owner will thereafter be responsible for reimbursing the City for his or her half of the costs of this water line construction at the time he or she (the second property owner or developer) begins to develop or build upon his or her property that is adjacent to the water line installed by the first property owner. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-1-28: FLOOD PLAIN LIMITATIONS: The following limitations are imposed on all water line replacements and connections
within the flood plain areas of the City as set forth on the maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
A. New Structures: The City shall not allow new structures built within the 100-year flood plain to be connected to the City water system unless or until the new structure shall meet the construction/building requirements of the Idaho Flood Plain Management and National Flood Insurance Program.
City of Salmon
8-1-28 8-1-32
B. Replacements: The City shall make pipeline replacements within the 100-year flood plain designed so as not to encourage growth within the 100-year flood plain. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-1-29: CITATION; APPEARANCE: Whenever it is determined by any police officer or other duly authorized officer that any
person(s) have violated any provisions of this Chapter or Chapter 2 of this Title, the said officer shall provide in quadruplicate and serve upon such person(s) a written citation containing a notice to appear in a designated court of competent jurisdiction within the City. This citation shall contain the name and address of the person charged, the offense charged, the time and place when and where the offense charged occurred, and the time when the person charged shall appear in said court, and such other pertinent information as may be necessary; and such person(s) shall appear in said court within five (5) days after such citation is issued and served. The issuance of a citation shall not be the exclusive method of summoning offenders hereunder. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-1-30: FAILURE TO APPEAR UNLAWFUL: It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to fail to or neglect to appear in response to
and as required by the citation regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which such citation was originally issued. Appearance in court shall be deemed complied with upon appearance by the person(s) cited or their attorneys. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-1-31: LIABILITY: This Chapter and Chapter 2 of this Title shall not be construed to hold the City responsible for
any damage to any water user by reason of a stoppage or interruption of the water supply caused by scarcity of water, accidents to works or mains, alterations, additions, repairs or from other unavoidable causes to persons or property. The City shall also not be held liable for damage to persons or property by reason of the inspection or testing herein, or the failure to inspect or test or by reason of approval of any cross-connections. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-1-32: PENALTY: Any person violating any provision of this Chapter or Chapter 2 of this Title shall be guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereunder may be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. Each day said violation occurs shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92; 1995 Code, amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
City of Salmon
8-2-1 8-2-2
CHAPTER 2
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
8-2-1: Water Supply Protection
8-2-2: Use of Backflow Devices
8-2-3: Cross-Connection Inspection
8-2-4: Installation Permits for Cross-connection Control Devices
8-2-5: Additional Remedies
8-2-1: WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION: No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or continued in
the City unless the water supply is protected by backflow prevention devices as may be required by this Chapter, Idaho Code and all standards, rules and regulations of the State of Idaho, the Idaho Division of Environment and any other Federal, State, County or City authority or agency thereof. The installation or maintenance of a cross-connection which will endanger the water quality of the potable water supply of the City shall be unlawful and is prohibited. Any such cross-connection now existing or hereafter installed is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the same shall be abated. The control or elimination of cross-connection shall be in accordance with this Chapter, Idaho Code and all standards, rules and regulations of the State of Idaho, the Idaho Division of Environment and any other Federal, State, County or City authority or agency thereof, together with the latest edition of appropriate manuals of standard practice pertaining to cross-connection control enacted by the City and any applicable County, State and Federal authorities and agencies. The City shall have the authority to establish requirements more stringent than State regulations if it deems that the conditions so dictate. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-2-2: USE OF BACKFLOW DEVICES:
A. Backflow Prevention Device Required: Backflow prevention devices shall be installed in connection with water service connections or
City of Salmon
8-2-2 8-2-2
within any premises where, in the judgment of the City, the nature
and extent of the activities, or the materials stored on the premises, would present an immediate and dangerous hazard to health and/or be deleterious to the quality of the water should a cross-connection occur, even though such cross-connection does not exist at the time. The backflow prevention devices shall be installed under circumstances including but not limited to the following:
1. Auxiliary Water Supply: Premises having an auxiliary water supply that are connected to lawn irrigation system, swimming pool or is otherwise not in compliance with Idaho drinking water standards, rules and regulations of the Idaho Division of Environment and any other Federal, State, County or City authority or agency thereof and is acceptable to the City.
2. Internal Cross-Connections: Premises having internal cross- connections that are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impracticable to ascertain whether or not cross-connections exist.
3. Restricted Entry: Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to ensure that cross-connections do not exist.
4. History of Cross-Connection: Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being established or reestablished.
5. Substances Under Pressure: Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to permit entry into the City water supply or where a cross-connection could reasonably be expected to occur. This shall include the handling of process waters and cooling waters.
6. Toxic Materials: Premises where materials of a toxic nature are
handled in such a way that if back siphonage should occur, a serious health hazard might result.
7. Types of Facilities: The following types of facilities will fall into one of the above categories where a backflow prevention device is required to protect the City water supply. A backflow prevention device shall be installed at these facilities unless the City and applicable State, County and Federal authorities and agencies determine that no hazard exists:
City of Salmon
8-2-2 8-2-2
a. Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics;
b. Laboratories, including school laboratories;
c. Metal plating industries;
d. Sewage treatment plants;
e. Food or beverage processing plants;
f. Chemical plants using a water process;
g. Petroleum processing or storage plants;
h. Car washes;
i. Dry cleaners.
Other premises as specified by the City where backflow prevention devices are required to protect the City water supply.
B. Type of Protective Device: The type of protective device required shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists:
1. An air-gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention device shall be installed where the City water supply may be contaminated with sewage, industrial waste of a toxic nature or other contaminant which could cause a health or system hazard.
2. In the case of a substance which may be objectionable but not
hazardous to health, a double check valve assembly, air prevention device shall be installed.
C. Location: Backflow prevention devices required by this Chapter shall be installed at the property line of the premises, or at a location designated by the City. The device shall be located so as to be readily accessible for maintenance and testing, and furthermore, where no part of the device will be submerged.
D. Approval and Supervision by City: Backflow prevention devices required by this Chapter shall be installed under the supervision of, and with the approval of, the City.
City of Salmon
8-2-2 8-2-3
E. Additional Approval: Any protective device required by this Chapter shall be approved by the City, applicable State, County and Federal authorities and agencies. These devices shall be furnished and installed by and at the expense of the customer.
F. Inspection and Testing: Backflow prevention devices installed pursuant to this Chapter shall be inspected and tested annually, or more often if necessary. Inspections, tests and maintenance shall be at the customer's expense, and, if requested by the City, by a certified tester retained and paid by the customer. Whenever the devices are found to be defective, they shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the customer's expense. Inspections, tests, repairs and records thereof shall be accomplished in accordance with all standards, rules and regulations of this Chapter, Idaho Code and all standards, rules and regulations of the State of Idaho, the Idaho Department of Health and Welfare, and any other Federal, State, County or City authority or agency thereof by certified testers retained and paid by the customer.
G. Underground Sprinkling Device: No underground sprinkling device will be installed without adequate backflow prevention devices at the point from which water for irrigation is taken from the City water supply.
H. Noncompliance: Failure of the customer to cooperate in the installation, maintenance, testing or inspection of backflow prevention devices required by this Chapter, Idaho Code and all standards, rules and regulations of the State of Idaho, the Idaho Department of Health and Welfare, and any other Federal, State, County or City authority or agency thereof shall be grounds for termination of water service to the premises, or, in the alternative, the installation of an air-gap separation at the customer's expense. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-2-3: CROSS-CONNECTION INSPECTION:
A. No water shall be delivered to any structure hereafter built within the City until the same shall have been inspected by the City for possible cross-connections and been approved as being free of the same.
B. Any construction for industrial or other purposes which is classified as hazardous facilities pursuant to subsection 8-2-2A7 of this
City of Salmon
8-2-3 8-2-5
Chapter, where it is reasonable to anticipate cross-connections, or as determined by the City, shall be protected by the installation of one or more backflow prevention devices at the point of service from the City water supply or any other location designated by the City and applicable County, State and Federal authorities and agencies.
C. Inspections may be made periodically of all buildings, structures or improvements of any nature now receiving water through the City's system, for the purpose of ascertaining whether cross-connections exist. Such inspections shall be made by the City or applicable County, State and Federal authorities and agencies. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-2-4: INSTALLATION PERMITS FOR CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICES: If cross-connection control device(s)
are found to be necessary, the owner of the property served must apply to the City for a specific installation permit. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
8-2-5: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES1: In the event an improper cross-connection is not corrected within the time limits set by the
City or in the event the City is refused access to any property for the purpose of determining whether or not cross-connections exist, the City may cease delivery of water to the property until the deficiency is corrected to the City's satisfaction. In addition, the City without waiving any terms of this Chapter may, but shall not be required to, effect the necessary repairs or installations at the expense of the property owner and refuse delivery of water to the property until the cost thereof shall have been paid. Violations of this Chapter are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the City, after notice to the customer or property owner to remove or correct the violation, may prevent, remove and abate the same at the expense of the party creating or maintaining the same, in which event the City may levy a special assessment as provided in Idaho Code on the land or premises whereon the nuisance is situated to defray the cost or to reimburse the City for the cost of abating the same. (Ord. 92-549, 3-18-92, eff. 11-1-92)
1 See also Sections 8-1-29 through 8-1-32 of this Title for citation, liability and penalty provisions.
City of Salmon
8-3-1 8-3-2
CHAPTER 3
IRRIGATION WATER
SECTION:
8-3-1: Days of Use
8-3-2: Sprinkler Systems; Restrictive Devices
8-3-3: Penalty
8-3-1: DAYS OF USE: It shall be unlawful for any inhabitant, resident or water user of the City to cause or permit the use
of Municipal domestic water, for which said individual resident or water user is charged by the City for the use of said water, for irrigation and/or sprinkling except on the days set forth herein.
A. Even-Numbered Days: All such water users so using said water on premises or property identified on the Official Map of the City with an address ending in an even number shall be permitted to so use said water on even-numbered calendar days; and
B. Odd-Numbered Days: All such water users so using said water on premises or property identified on the Official Map of the City with an address ending in an odd number shall be permitted to so use said water on odd-numbered calendar days.
C. Thirty First Day of Month: It shall be unlawful for any inhabitant, resident or water user to irrigate and/or sprinkle on the thirty first day of any month. (Ord. 85-485, 6-3-85)
8-3-2: SPRINKLER SYSTEMS; RESTRICTIVE DEVICES: It shall be unlawful for any inhabitant, resident, or water user of the
City to cause or permit the use of Municipal domestic water for which said individual resident or water user is charged by the City for the use of said water, for irrigation and/or sprinkling as set forth in Section 8-3-1 above, except in the manner as set forth below:
City of Salmon
8-3-2 8-3-3
A. Hoses: Only one hose is permitted to be used at any single time and said hose used for said irrigation and/or sprinkling shall have
attached to it a restrictive device. (Ord. 85-485, 6-3-85)
B. Sprinkler Systems:
1. Hours of Use: Notwithstanding the above, it shall be lawful for an inhabitant, resident or water user of the City to cause, or permit the use of Municipal domestic water for which said individual resident or water user is charged by the City for the use of said water, for irrigation and/or sprinkling by use of a sprinkler system between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the date permitted for such use under Section 8-3-1 above. For purposes of this Section, a "sprinkler system" is defined as an irrigation system utilizing two (2) or more solid set sprinkler devices per service line and being serviced primarily from an underground piping system.
2. Discharge: During the hours of operation the sprinkler system
should not discharge more than four thousand three hundred (4,300) gallons of water. This is equivalent of one sprinkler used for twenty four (24) hours using the equation of 3 gpm x 60 minutes x 24 hours.
3. Anti-Siphon Valves: It shall be required that anti-siphon valves for sprinkler systems connected to potable water systems be installed. (Ord. 85-485, 6-3-85)
8-3-3: PENALTY: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or fail to perform any requirement which is prohibited or
required by this Chapter, and said violation is hereby declared to be an infraction and is subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 85-485. 6-3-85; 1995 Code, amd. Ord 15-811, 11-19-15)
City of Salmon
8-4-1 8-4-1
CHAPTER 4
SEWER USE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-4- 1: Definition of Terms
8-4- 2: Connection to Sanitary Sewer Required
8-4- 3: Unpolluted Water
8-4- 4: Prohibited Discharges
8-4- 5: Approval Required for Wastewater
8-4- 6: Refusal of Use of System
8-4- 7: Sewer Service Line Requirement and Maintenance
8-4- 8: Injury to or Tampering with Sanitary Sewer System Unlawful
8-4- 9: Interceptor or Removal Facilities Required to Remove Harmful Ingredients
8-4-10: Duties of Wastewater Operator Regarding Side Sewers
8-4-11: Permits Required
8-4-12: Side Sewer Extension or Repair and Inspection
8-4-13: Installation and Maintenance of Sewer Service Line
8-4-14: Right to Revoke Permission
8-4-15: Sewer Construction Plans, Specifications and Inspection
8-4-16: Right to Enter Premises for Inspection
8-4-17: Industrial Wastes
8-4-18: Special Agreements
8-4-19: Extensions
8-4-20: System of Charges
8-4-21: Sewer Connection Fee
8-4-22: Sewer Main Construction Charge
8-4-23: Service Line Installation Fee
8-4-24: Service Call Charges
8-4-25: Monthly Sewer Rates
8-4-26: Metered Service
8-4-27: Billing Procedure and Period
8-4-28: Due Date
8-4-29: Delinquent Accounts
8-4-30: Sewer Service Discontinuance Fee
8-4-31: Wastewater Collection and Treatment System Improvement
Fund
8-4-32: Sewer System Materials and Installation
8-4-33: Sewer System Design
City of Salmon
8-4-1 8-4-1
8-4-34: As-Built Drawings and Engineer's Certification
8-4-35: Subdivision Developer's or Property Owner's Responsibility
8-4-36: Citation; Appearance
8-4-37: Failure to Appear Unlawful
8-4-38: Liability
8-4-39: Penalties
8-4-1: DEFINITION OF TERMS: Terms used in this Chapter shall have the meaning herein given to them.
APPROVING The Wastewater Operator, as appointed by AUTHORITY: the City or his or her duly authorized
deputy, agent or representative.
BIOCHEMICAL The quantity of oxygen, expressed in parts
OXYGEN DEMAND per million by weight, utilized in the
(BOD): biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory determinations made in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods".
BUILDING DRAIN: The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the drainage from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the side sewer which begins two feet (2') outside the outer face of the building wall.
CHLORINE The amount of chlorine, in parts per million
REQUIREMENT: by weight, which must be added to the sewage to produce a specified residual chlorine content, or to meet the requirements of some other objective, in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods".
CITY: The City of Salmon.
City of Salmon
8-4-1 8-4-1
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer receiving both surface runoff (storm drainage) and wastewater (sanitary sewage).
COMMERCIAL Any structure built for the support, shelter, BUILDING: enclosure of persons, animals, or chattels, or property of any kind or for
any type of business or enterprises or for
any other purposes not otherwise described or covered above under "dwellings".
COMMERCIAL USER: All persons not specifically classified as
domestic or as an industrial waste contributor.
DWELLINGS:
Auto Court, Motor The combination or group of two (2) or
Court, Travel Trailer more dwelling units occupying a building
Court, Motel, Hotel, site or area under one ownership, used for
etc. the purpose of furnishing transient living
accommodations.
Duplex: A building designed, built, rented or leased for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other.
Multiple-Family Any building or portion thereof Dwelling or Apartment which is designed, built, rented, leased,
House: let, or hired to be occupied or which be
occupied or which is occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families or persons living independently of each other and doing their own cooking within the premises, which shall include townhouses or condominiums.
Single-Family A building designed for or occupied
Dwelling: by one family for living or sleeping purposes, and having one kitchen or set of cooking facilities.
Trailer House or Any vehicle used or so constructed as to
Mobile Home: permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways and
City of Salmon
8-4-1 8-4-1
streets or highways and constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons.
GARBAGE: The residue from the preparation and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food products and produce.
GROUND GARBAGE: The residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimensions.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Any flow discharged to the wastewater treatment system identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, office of the Management Budget, as amended and supplemented under the following divisions:
A. Division A: Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing
B. Division B: Mining
C. Division D: Manufacturing
D. Division E: Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitation Service
E. Division 1: Services
MG: Million gallons.
MGD: Million gallons per day.
City of Salmon
8-4-1 8-4-1
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water developed by naturally occurring process of nature.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in moles per liter and is a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution. It shall be determined by one of the procedures outlined in "Standard Methods".
PARTS PER MILLION: A weight-to-weight ratio; the parts per million value multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, group or other entity.
PRIVATE SEWER: A sewer serving two (2) or more buildings, residences or properties, constructed by private contract outside of the public right of way and remaining under private ownership and jurisdiction and which shall be designed, constructed and maintained by said private owners to the same design, construction and maintenance standards as are public sewers.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the City. It shall also include sewers within or outside the City boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the City's sanitary or combined sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed with City funds. All public sewers shall be located in dedicated public rights of way or easements. Public sewers shall be at least eight inches (8") in diameter.
REPLACEMENT: Any expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or
City of Salmon
8-4-1 8-4-1
appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement.
SANITARY SEWAGE: Wastes that are derived principally from dwellings, business buildings, institutions and like, exclusive of storm and surface waters and industrial wastes.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that conveys sanitary sewage or industrial wastes, or a combination of the two (2), and into which storm, surface and ground water or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
SERVICE CHARGE: The charge levied on all users of the sewage system for the purpose of repayment of City indebtedness for the construction and installation of the system and for its efficient maintenance and operation, and in establishing such rates and charges the City has taken into account the cost and value of the system, operation and maintenance expenses, possible delinquencies, proper allowance for depreciation, contingencies and any amounts necessary to retire all bonds payable from net revenues and the reserve required for these.
SERVICE A sewer line connected to the sewer main.
CONNECTION:
SEWAGE: Wastewater.
SEWAGE Wastewater treatment plant or other TREATMENT PLANT: like facilities.
SEWER: Any pipe or conduit used for conveying wastewater or any other waste liquids, including storm, surface and ground water drainage.
City of Salmon
8-4-1 8-4-1
SEWER MAIN: The pipe laid in a street, road, alley or easement and running approximately parallel to the street, road, alley or easement for the collection of wastewater from the customers, and which is owned, operated, controlled and maintained by the City.
SIDE SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer and is sometimes referred to as the sewer service connection or sewer service line.
STANDARD SEWAGE: Sewage and acceptable wastes that are within specifications regarding pH, BOD, dissolved oxygen, suspended solids and grease.
STORM DRAIN: Any pipe or conduit conveying storm, surface and ground water drainage, but excluding sewage and industrial wastes.
STORM WATER That portion of the rainfall that is drained RUNOFF: into the sewers.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS): Solids that either float on the surface of, or in suspension in water, sewage or Industrial waste and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods".
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Any water or liquid containing none of the following: free or emulsified grease or oil; acids or alkalis, substances that may impart taste and odor or color characteristics; toxic or poisonous substances in suspensions, colloidal state or solution; odorous or otherwise obnoxious gases. It shall contain not more than thirty (30) parts per million each of suspended solids or biochemical oxygen demand. Analytical determination shall be
City of Salmon
8-4-1 8-4-2
made in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods".
WASTEWATER: The water-carried human, animal or household wastes in a public or private sewer, and may include ground water infiltration, surface drainage and industrial wastes.
WASTEWATER All facilities for collecting, pumping, COLLECTION AND treating and disposing of domestic, TREATMENT SYSTEM commercial and industrial waste, and
(also termed Sewage includes sewers as well as the wastewater Collection and treatment plant.
Treatment System):
WASTEWATER The Wastewater Operator of the City of OPERATOR: Salmon.
WASTEWATER An assemblage of devices, structures,
TREATMENT PLANT: equipment and holding ponds or lagoons for treating domestic, commercial and industrial waste.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-2: CONNECTION TO SANITARY SEWER REQUIRED: Every parcel of land or premises within the boundaries of the City,
improved for occupancy and occupied or used by any person, or as a commercial business, shall be connected to the public sanitary sewer system unless exempted by the City Council in writing. The owner or person in charge of such land shall make or cause to be made, such connection within ninety (90) days after receiving official notice from the City to so connect. All charges associated with the laying of pipe from the home or facilities to be served to the City's mains and all other costs incurred in connecting to said mains shall be borne by the property owner. All such connections to the City's mains shall be properly designed and constructed in conformity with requirements specified by the City. If a parcel of land is not within three hundred feet (300') of a sewer, connection is optional. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
City of Salmon
8-4-3 8-4-4
8-4-3: UNPOLLUTED WATER:
A. Prohibited from Sanitary Sewer: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or other unpolluted water to any sanitary sewer without having received written permission from the Wastewater Operator to take such action.
B. Discharged to Storm Drain: Storm water shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm drains, or to a natural outlet approved by the Wastewater Operator. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process water may be discharged upon approval of the Wastewater Operator to a storm drain, combined sewers or natural outlet. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-4: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES: Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any of the following described wastewater to the wastewater collection and treatment system:
A. Any solids, liquids or gases which may, by themselves or by interaction with other substances, cause fire or explosive hazards or in any other way be injurious to person, property or the operation of the wastewater collection and treatment system.
B. Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases which either singly or by interaction with other substances are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance or repair.
C. Any solids, greases, waxes, slurries or viscous material of such character or in such quantity that it, in the opinion of the Wastewater Operator, may cause an obstruction to the flow in the sewer, or otherwise interfere with the proper functioning of the wastewater collection treatment plant.
D. Any toxic substance, chemical elements or compounds in quantities sufficient to impair the operation or efficiency of the wastewater treatment facilities and cause the effluent thereof to exceed Idaho State Board of Health water requirements.
City of Salmon
8-4-4 8-4-7
E. Any liquids having a Ph lower than five and five-tenths (5.5) or higher than nine (9.0) or having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to structures, equipment, or personnel of the wastewater collection and treatment system.
F. Any radioactive isotopes without obtaining a special permit from the Wastewater Operator.
G. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature greater than one hundred forty degrees (140°) Fahrenheit.
H. Any garbage that has not been properly ground.
I. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, hair or other material capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with proper operation of the wastewater collection treatment system. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-5: APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR WASTEWATER: Review and acceptance of the Wastewater Operator shall be obtained
prior to discharge into the public sewers of any water or wastes having:
A. A total of more than thirty (30) pounds of suspended solids in any
one day.
B. A total of more than thirty (30) pounds of BOD in any one day.
C. An average flow of one one-hundredth (0.01) mgd or more. (Ord.
92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-6: REFUSAL OF USE OF SYSTEM: The Wastewater Operator may prohibit the discharge into the public sewer of
sewage that does not comply with the limitations set forth in this Chapter. (Ord. 92-554. 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-7: SEWER SERVICE LINE REQUIREMENT AND
MAINTENANCE:
A. Independent Sewer Service Line Required:
City of Salmon
8-4-7 8-4-8
1. The sewer main line and sewer service line(s) shall be so arranged that there is a separate and independent sewer service line to each individual building, place of business or tract of land.
2. After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter, a separate and independent side sewer (building service line) shall be provided for every new building connecting to the sanitary sewer system of the City. Separate side sewers are not required for each trailer space in overnight trailer courts, nor for each cabin in cabin courts; however, separate side sewers (sewer service lines) are required for trailer houses or individual lots or for long-term trailer rental units in mobile home courts.
B. Existing Branch Service Lines: Where sewer service is now provided through one sewer service line to several customers (branch service lines), the City, by resolution of its Council, may decline to continue to accept sewage from said premises until separate sewer service lines are provided at the owner's expense. Where more than one dwelling is served from one such service line, the established rate shall be charged for each customer in the
same manner as if each did, in fact, have an individual sewer service line.
C. Sewer Service Line Maintenance: All sewer users shall keep their
individual service lines in good repair and shall keep them in such
good condition that they shall not allow excessive amounts of ground water to enter into the sewer system. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff 10-21-92)
8-4-8: INJURY TO OR TAMPERING WITH SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM UNLAWFUL: It shall be unlawful to disturb,
destroy, damage, adjust, molest, meddle or otherwise interfere with any portion of the City sewage collection treatment system or its appurtenances, located on either public or private property. Should any damage result, either intentionally or unintentionally, from handling or otherwise tampering with or plugging said sewer system, the violator shall pay for all costs incurred in connection with the repairs of said system and/or for any damages that may result from the tampering with or plugging of said sewer system and may be subject to other civil and criminal fines and penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any substance which may tend to obstruct the flow of the sewer, in any sewer opening. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
City of Salmon
8-4-9 8-4-11
8-4-9: INTERCEPTOR OR REMOVAL FACILITIES REQUIRED TO REMOVE HARMFUL INGREDIENTS: Grease, oil and
sand interceptors or other necessary removal facilities shall be installed on the premises when, in the opinion of the Wastewater Operator, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, high concentration of blood, fruit, vegetable or grain liquors, milk, wastes, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients. All interceptors or removal facilities shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Wastewater Operator and shall also be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. When installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner or occupant, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-10: DUTIES OF WASTEWATER OPERATOR REGARDING SIDE SEWERS: The Wastewater Operator is hereby
empowered, and it is hereby made his or her duty, in all cases where there is a public sanitary sewer within three hundred feet (300’) to notify
every owner or person in charge of land, or premises, requiring a sanitary sewer building connection as specified in Section 8-4-2 to comply with the provisions of that Section of this Chapter within ninety (90) days or cease to use or occupy the land. A lessee of land shall be deemed to be in charge. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-11: PERMITS REQUIRED:
A. Installation or Alteration of Sanitary Sewer Line: It shall be unlawful to install or alter or to tap onto or connect to any sanitary sewer line whether lateral, main or interceptor, without having first obtained from the City a permit therefor.
B. Application for Connection: An application for connection to the City sewer system shall be made at City Hall and no connection shall be made to any sewer main without a valid permit therefor having been issued by the City. The existence of a sewer permit shall in no way be construed as making permissible any work for which an excavation permit may be required by the City. (amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
C. Excavation Permit: No permit shall be granted to do sewer work in any street, alley or public easement until the applicant shall have first obtained an excavation permit as required by the City. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92. eff. 10-21-92)
City of Salmon
8-4-12 8-4-13
8-4-12: SIDE SEWER EXTENSION OR REPAIR AND INSPECTION:
A. Repair: When any sewer service line (side sewer) or private sewer connected with any public sewer becomes obstructed, broken or out of order, on private property (outside of any public right of way or easement), the owner, agent or tenant of such premises shall repair the same at his or her own expense. No person shall finish the construction, re-laying, repair or extension of any side sewer or private sewer until the work has been inspected by the Wastewater Operator.
B. Extension: It shall be unlawful for any person to extend any private sewer or side sewer beyond the limits of the building or property without the approval and inspection of the Wastewater Operator. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-13: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SEWER
SERVICE LINE:
A. Installation by City: When approval and inspection of a sewer service line (side sewer) has been granted, the sewer tap at the sewer main and the sewer service line from the sewer main to the property line shall be installed by the City at the expense of the person or business desiring sewer service, but thereafter the sewer service line within the public right of way or easement shall be maintained by the Sewer Department at its expense and kept within and under its exclusive control and jurisdiction.
B. Installation by Other Than City Personnel: All sewer service lines (side sewers) within any public right of way or easements shall be
constructed by the City; except that sewer service lines in any new subdivisions may be installed as part of the construction of the new sewer collection system within said subdivision; and provided, further, that said service lines are constructed, inspected, tested and certified as being in conformance with the City standard drawings and standard specifications governing the construction of sewer service lines. Sewer service lines may also be installed by contract in conjunction with City sponsored projects or when, in the opinion of the Wastewater Operator, it is in the City's best interest to have or allow said sewer service lines to be installed by other than City personnel. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
City of Salmon
8-4-14 8-4-17
8-4-14: RIGHT TO REVOKE PERMISSION: Permission given to connect sewers and drains shall be upon the express
condition that the Wastewater Operator may for good cause revoke the same and the person making such connection, or his or her successor in interest, shall have no right to claim any damage in consequence of such permission being revoked. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-15: SEWER CONSTRUCTION PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS AND INSPECTION: All construction or reconstruction of
public, private and side sewers shall be in accordance with the City standard drawings and standard specifications and subject to inspection by the City. Plan and profile drawings shall be prepared for all new sewer mains (whether public or private) and for all sanitary sewer extensions, reconstructions or renovations; and all such plan and profile drawings must be reviewed and approved by the Public Works Superintendent and
the Idaho Department of Health and Welfare before any construction work on said sewer lines is started. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92. eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-16: RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES FOR INSPECTION:
A. Inspection: The Wastewater Operator shall have the right to enter upon any premises connected with any public sewer at all reasonable hours to determine that there is compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Conflict: If conflict is noted, the owner of said premises or his or her agent shall be directed to alter, repair or reconstruct said sewer facilities to conform to the requirements of this Chapter within fifteen (15) days. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-17: INDUSTRIAL WASTES:
A. Each person or firm desiring to make a connection to the public sewer for the purpose of discharging industrial wastes thereto shall prepare and file with the Public Works Superintendent a report that shall include actual or predicted data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the waste to be discharged. Private treatment facilities may be authorized by the City; provided, that all Federal, State and local laws and regulations are fully complied with.
City of Salmon
8-4-17 8-4-19
B. Industrial waste charges may be based upon the amount of flow, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), and suspended solids or any combination thereof recommended by the Public Works Superintendent or this Chapter.
C. The sewage collection and treatment charges for industrial waste shall completely pay for all collection and treatment costs associated with said wastes. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92. eff. 10-21-92; 1995 Code)
8-4-18: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS: No statement contained in this Chapter shall be construed as prohibiting any special
agreement or arrangement between the City and any person or organization whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted to the wastewater collection treatment system either before or after pretreatment; provided, that there is no impairment of the
functioning of the wastewater treatment system by reason of the admission of such wastes, and no extra costs are incurred by the City without recompense by said person or organization. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-19: EXTENSIONS:
A. Within the City: The Wastewater Operator shall be authorized to construct, or cause to be constructed extensions to the sewer system if one of the following conditions exists:
1. The annual anticipated revenue made available to the City from the customers to be immediately served by such extension is not less than one-tenth (1/10) of the actual cost to the City for the construction of said extension.
2. The City approves a Development Agreement for the construction of the extension with a party or parties desiring sewer service. Provided, however, that subdividers or developers within or adjacent to the City shall construct at their own expense all sewer mains within their subdivisions or developments except that the City will be responsible for those sewer line costs set forth in Section 8-4-35.
City of Salmon
8-4-19 8-4-21
B. Contiguous to City: In areas contiguous to the City that may be annexed to the City, the City may require such area to be annexed before sewer service is provided. Prior to annexation the City shall require the execution and approval of an annexation agreement which shall detail the conditions for sewer service. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92. eff. 10-21-92, amd. Ord. 04-679, 12-01-2004)
8-4-20: SYSTEM OF CHARGES: All systems of charges and fees to users, within the City, shall assure that each
recipient of wastewater collection and treatment services will pay its proportionate share of the costs of operation and maintenance (including equipment replacement) of any waste collection and treatment services provided by the City. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-21: SEWER CONNECTION FEE:
A. Rates: Before any sewer connection permit is issued for the installation of any sewer service connection (side sewer), the person making the application therefor shall pay to the City, a sewer connection fee as set by resolution for each sewer connection per dwelling unit (single-family, duplexes and multiple living units if served by separate service lines), per mobile home lot if located in mobile home courts or mobile home subdivisions, per motel, cabin courts or travel trailer courts and per commercial building. The rate is applicable to a standard four inch (4") connection. Any request for a different size connection will have a rate charged as determined by the Public Works Committee with approval by the City Council. Industrial facilities connection rates will also be established individually. (amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
B. Exception: The above-referenced sewer connection fee will not apply to or be charged against the reconstruction of any existing sewer service line serving any existing dwelling, building, etc., unless the developer or owner is constructing a different sized line. It is intended that this sewer connection fee be charged only where a new building is being constructed upon previously undeveloped property or in instances when larger sized connections are needed due to business expansion. These fees may be changed from time to time, by resolution of the City as such changes are deemed necessary. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
City of Salmon
8-4-22 8-4-23
8-4-22: SEWER MAIN CONSTRUCTION CHARGE:
A. Rate: Hereafter, any person, before obtaining a permit to connect to any public sanitary sewer, whether lateral, main or interceptor, shall pay a sewer main charge therefor, at a rate per front foot of property to be served by the permit. Said sewer main construction charge shall be in addition to any other connection fees or permits required. Provided, however, that no sewer main construction charge shall be required if said sewer service connection is within a subdivision having been platted since 1975 and within which the sanitary sewer system has been constructed at the expense of the developer of said subdivision. This charge may be changed from time to time by resolution of the City as such change is deemed necessary. (amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
B. Property Being Annexed: The above-referenced sewer main construction charge applies only to property within the City limits. The sewer main construction charge for property being annexed to the City shall be set forth in the annexation agreement. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92. eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-23: SERVICE LINE INSTALLATION FEE:
A. Rate: At the time an applicant applies for City sewer service, a service line installation fee shall be charged. The service line installation fee is to cover the costs incurred by the City in installing the sewer service line from, and including the sewer tap at the main to the property line. The service line installation fee for the various sizes of service lines shall include a sewer saddle and repair of asphalt street surfacing per square foot. (amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
B. Review of Fees and Costs: Said fees and costs shall be reviewed annually and revised by resolution of the City so that said fees and costs adequately cover the costs actually incurred by the City in installing these service lines. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
City of Salmon
8-4-24 8-4-25
8-4-24: SERVICE CALL CHARGES: The City may require a service charge in an amount not to exceed the actual costs
to the City, for service calls which are only for the convenience and benefit of the customer. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92, amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
8-4-25: MONTHLY SEWER RATES:
A. General:
1. This treatment work is primarily dependent and will use the equivalent user concept. The equivalent user system has been set up based on flow.
2. A sewer user charge shall be levied on all users of the sewage collection and treatment facilities, to cover the actual or estimated cost of operation, maintenance, replacement and financing of this facility. The user charge system shall distribute these costs to each user or user class in approximate portion to such user's contribution to the total wastewater load of such facilities.
B. Basis for Rates: The sewer user rates for each user (or user class) shall be based on the user's contribution to the total wastewater loading of the treatment facilities in comparison to a standard equivalent user as defined below. Each user (or user class) shall be assigned an equivalent user number to be multiplied by a constant monthly factor to determine the basic user monthly rate. Special users contributing sewage of excessive flow and/or strength, for which the tabulated equivalent users below do not apply, shall be individually calculated as provided below. The constant monthly cost factor shall be set by resolution of the City.
C. Equivalent User: One equivalent user shall be defined as contributing two hundred ten (210) gallons per day of wastewater containing not more than seven-tenths (0.7) pounds of five (5) day BOD and five-tenths (0.5) pounds of suspended solids. The equivalent user flow has been developed from population and sewage usage records which indicate an average single dwelling unit has three and five-tenths (3.5) people contributing seventy (70) gallons per day per person. Standard engineering data indicates two-tenths (0.2) pounds of five (5) day BOD and fourteen one-hundredths (0.14) pounds of suspended solids respectively per person per day. The basic equivalent user shall be subject to revision if population, water usage, sewage volume and / or other
City of Salmon
8-4-25 8-4-25
information indicates flow and/or strength significantly different from that defined herein. Revisions of the basic equivalent user criteria shall normally only be made upon the recommendation of a registered professional engineer.
D. Equivalent User Schedule: The number of equivalent users to be assigned each user and/or user class shall be in accordance with the following equivalent user schedule. Assignment of equivalent users shall apply for one year until the next annual user charge review. Users so indicated or not included in this schedule shall be considered special users and shall be evaluated separately as sewage contributed by any of the following users is in excess in
provided below. If the information indicates that the strength of comparison with the allowable limits listed above, then a surcharge shall be levied against such users as provided below. Any of the users in the following schedule may be classified as special users if information on their contribution flow and/or strength indicates a need to do so. A single user having more than one classification of use shall be the sum of the fees. The minimum monthly sewer user charge shall be one equivalent user.
EQUIVALENT USER SCHEDULE (1.0 Minimum)
CLASSIFICATION EQUIVALENT USERS
Single-family 1. per house
Multi-family with washer facilities 1. per unit
Multi-family without washer facilities .67 per unit
Duplex 1. per unit
Permanent mobile home 1. per unit
Professional offices 1. 1-13 employees
1.5 14-20 employees
2.0 21-26 employees
Laundromats .5 per machine
Motel/hotel .23 per room
Recreational Vehicle Park .13 per RV space
Restaurants
3 meal/day .17 per seat
2 meal/day .11 per seat
1 meal/day .06 per seat
Lounges .056 per seat
Retail-commercial 1.0 1-15 employees
1.5 16-22 employees
2.0 23-30 employees
City of Salmon
8-4-25 8-4-25
Grade school .034 per student
Secondary school .053 per student
Churches 1.0 church & parish
plus 1.0 gym
Theater .02 per seat
Bowling alley .5 per alley
Daycare/kindergarten .0278 per student
Beauty shop/barber shop 1.0 per business
Car washes 1.0 per bay
Lodges and halls 1.0 per 300 seats
Residential Users: Single-family homes, duplexes, multi-family units, apartments, mobile home parks.
Business and Professional Offices: Retail commercial, professional retail service
Commercial: Laundromats, service stations, restaurants, daycare, mortuary, hotels, motels, etc.
Institutional: Churches, lodges, schools.
Industrial: Those producing a finished product which involves the
disposing of a waste material to the sewage system.
E. Surcharge for Excessive Strength: When any user contributes wastewater having an average BOD and/or suspended loading in excess of the designated allowable limits hereinafter designated, a surcharge shall be levied against such user. Said surcharge shall be based on the average degree of excessive loading, and applied as a percentage of the basic user charge as provided in the above schedule, or otherwise for special users. The BOD and suspended solids loading shall be determined from estimates or tests made by City officials or its Public Works Superintendent. The user's monthly surcharge shall be computed by use of the following equation:
US = [(b/B)-1 + (s/S)-11 x(UMC)].
2 where
"US" represents the user's monthly surcharge to be added to the basic user's monthly charge;
City of Salmon
8-4-25 8-4-25
"UMC" represents the basic user's monthly charge (for treatment only) and shall not be less than one (1.0);
"b" represents the average BOD loading above which is a user's wastewater contribution, expressed in parts per million;
"B" represents the allowable limit of BOD loading above which a user's surcharge shall be levied,
hereby designated as being two hundred (200)
parts per million;
"s" represents the average suspended solids loading of the user's wastewater contribution, expressed in parts per million; and
"S" represents the allowable limit of suspended solids loading above which a user's surcharge shall be levied, hereby designated as being one hundred forty (140) parts per million.
A copy of the list of users surcharged, the characteristics of their sewage and the surcharge for each shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the City Clerk.
F. Special Users: If, in addition to excessive strength, a user is determined to add flow to the wastewater treatment facilities in excess of six thousand five hundred (6,500) gallons per month, the above formula shall be increased by a factor of total flow divided by six thousand five hundred (6,500) gallons per month multiplied by one equivalent user. In order to determine the flow of this special user, the City may monitor sewage and water flow in order to determine total flow. The value of UMC used in the formula above will be the same value as assigned single dwelling units. A copy of the list of special users, the characteristics of their sewage and the special user's monthly charge shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the City Clerk.
G. Review and Revisions of Rates: The sewer user charges shall, at a minimum, be reviewed annually and updated by resolution of the
City of Salmon
8-4-25 8-4-26
City to reflect actual costs of operation, maintenance, replacement and financing of the sewage collection and treatment facilities. Any revisions of the user charges shall be based on actual operation, maintenance, replacement and financing expenses, and/or on significant changes in the total number of equivalent users, the total daily flow, the total daily BOD, and/or the total suspended solids. The City may install flow measuring devices and/or collect wastewater samples at any time in any user's service line to
determine actual usage as a basis for revisions of the user’s charge. Revisions due only to changes in expenses and user class shall be made by the City. Revisions involving user's flow, BOD, and/or suspended solids shall normally only be made upon the recommendation of a registered professional engineer. All changes in user charges applicable to this Chapter shall be computed by the methods outlined herein.
H. User Request for Rate Change: Any sewer user, who feels his or her user charge is unjust and inequitable as applied to his or her premises within the spirit and intent of the foregoing provisions, may make written application to the City requesting a review of said user charge. Said written request shall, where necessary, show the actual or estimated average flow and strength of his or her wastewater in comparison with the values upon which the change is based, including how the measurements or estimates were made. Any flow measurements and/or testing of wastewater shall be approved in detail by the City and/or its Public Works Superintendent. Review of the request by the City shall determine if it is substantiated or not, including recommended further study of the matter for the City and/or user by a registered professional engineer. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92; 1995 Code)
8-4-26: METERED SERVICE: Whenever the City shall deem it
appropriate and in the best interests of the City and its citizens to require a user to have the sewer and/or water service to his or her facilities metered to more appropriately determine the amount of service provided such user by the system, the City may by resolution require the said user to install a meter and/or meters which will accurately measure the service provided; and the City may further establish by resolution the rates to be charged for such service as will properly pay the fair share of the services provided such user. The cost of the meter and its installation shall be borne by the user. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
City of Salmon
8-4-27 8-4-27
8-4-27: BILLING PROCEDURE AND PERIOD:
A. Rate: Accounts shall be charged a rate in accordance with the rate schedule found in Section 8-4-25 of this Chapter or as such may hereinafter be amended and revised by the City and may be included separately or in conjunction with the monthly water bill.
B. Monthly Statement: The City Clerk shall furnish to each property owner, landlord, tenant or agent, a monthly statement of the amount due for sewer service for that month. The failure of any service user to receive notice or statement will in no way affect the obligation of the user to remit monthly as required.
C. Initial Billing: The initial billing for premises occupied less than one month shall be charged only for that portion of the month during which the premises were occupied. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
D. Deposit Required:
1. Each owner, tenant or lessee of property, before utility services are furnished, shall pay a refundable deposit. The amount collected may be amended by Resolution of the Salmon City Council. (amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
2. All such deposits shall be placed in a reserve account managed by the City Treasurer/Finance Director.
3. Refundable deposits may be transferred to another physical address on the City of Salmon Utility system if current bill is paid in full and upon written request from the owner, tenant or lessee of notice of transfer of the account to a different address.
4. If your City of Salmon utility bills have been paid in full and on time for the last 12 consecutive months, you will receive a credit to your account in the amount of your deposit. (Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
5. In the event that an account becomes into arrears for a period of longer than sixty (60) days, the deposit will be applied to the amount in arrears. Before the service to the owner, tenant or lessee resumes, the amount in arrears must be paid in full and a new deposit shall be submitted to the City. (amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
City of Salmon
8-4-27 8-4-28
6. Upon vacating the premises, the City will be notified immediately. The owner, tenant, or lessee will, at that time, submit a written request, which shall be furnished by the City, for a refund and furnish a forwarding address. The refundable deposit will then be transferred to the appropriate Utility Fund of the City and credited to the account. The balance of the account, if any, shall be refunded to the person making the deposit, their heir, or a personal representative within thirty (30) days of the written.
7. No interest will be paid on funds to be returned. If such refund cannot be made within three (3) months because of the unknown whereabouts of the person making the deposit, the balance of the deposit shall be placed in the appropriate Utility Fund. (Ord. 05-700, 10-5-2005)
E. When any person determines his or her home, business, etc. is destroyed and/or uninhabitable for an extended time due to circumstances beyond his control such as fire, flood, wind, or some other act of God, he or she may apply in writing to the City Utility Clerk for a waiver of payment of his/her City monthly water service fee and City monthly sewer fee. Said waiver must be approved by the City Council. Said approval is at the City Council’s discretion and is not automatic based upon the fact that a building is destroyed and/or uninhabitable. Said waiver shall not exceed six months’ time period. Said time period may be extended upon further application.
Criteria to be considered by the City Council shall include:
a. The cause of said damage
b. The extent of said damage
c. The property owner’s intent as to whether or not he/she plans to rebuild
d. Estimated time period to rebuild or repair damage
e. City services are not available
(Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
8-4-28: DUE DATE: Bills rendered for sewer service are payable upon receipt and become past due twenty five (25) days
from the date on which rendered. When the past due date falls on a legal holiday or on a date when City offices are not open for business, the next regular business day is considered the past due date. When remittances are made by mail, bills shall be deemed paid upon receipt. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92, amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
City of Salmon
8-4-29 8-4-30
8-4-29: DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS:
A. When the delinquent portion of utility bills are not paid by the 18th of the following month, the City shall discontinue water service to such delinquent customers without any further notice. In case service is discontinued for delinquency, it shall not be restored until the delinquency is paid in addition to a fee which shall be set by resolution for discontinuing and restoring service. After payment in full has been received by the city, the service shall be restored within 24 hours excluding weekends and holidays. A service charge of one and one-half percent (1.5) will be added to the unpaid balance at the end of each month. (Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
B. Failure to Pay: In the event that a delinquent customer fails to pay his or her bill within the time set forth above, the City may discontinue water service or remove or close sewer connections, and enter upon property for accomplishing such purposes. In cases where the property is occupied by a tenant, and the tenant moves out, the account must be paid in full before the City will restore and/or transfer water service for the property. This holds the tenant and homeowner equally responsible for the outstanding account. (amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
C. Restoration Costs: The expense of digging up and plugging the sewer service line as well as the expense of restoring said sewer line back to an operable condition is the responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92, amd Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
8-4-30: SEWER SERVICE DISCONTINUANCE FEE: When any
person determines that his or her home, business, etc., is going to be vacant, not used, shut down, etc., for an extended period of time, he or she may notify the City. Every residential and commercial connection to the City wastewater collection and treatment system shall pay the minimum monthly base charge, set by the City Council in accordance with Section 8-4-25, for each month, or part thereof, for every month that wastewater disposal and treatment services are available to the property by connection. The monthly minimum base charge shall only be waived upon complete disconnection from the City wastewater collection and treatment system. All requests for disconnection must be approved by the City Council. The fee for reconnection, shall be the same as the new connection fee as set forth in Section 8-4-21. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92, amd. Ord. 04-679, 12-01-2004)
City of Salmon
8-4-31 8-4-33
8-4-31: WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT FUND: There is hereby
established a wastewater collection and treatment improvement fund to be maintained by the Finance Director/Treasurer in managing the fiscal affairs of the City. All revenues derived from the charging of any fees, charges, rates, etc., as such are set forth herein shall be deposited in said Fund and shall be disbursed only for the purposes of paying existing or future indebtedness connected with or relating to maintaining, repairing, studying, controlling, enlarging, extending, enhancing or improving the wastewater collection and treatment system of the City. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-32: SEWER SYSTEM MATERIALS AND INSTALLATION:
A. Main Lines: All sanitary sewer main lines and storm drain main line materials, manholes, inlet boxes, trench drains, etc., and their installation shall be in accordance with the City standard specifications of the construction of sanitary sewer and storm sewers and the applicable standard drawings depicting various sewer service line installation details.
B. Service Lines: All sewer service line materials and their installation shall be in accordance with the City standard specifications for the construction of sanitary sewers and storm sewers and the applicable standard drawings depicting the various sewer service line installation details.
C. Quality: All sewer system materials shall be of the class, strength, thickness etc., necessary to accommodate or provide for the depth of cover over the pipe, the type of material and bedding around the pipe, and the type, magnitude and extent of the external loads being applied to the pipe.
D. City Approval: All materials must be approved by the Public Works Superintendent. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-33: SEWER SYSTEM DESIGN:
A. Plans Signed by Registered Professional Engineer: The plans for all sewer lines, sewage lift stations, sewage treatment facilities, etc., shall be designed, signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer licensed in the State of Idaho.
City of Salmon
8-4-33 8-4-33
B. Compliance with State Health Department Requirements: All sewer lines, lift stations, sewage treatment facilities, etc., shall be designed in accordance with State Health Department requirements.
C. Size and Capacity: Minimum sanitary sewer main size shall be eight inch (8") diameter. Minimum storm drain size shall be eight inch (8") diameter. Larger sizes shall be as required by the City's overall sewer system master plan or as needed to provide adequate sewage carrying capacity for the area (and surrounding
developable area) being developed and/or annexed to the City. Minimum service line size shall be four inch (4") diameter.
D. Depth: In general, sewers shall be sufficiently deep so as to receive sewage from basements and to prevent freezing. Sewer lines shall have at least three feet (3') of cover (from the top of sewer line pipe to the ground or street surface), unless a special design is approved by the Public Works Superintendent whereby the sewer line is protected from freezing by special means or methods and the sewer is protected from "heaving" by the installation of crushed gravel backfill material under, around and over the pipe.
E. Slope:
1. All sewer mains shall be designed and constructed to provide mean velocities, when flowing full, of not less than two feet (2') per second. All sewer service lines (side sewers) shall be designed and constructed to provide mean velocities, when flowing full of not less than three feet (3') per second. The following are minimum slopes which should be provided, however, slopes greater than these are desirable:
Sewer Size Minimum Slope In Feet Per 100 Feet
4 inch 2.00
6 inch 1.00
8 inch 0.40
10 inch 0.33
12 inch 0.31
15 inch 0.15
18 inch 0.12
21 inch 0.10
24 inch 0.08
27 inch 0.067
30 inch 0.058
33 inch 0.046
City of Salmon
8-4-33 8-4-33
2. Under special conditions, if detailed justifiable reasons are given, slopes slightly less than those required above (i.e., to provide 2 or 3 fps velocity when flowing full) may be permitted. Such decreased slopes will only be considered where the depth of flow will be three-tenths (0.3) of the diameter or greater for the design average flow. Whenever such decreased slopes are proposed, the design engineer must furnish with his or her report
the computations of the depths of flow in such pipes at the minimum and average rates of flow for a typical day.
3. Sewers shall be laid with uniform slopes between manholes, i.e., a manhole shall be constructed at each point where the sewer line slope or grade changes.
F. Location of Manholes: Manholes shall be located no more than four hundred feet (400') apart on lines fifteen inches (15") in diameter or smaller. Manholes may be located up to six hundred feet (600') apart on lines larger than fifteen inches (15") in diameter. Manholes shall be installed at locations where sewer line eight inches (8") in diameter or larger intersect, join together, or make a bend. All dead-end sewer lines shall have a manhole installed on the end thereof.
G. Sewer Mainline Drop Through Manholes: The following of the main sewer line as it enters and leaves any manhole shall be dropped as follows:
Mainline Bend of Drop of
0 to 10 degrees (Regular pipe slope)
11 to 45 degrees 0.05 feet
46 to 90 degrees 0.10 feet
H. Lateral Sewer Line Connections at Manholes: Lateral sanitary sewer lines shall not enter a manhole at an elevation appreciably higher than the sewer main line. The flowline(s) of any lateral shall be positioned within the manhole as follows:
1. The flowline of the main sewer line shall be at least five one- hundredths foot (0.05') below the flowline of any of the lateral sewer lines entering the manhole. Where the diameter of the main line and the lateral line shall differ by less than five-tenths foot (0.5'), the
City of Salmon
8-4-33 8-4-33
top of the lateral line shall be positioned even with the top of the main line on its high (inlet) side.
2. Where the diameters of the main and lateral differ by five-tenths of a foot (0.5') or more, the eight-tenths (0.8) depth points of the two (2) sewer line inverts shall be positioned at the same elevation.
3. Where a lateral sewer line would enter a manhole at an elevation of three feet (3') or more above the main sewer line, drop manhole construction shall be utilized to locate or position the flowline of the lateral line (in relation to that of the main line) as indicated above.
4. Where a lateral line would enter a manhole at an elevation of less than three feet (3') above the main sewer line, the grade or slope of the lateral shall be adjusted so that its flowline is located (in relation to that of the main line) as indicated above.
5. Individual building service lines may not enter manholes, except that no more than two (2) individual building service lines may enter a dead-end manhole (a manhole on the upstream and permanent end of a sewer line); and provided further, that the individual building service lines must enter the manhole at such elevation that the top of the service line is level with the top to the sewer main line and that the poured-in-place concrete floor of the manhole brings the flowlines of the service lines into the flowline of the main line in a smooth continuous manner.
I. Location of Water and Sewer Lines and Storm Drains: Sanitary sewer lines and water lines shall, whenever possible, be located thirteen feet (13') west or north of the street center line and the sanitary sewer at thirteen feet (13') east or south of the street center line. Where storm drains are needed, these shall preferably be located along the street center line. The above- referenced locations and dimensions may be varied to accommodate unusual circumstances; however, a ten foot (10') (out-to-out) horizontal separation between water line facilities and sewer facilities (either sanitary or storm) and an eighteen inch (18") (out-to-out) vertical separation between said facilities shall always be maintained unless a specific variance to this requirement is obtained from the Public Works Superintendent. The applicable separation requirements of the State Health Department shall also be complied with.
J. Drawings: All drawing shall be on linen or mylar in pencil or ink and of such quality that they clearly show the dimensions, locations,
City of Salmon
8-4-33 8-4-35
sizes, etc., of all facilities represented thereon. All sewer line manholes, inlet boxes, building service lines, etc., shall be clearly shown and identified by name and by station or other means of horizontal location. Sewer lines shall be shown in both plan and profile unless the length of said sewer line or sewer extension is so short that the Public Works Superintendent waives this requirement. If a profile of the sewer line is not provided, it shall be
located in the vertical plane by elevations on the flowline of the pipe at all manholes, inlet boxes, etc., and at other such locations and intervals as the Public Works Superintendent may require. Drawings shall be drawn on a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') unless the amount of detail, topography, etc., necessitates their being drawn on a larger scale (i.e., 1" = 50' or 1" = 40') to provide the clarity and completeness needed on their drawings.
K. Design: The design of all sewer lines and all sewer line plans must be approved by the Public Works Superintendent. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92; 1995 Code)
8-4-34: AS-BUILT DRAWINGS AND ENGINEER'S CER-
TIFICATION:
A. Drawings: As-built or record drawings of sewer line plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer and the corrected original drawings or a duplicate mylar copy of the corrected original drawing(s) shall be provided to the City.
B. Certification by Engineer: As-built plans shall include a certification thereon signed by the registered professional engineer in charge of the work that the as-built drawings of the sewer lines are true and correct and that he or she (the registered professional engineer) has inspected the construction of the sewer line installation and that the materials and installation of same were all done in conformance with the City standard specifications for the construction of sanitary sewers and storm sewers. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-35: SUBDIVISION DEVELOPER'S OR PROPERTY OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY:
A. Sewer Lines:
1. Owner or Developer, Construction Responsibility:
City of Salmon
8-4-35 8-4-35
a. The owner or developer of any piece of property or tract of land is responsible for the construction of the sewer line (or for the sewer line costs) along any of the property sides or frontages of the property along which a sewer line is needed for the overall completeness and continuity of the City's sewer main system. If it is a large tract of land, the owner or developer shall also be responsible for the necessary and required system of sewer lines within the interior of the tract of land.
b. The owner or developer of any piece of property shall construct all needed sewer lines (of the approved size) within and along all sides or frontages of any piece of property prior to the time any building constructed thereon is occupied or utilized unless phased construction of the sewer main system is specifically allowed or provided for in the annexation or development agreement. In lieu of actually constructing said required sewer line or sewer lines, the property owner or developer may deposit adequate monies with the City to fully cover the costs(s) of said required sewer line construction.
2. City Responsibility:
a. The owner or developer of any property or subdivision will normally be responsible only for the cost of up to an eight inch (8") diameter sanitary sewer line. The additional cost of providing a sanitary sewer line of a size greater than eight inches (8") will normally be a City responsibility. The City will reimburse the developer for the extra cost of the additional sanitary sewer line size (over the 8 inch diameter size reference above) as set forth in the annexation or development agreement between the developer and the City. Provided further, however, that if any proposed subdivision or development is of such size or magnitude that it requires or necessitates a sewer size larger than an eight inch (8") diameter line or if the type of development is such as to produce a wastewater flow in excess of the capacity of an eight inch (8") diameter sewer line, then the owner or developer of said subdivision or development shall be responsible for the entire cost of whatever size of sewer line is needed to accommodate such development.
b. The additional cost of providing any extra sewer line depth required by the City (over and above the sewer line depth required to adequately serve the owner's or developer's property when assuming at least a 12 foot sewer line depth at the uppermost end of the sewer line extended through or along said property) will be a
City of Salmon
8-4-35 8-4-35
City responsibility and the City will reimburse the owner or developer for the cost of said extra depth of sewer line as agreed upon and as set forth in the annexation or development agreement between the developer and the City.
3. Sharing of Costs:
a. If the property owner or developer owns or is developing the property on only one side (as compared to both sides) of any street, alley or easement where a sewer line is located or required, he or she (or they) shall be responsible for only one-half (1/2) of the cost of said sewer line, while the property owner on the other side of said street, alley or easement shall be responsible for the other half of the cost of said sewer line construction. However, in the absence of any mutual agreement between the property owners, the City may participate with the first owner or developer to the extent of paying for one-half (1/2) the cost of any eight inch (8") diameter sewer line access to said reference property frontage. The second property owner will thereafter be responsible for reimbursing the City for his or her half of the costs of this sewer line construction at the time he or she (the second property owner or developer) begins to develop or build upon said property that is adjacent to the sewer line installed by the first property owner.
b. Provided further, however, that if the length of the sewer line construction in which the City would be participating (as referred to above) exceeds one thousand (1,000) lineal feet, the City may decline to participate in the cost of said sewer line construction except to pay for the extra cost differential between the size and depth of sewer line required to serve the development and the actual size and depth of line that the City designates shall be installed to meet the requirements of its sewer system master plan. When this situation or set of circumstances exists, the property owner or developer who first initiates or actually begins the development of his or her property, shall be responsible for "front ending" the entire cost of the sewer line construction and for actually constructing said sewer line. The second (or other) property owner(s) will thereafter be responsible for reimbursing the property owner for his or her (or their) share of the costs of the sewer along with his or her (or their) frontage at the time he or she (or they), the other adjacent property owners or developers, begin(s) to develop or build upon his or her (or their) property adjacent to the sewer line installed by the first property owner. In the absence of any agreement between the first property owner or developers covering the cost of said sewer line(s), the referenced
City of Salmon
8-4-35 8-4-38
other adjacent owners or developers shall pay to the City per lineal foot (or such other amount as the City may hereinafter establish and adopt by resolution) for the length of sewer line across his or her (or their) frontage. The City, in turn, will reimburse this same amount to the first party, which reimbursement shall be deemed adequate and appropriate compensation for his or her (or their) share of the cost of said sewer line. (amd. Ord. 15-811, 11-19-15)
B. Sewage Lift Station: Sewer mains shall be kept as deep as practicable to keep sewage lift stations to the smallest number possible. When a sewage lift station and its related facilities is required, it and the sewer main system directing sewage to it shall generally be designed for an entire definable area and not just to serve a single property owner or developer. The cost and maintenance of the sewage lift station shall be the responsibility of the developer or owner. Upon acceptance and approval by the City, the City will be responsible for maintenance. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92 eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-36: CITATION; APPEARANCE: Whenever it is, determined by any police officer or other duly authorized officer that any
person has violated any provision of this Chapter, the said officer shall
provide, in quadruplicate, and serve upon such person a written citation containing a notice to appear in a designated court of competent jurisdiction within the City. This citation shall contain the name and address of the person charged, the offense charged, the time and place when and where the offense charged occurred, and the time when the person charged shall appear in said court, and such other pertinent information as may be necessary; and such person shall appear in said court within five (5) days after such citation is issued and served. The issuance of a citation shall be the exclusive method of summoning offenders hereunder. (Ord. 92-554 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-37: FAILURE TO APPEAR UNLAWFUL: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or neglect to appear in response to and
as required by the citation regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which such citation was originally issued. Appearance in court shall be deemed complied with upon appearance by the person cited or his or her attorney. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-38: LIABILITY: This Chapter shall not be construed to hold the City responsible for any damage to any sewer user by
City of Salmon
8-4-38 8-4-39
reason of an interruption in the sewer collection system by reason of accidents to works or mains, alterations, additions, repairs or from other unavoidable causes to persons or property. The City shall also not be held liable for damage to persons or property by reason of the inspection or testing herein, or the failure to inspect or test or by reason of approval of any cross-connections. (Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92. eff. 10-21-92)
8-4-39: PENALTIES: Any person violating any provision of this
Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof, may be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1of this Code. Each day said violation occurs shall be a separate offense.
(Ord. 92-554, 10-21-92, eff. 10-21-92; 1995 Code)
City of Salmon
TITLE 9
FRANCHISES
Subject Chapter
Power Franchise ........................................ 1
Garbage Service Franchise ........................ 2
CATV Franchise ......................................... 3
City of Salmon
9-1-1 9-1-1
CHAPTER 1
POWER FRANCHISE
SECTION:
9-1-1: Power Franchise Ordinance Adopted by Reference
9-1-1: POWER FRANCHISE ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE: The ordinance entitled "An Ordinance
granting to Idaho Power Company, its successors and assigns, an Electric Light, Heat and Power Franchise for a term of fifty years and revoking prior Franchise Ordinance", being Ordinance 380, found in Book 9, page 42, City of Salmon, Record Book, is hereby incorporated by reference. (Ord. 70-380, 12-21-70)
City of Salmon
9-2-1 9-2-2
CHAPTER 2
GARBAGE SERVICE FRANCHISE
SECTION:
9-2-1: Grant Of Franchise
9-2-2: Term
9-2-3: Specific Conditions
9-2-4: Indemnity
9-2-5: Comprehensive Liability Insurance
9-2-6: Assignment Of Franchise
9-2-7: Forfeiture
9-2-8: Police Power
9-2-9: Extension Of City Limits
9-2-1: GRANT OF FRANCHISE:
A. The City of Salmon, herein referred to as City hereby grants to Lemhi Waste Services, dba/Lemhi Sanitation Service, hereinafter referred to as "Grantee" an exclusive Franchise to collect and haul for hire over the streets and alleys of the City, all garbage collected from public and private customers located within the corporate limits of the City. This exclusive franchise shall not require mandatory garbage service by the citizens of the City.
B. "Garbage", as used herein, shall be interpreted to mean and include all waste, animal and vegetable matter, rubbish, trash, debris, ashes, tin cans, and other waste materials of any kind which are ordinarily and customarily hauled away and dumped. (Ord. 95-581, 7-19-95; amd. Ord. 08-730, 7-3-2008)
9-2-2: TERM: The term of the Franchise is extended for an additional term of seven (7) years, effective September 3,
City of Salmon
9-2-2 9-2-3
2008, and terminating on September 4, 2015. This Franchise shall become effective on such date only if Grantee files a written acceptance of the extension of the Franchise with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date the ordinance codified in this Chapter becomes effective. The term of the Franchise may be further extended by the City following compliance with the provisions of Idaho Code section 50-329. (Ord. 95-581, 7-19-95)
9-2-3: SPECIFIC CONDITIONS:
A. Garbage Trucks: All trucks used by Grantee for the collection and hauling of garbage shall be maintained in safe operating condition at all times. Each truck shall be equipped with a closed body that incorporates a hydraulically operated device for compacting collected garbage. Grantee shall also maintain at all times at least two (2) garbage trucks with a minimum capacity of twenty (20) cubic yards. Grantee's garbage trucks shall meet all Idaho Public Utilities Commission standards now in force or as may be adopted hereafter. Grantee shall also provide, without charge or fee, commercial garbage containers for any person or organization requesting such containers. Grantee shall provide service to each customer not less than once per week or upon request; provided, that the customer is current on fees charged by Grantee.
B. Service Fees: The City shall have the authority to approve all changes in rates to the City residences and businesses during this term of this Franchise, provided such fees shall not be arbitrary, unreasonable or discriminatory. Grantee agrees to appear before the City annually for a review of the Grantee's performance, and Grantee further agrees to notify the City of proposed rate changes or modifications in service, and be available to meet with the City prior to the effective date of such change or modification. Rate changes shall not become effective until approved by the City.
C. Franchise Fee: Grantee shall remit to the City a franchise fee in the amount of two and one-half percent (2.5) of the gross monthly billings sent to customers located within the City limits irrespective of whether such billings are in fact collected. Such franchise fee shall be paid to the City Treasurer on or before the first day of each calendar quarter during the term hereof. The Grantee shall during regular business hours allow the City access to Grantee's books and records as necessary to monitor compliance with the terms thereof.
City of Salmon
9-2-3 9-2-5
The Grantee shall also allow the City to audit the records of the Grantee to ensure compliance with this Section.
D. Compliance With Regulations: Grantee shall comply with all ordinances and regulations, as now adopted or as may be hereafter adopted by the City, pertaining to the collection, hauling and disposal of garbage within the corporate limits of the City or regulating the use of the streets therefor. (Ord. 95-581, 7-19-95)
9-2-4: INDEMNITY: Grantee shall indemnify and defend the City, its boards, commissions, officers, agents and employees,
and any and all other public agencies, and their members, officers, agents and employees, against any and all liabilities for injury to or death of any person or any damage to any property caused by Grantee, its officers, agents or employees, in the construction, operation or maintenance of its property, or arising out of the exercise of any right or privilege under the Franchise. (Ord. 95-581, 7-19-95)
9-2-5: COMPREHENSIVE LIABILITY INSURANCE:
A. At all times during the term of the Franchise, Grantee will, at its own expense, maintain in force general comprehensive liability insurance with an insurance company approved by the City, the policy or policies to be in form satisfactory to the City. The coverage represented by such policy or policies shall be for the protection of the City, members of its boards and commissions, and its officers, agents and employees against liability for loss or damages for bodily injury, death, and property damage occasioned by the activities of Grantee under the Franchise. Minimum liability limits under the policy or policies are to be five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for personal injury or death of any one person and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for personal injury or death of two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence, and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for damage to property resulting from any one occurrence. Additional public agencies and their personnel shall be added as insureds, subject to the same terms and conditions, at the request of the City.
B. Such policy shall include a provision that requires a written notice of any cancellation or reduction in coverage of the policy shall be delivered to the City thirty (30) days in advance of the effective date thereof. If any such insurance is provided by a policy that also covers Grantee or any entity or person other than those named
City of Salmon
9-2-5 9-2-9
above, then such policy shall contain the standard cross-liability endorsement. Within thirty (30) days after Grantee's acceptance of this Franchise, Grantee shall provide the City a certificate of insurance evidencing such insurance coverage. (Ord. 95-581, 7-19-95)
9-2-6: ASSIGNMENT OF FRANCHISE: Grantee shall not assign the Franchise or otherwise transfer it in any manner
whatsoever, or sell, lease, license, or permit others to use or transfer in any manner whatsoever any interest in all or any part of its facilities that are installed or operated hereunder, except on prior written approval by the City. (Ord. 95-581, 7-19-95)
9-2-7: FORFEITURE: The Franchise may be forfeited, at the option of the City, upon failure or refusal by Grantee to
observe the terms and conditions set forth herein. Forfeiture may be exercised by written notice to Grantee of failure to observe the terms and conditions hereof, followed by Grantee's refusal to eliminate or correct such failure or violation within thirty (30) days. In the event of any failure or violation, the City may sue in its own name in the manner provided by law for the forfeiture of the Franchise without the necessity of resorting to procedures in quo warranto, and the exercise of such remedy of forfeiture shall not preclude exercise of any other right or remedy given to the City by law, whether exercised concurrently or subsequently. (Ord. 95-581, 7-19-95)
9-2-8: POLICE POWER: The passage of the ordinance codified in this Chapter is necessary for the protection of the public
welfare and property of the City. Grantee shall not be required to post any security of performance under the terms of this Franchise. (Ord. 95-581, 7-19-95)
9-2-9: EXTENSION OF CITY LIMITS: Upon the annexation of any territory by the City, all rights, privileges and the
Franchise hereby granted shall extend to the territory so annexed, and all facilities owned, maintained or operated by said Grantee, located within the territory so annexed upon any of the streets, alleys, avenues, or other public places situated in such annexed territory, shall thereafter be subject to all the terms hereof. (Ord. 95-581, 7-19-95)
City of Salmon
9-3-1 9-3-1
CHAPTER 3
CATV FRANCHISE
SECTION:
9-3-1: Definition of Terms
9-3-2: Grant of Franchise
9-3-3: Standards of Service
9-3-4: Technical Standards
9-3-5: Regulation by Franchising Authority
9-3-6: Renewal of Franchise
9-3-7: Conditions of Sale
9-3-8: Transfer of Franchise
9-3-9: Compliance and Monitoring
9-3-10: Insurance and Indemnification
9-3-11: Enforcement and Termination of Franchise
9-3-12: Actions of Parties
9-3-13: Equal Protection
9-3-14: Service of Notices
9-3-15: Descriptive Headings
9-3-16: Severability
9-3-17: Effective Date
9-3-1: DEFINITION OF TERMS: For the purpose of this Franchise, the following terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations
shall have the meanings ascribed to them below. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number:
BASIC CABLE: The lowest priced tier of service that includes the retransmission of local broadcast television signals.
City of Salmon
9-3-1 9-3-1
CABLE ACT: Collectively means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, as amended.
CABLE SERVICE: Shall have the meaning specified for "Cable Service" in the Cable Act.
CABLE SYSTEM: Shall have the meaning specified for "Cable Communications System" in the Cable Act. Unless otherwise specified it shall, in this document, refer to the cable communications system constructed and operated in the City under this Chapter.
CHANNEL: A single path or section of the spectrum which carries a cable service.
CITY: The City of Salmon, a Municipal corporation of the State of Idaho.
FCC: Federal Communications Commission, or successor governmental entity thereto.
FRANCHISE: The initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the Franchising Authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, or otherwise, which authorizes construction and operation of the system.
FRANCHISING The City of Salmon, Idaho or the lawful
AUTHORITY: successor, transferee, or assignee thereof.
GRANTEE: Independent Cable Systems of Idaho LLC or the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee thereof.
GROSS REVENUES: Any and all receipts and revenues received
directly or indirectly from all sources by the
Grantee and attributable to the operation of the cable system within the corporate limits of the City including, but not limited to, revenue from sales of advertising upon the cable system; however, that such phrase shall not include any fees or taxes which are imposed directly or indirectly on any
City of Salmon
9-3-1 9-3-1
subscriber thereof by any governmental unit or agency, and which are collected by the Grantee on behalf of such governmental unit of agency.
Gross revenues is intended to include, but is not limited to, all income received by the
Grantee without any offsetting of expenses, costs or depreciation, from:
A. Subscribers receiving goods, equipment, equipment service, or cable service from or through the use of a cable system within the City; revenues for service, installation and repair; and, any and all charges not specifically exempted herein such as delinquency fees, interest, or finance charges;
B. Sales of advertising upon the cable system; and
C. Commissions on sales from home shopping programming.
"Gross revenues" shall not include net uncollectible debts.
INSTALLATION: The connection of the cable system to subscribers' terminals.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or governmental entity.
PREMIUM SERVICES: Programming over and above those provided by basic cable for which there is generally an additional charge.
PUBLIC WAY: The surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle, or other public right of way, including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility strips, or rights of way dedicated for compatible
City of Salmon
9-3-1 9-3-2
uses and any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the Franchising Authority in the service area which shall entitle the Franchising Authority and the Grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing, and maintaining the system. Public way shall also mean any easement now or hereafter held by the Franchising Authority within the service area for the purpose of public travel, or for utility or public service use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall include other easements or rights of way as shall within their proper use and meaning entitle the Franchising Authority and the Grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing and operating the Grantee's system over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the system.
SERVICE AREA: The present municipal boundaries of the Franchising Authority, and shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.
SUBSCRIBER: A person or user of the system who lawfully receives communications and other services therefrom with the Grantee's express permission. (Ord. 94-576, 12-7-94)
9-3-2: GRANT OF FRANCHISE:
A. Grant: The Franchising Authority hereby grants to the Grantee a nonexclusive Franchise which authorizes the Grantee to construct and operate a system in, along, among, upon, across, above, over, under, or in any manner connected with public ways within the service area and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain, or retain in, on, over, under, across,
City of Salmon
9-3-2 9-3-3
or along any public way and all extensions thereof and additions thereto, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, pedestals, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other related property or equipment as may be necessary or appurtenant to the system.
B. Additional Services: Because the communications industry and the regulatory environment in which it operates are rapidly changing, and because increasing competitive pressures are playing a role in the future of the industry, the City will not require the Grantee to provide video, voice or data service(s) to the City on more preferential terms than any provider of competitive service(s).
C. Term: The Franchise granted hereunder shall be for an initial term of fifteen (15) years commencing on the effective date of the Franchise as set forth in subsection 9-3-17, unless otherwise lawfully terminated in accordance with the terms of this Franchise.
D. Nonexclusivity: Any franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter shall be nonexclusive and shall not preclude the City from granting other or further franchises or permits or preclude the City from using any public way, or other public properties or affect its jurisdiction over them or any part of them, or limit the full power of the City to make such changes, as the City shall deem necessary, including the dedication, establishment, maintenance, and improvement of all new rights of way and thoroughfares and other public properties. All franchises granted subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter shall be granted consistent with the terms and conditions of this Chapter. (Ord. 94-576, 12-7-94)
9-3-3: STANDARDS OF SERVICE:
A. Conditions of Street Occupancy: All transmission and distribution structures, poles, other lines, and equipment installed or erected by the Grantee pursuant to the terms hereof shall be located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper use of public ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own property that adjoins any of such public ways.
B. Restoration of Public Ways: If during the course of the Grantee's
construction, operation, or maintenance of the system there occurs a disturbance of any public way by the Grantee, it shall, at its expense, replace and restore such public way to a condition as
City of Salmon
9-3-3 9-3-3
good as or better than the condition of the public way existing immediately prior to such disturbance.
C. Relocation at Request of Franchising Authority: Upon its receipt of reasonable advance notice, not to be less than five (5) business days, the Grantee shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the public way, or remove from the public way, any property of the Grantee when lawfully required by the Franchising Authority by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street abandonment, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, or any other type of structures or improvements by the Franchising Authority; but, the Grantee shall in all cases have the right of abandonment of its property. If public funds are available to any person using such street, easement, or right of way for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, the Franchising Authority shall make application for such funds on behalf of the Grantee.
D. Relocation at Request of Third Party: The Grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the Franchising Authority, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of such building, provided: 1) the expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires is paid by said person, including, if required by the Grantee, making such payment in advance; and 2) the Grantee is given not less than ten (10) business days advance written notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
E. Trimming of Trees and Shrubbery: The Grantee shall have the authority, upon receiving approval from the City Public Works Superintendent, to trim trees or other natural growth overhanging any of its system in the service area so as to prevent branches from coming in contact with the Grantee's wires, cables, or other equipment. The Grantee shall reasonably compensate the Franchising Authority for any damages caused by such trimming, or shall, in its sole discretion and at its own cost and expense, reasonably replace all trees or shrubs damaged as a result of any construction of the system undertaken by the Grantee. Such replacement shall satisfy any and all obligations the Grantee may have to the Franchising Authority pursuant to the terms of this
City of Salmon
9-3-3 9-3-3
Section. The Franchisee shall be responsible for debris removal from such activities. Failure to remove debris after a reasonable time shall result in the debris being removed by the City and the costs involved charged to the Franchisee.
F. Safety Requirements: Construction, installation, and maintenance of the system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All such work shall be performed in substantial accordance with applicable FCC or other Federal, State, and local regulations and the National Electric Safety Code. The system shall not unreasonably endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the service area.
G. Aerial and Underground Construction: In those areas of the service area where all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are underground, the Grantee likewise shall construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground; provided, that such facilities are actually capable of receiving the Grantee's cable and other equipment without technical degradation of the system's signal quality. In those areas of the service area where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications, and electric services are both aerial and underground, the Grantee shall have the sole discretion to construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities, or any part thereof, aerially or underground. Nothing contained in this Section shall require the Grantee to construct, operate, and maintain underground any ground-mounted appurtenances such as subscriber taps, line extenders, system passive devices (splitters, directional couplers), amplifiers, power supplies, pedestals, or other related equipment. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Section, in the event that all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric services are placed underground after the effective date of this Franchise, the Grantee shall only be required to construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground if it is given reasonable notice and access to the public utilities' facilities at the time that such are placed underground.
H. Required Extensions of Service: The system, as constructed as of the date of the passage and final adoption of this Franchise, substantially complies with the material provisions hereof.
City of Salmon
9-3-3 9-3-3
Whenever the Grantee shall receive a request for service from at least fifteen (15) residences within one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) cable-bearing strand feet (1/4 cable mile) of its trunk or distribution cable, it shall extend its system to such subscribers at no cost to said subscribers for system extension, other than the usual connection fees for all subscribers; provided, that such extension is technically feasible, and if it will not adversely affect the operation, financial condition, or market development of the system, or as provided for under subsection 9-3-31 of this Chapter. In case of new construction or property development where utilities are to be placed underground, the developer or property owner shall give the Grantee reasonable notice of not less than thirty (30) days prior to such construction or development, of the particular date on which open trenching will be available for the Grantee's installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to be provided at the Grantee's expense. The Grantee shall also provide specifications as needed for trenching. Cost of trenching and easements required to bring service to the development shall be borne by the developer or property owner.
I. Subscriber Charges for Extensions of Service: No subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily. However, for unusual circumstances, such as a subscriber's request to locate his or her cable drop underground, existence of more than one hundred fifty feet (150') of distance from distribution cable to connection of service to subscribers, or a density of less than fifteen (15) residences per one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) cable-bearing strand feet of trunk or distribution cable, service may be made available on the basis of a capital contribution in aid of construction, including cost of material, labor, and easements. For the purpose of determining the amount of capital contribution in aid of construction to be borne by the Grantee and subscribers in the area in which service may be expanded, the Grantee will contribute an amount equal to the construction and other costs per mile, multiplied by a fraction whose numerator equals the actual number of residences per one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) cable-bearing strand feet of its trunks or distribution cable, and whose denominator equals fifteen (15) residences. Subscribers who request service hereunder will bear the remainder of the construction and other costs on a pro rata basis. The Grantee may require that the payment of the capital contribution in aid of construction borne by such potential subscribers be paid in advance.
City of Salmon
9-3-3 9-3-3
J. Service to Public Buildings: Subject to subsection 9-3-31, the Grantee shall, upon request, provide without charge, one outlet of basic service to those Franchise authority offices, fire station(s), police station(s). and public school building(s) that are passed by its system. The outlets of basic service shall not be used to distribute or sell services in or throughout such building, nor shall such outlets be located in areas open to the public. Users of such outlets shall hold the Grantee harmless from any and all liability or claims arising out of their use of such outlets, including but not limited to, those arising from copyright liability. The Grantee shall not be required to provide an outlet to such buildings where the drop line from the feeder cable to said buildings or premises exceeds or unless the appropriate governmental entity agrees to pay the incremental cost of such drop line in excess of one hundred fifty (150) cable feet. If additional outlets of basic service are provided to such buildings, the building owner shall pay the usual installation fees associated therewith, including, but not limited to, labor and materials.
K. Emergency Use: In the case of any emergency or disaster, the Grantee shall, upon request of the Franchising Authority, make available its facilities for the Franchising Authority to provide emergency information and instructions during the emergency or disaster period. Except to the extent expressly prohibited by law, the Franchising Authority shall hold the Grantee, its employees, officers, and assigns, harmless from any claims arising out of the emergency use of its facilities by the Franchising Authority, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys' fees and costs.
L. Customer Service Standards:
1. Definitions: For purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
NORMAL The term "normal business hours" means those
BUSINESS hours during which most similar businesses in
HOURS: the community are open to serve subscribers. The Grantee will notify its subscribers and the Franchising Authority of its normal business hours.
NORMAL The term "normal operating conditions" means
OPERATING those service conditions which are within the
CONDITIONS: control of the Grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the Grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters,
City of Salmon
9-3-3 9-3-3
civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the Grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the system.
SERVICE The term "service interruption" means the loss
INTERRUPTION: of picture or sound on one or more channels.
2. System Office Hours and Telephone Availability:
a. The Grantee will maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to subscribers twenty four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week.
(1) Trained representatives of the Grantee will be available to respond to subscriber telephone inquiries during normal business hours, as defined herein.
(2) After normal business hours, an access line will be available to be answered by a service or an automated response system, including a phone answering system. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained representative of the Grantee on the next business day.
b. Under normal operating conditions, as defined herein, telephone answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, will not exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time will not exceed thirty (30) seconds. These standards will be met no less than ninety percent (90%) of the time under normal operating conditions, as measured by the Grantee on a quarterly basis.
c. The Grantee shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards set forth above unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply with such standards.
d. Under normal operating conditions, the subscriber will receive a busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time.
City of Salmon
9-3-3 9-3-3
e. Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at least during normal business hours and will be conveniently located.
3. Installations, Outages and Service Calls: Under normal operating conditions, each of the following four (4) standards will be met no less than ninety five percent (95%) of the time, as measured by the Grantee on a quarterly basis:
a. Standard installations will be performed within seven (7) business days after an order has been placed. "Standard installations" are those that are located up to one hundred twenty five feet (125') from the existing distribution system.
b. Excluding conditions beyond its control, the Grantee will begin working on service interruptions, as defined herein, promptly and in no event later than twenty four (24) hours after the interruption becomes known. The Grantee will begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem.
c. The Grantee will provide "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls, and other installation activities, which will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four (4) hour time block during normal business hours.
d. The Grantee shall not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment.
e. If a representative of the Grantee is running late for an appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the subscriber will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the subscriber.
4. Communications Between Grantee and Subscribers:
a. Notifications to Subscribers:
(1) The Grantee shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request:
(A) Products and services offered;
(B) Prices and options for services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services;
(C) Installation and service maintenance policies;
City of Salmon
9-3-3 9-3-3
(D) Instructions on how to use the service;
(E) Channel positions of programming carried on the system; and
(F) Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the local Franchising Authority's cable office.
(2) Subscribers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible through announcements on the system and in writing. Notice will be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the Grantee. In addition, the Grantee shall notify subscribers thirty (30) days in advance of any significant changes in the other information required by the preceding subsection L4a(1).
b. Billing:
(1) Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills will be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits.
(2) In case of a billing dispute, the Grantee will respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within thirty (30) days from receipt of the complaint.
c. Refund checks will be issued promptly upon request, but no later than the return of all subscriber equipment provided by the Grantee and, either the subscriber's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or thirty (30) days, whichever is later.
d. Credits for service will be issued no later than the subscriber's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted.
M. Parental Control Devices: Upon request by a subscriber, the Grantee will make available for sale or lease at fees consistent with the Cable Act and subsequent FCC rules a device by which the subscriber can prohibit viewing of a particular cable service.
N. Adaptation to New Technology: Grantee shall provide a brief summary report annually of relevant technological development in
City of Salmon
9-3-3 9-3-4
cable services. At a meeting to be held after the seventh anniversary of the acceptance of this Franchise the City and Grantee shall discuss technological developments and their incorporation into the services provided. Nothing contained herein shall require the Grantee to negotiate such additions if they are not economically or technically feasible or if incorporation of such additions will adversely affect the operation, financial condition, or market development of the system.
O. Devices for the Hearing Impaired: Franchisee shall provide sound enhancing devices to requesting subscribers for a hearing impaired subscriber or subscriber's family member in compliance with the Act. This requirement may be met by providing closed caption programming.
P. Educational and Governmental Access: Upon request and after one hundred twenty (120) days' written notice by the Franchising Authority, Grantee shall make available one channel to be used for educational and governmental cablecast programming which will be administered by the Franchise Authority except as provided for in this Section. In order that the cable customers of the City receive the most benefit from the cable system including diverse programming, the access channel must maintain programming four (4) hours per day at least five (5) days per week. If this level of programming is not maintained, the City shall return to the Grantee eighteen (18) consecutive hours' use of the channel, per day, including hours between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., for the sole use by the Grantee. Grantee also reserves the right to program the designated access channel during the hours not used by the Franchising Authority or other governmental entities. Access to the channel shall be shared with all municipalities receiving programming from the common headend site. The Franchising Authority shall agree to indemnify, save, and hold harmless Grantee from and against any liability resulting from use of the aforementioned educational and governmental channel by the Franchising Authority. (Ord. 94-576, 12-7-94)
9-3-4: TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
A. Applicable Law: Subject to Federal, State and local law, a Franchisee shall comply with FCC Rules, part 76, subpart K, sections 76.601 through 76.610 as amended, hereafter, and, at the minimum the following:
City of Salmon
9-3-4 9-3-5
1. Applicable City, County, State and National/Federal Codes and ordinances;
2. Applicable utility joint attachment practices;
3. The National Electric Safety Code; ANSI C2;
4. Local utility code requirements;
5. Local rights of way procedures.
B. Preventive Maintenance: A comprehensive program shall be developed, effected, and put into operation to ensure continued cable communications operating standards in conformance with FCC Regulations, part 76, or as may be amended. (Ord. 94-576, 12-7-94)
9-3-5: REGULATION BY FRANCHISING AUTHORITY:
A. Franchise Fee:
1. The Grantee shall pay to the Franchising Authority a franchise fee equal to five percent (5) of gross revenues (as defined in Section 9-3-1 of this Chapter) received by the Grantee from the operation of the system on a quarterly basis; provided, however, that the Grantee may credit against any such payments:
a. Any tax, fee, or assessment of any kind imposed by the Franchising Authority or other governmental entity on a cable operator, or subscriber, or both, solely because of their status as such;
b. Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or subscribers (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed, both on utilities and cable operators and their services); and
c. Any other special tax, assessment, or fee such as a business, occupation, and entertainment tax.
2. Franchisee shall pay the franchise fee to the City quarterly, on or before the thirtieth day of each January, April, July and October. The first three (3) such payments shall be twenty five percent (25%) of the total annual estimated franchise fee due by the Franchisee. The fourth such payment shall be the balance of the franchise fee due.
City of Salmon
9-3-5 9-3-5
The year end payment shall be accompanied by a brief report from a representative of the Grantee showing the basis for the computation.
3. All sums which become delinquent, shall accumulate interest at the statutory rate provided in Idaho Code, title 28, chapter 22, section 104(1). The accrual of interest is not intended to waive or in any manner restrict City's ability to elect any procedure or method of collection permissible by law to enforce all the terms and conditions of this Chapter.
4. The period of limitation for recovery of any franchise fee payable hereunder shall be six (6) years from the date on which payment by the Grantee is due.
5. Where the City determines by audit, financial statement or other method, that Franchisee has underpaid franchise fees or other charges owed to City, and where such underpayment is greater than ten percent (10) and is shown to be wilful, in addition to all fees and interest due and any other remedy sought by the City, the Franchisee may be required to pay an additional penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the total amount outstanding.
6. The Franchising Authority and the Grantee have agreed to increase the amount paid as franchise fees by the Grantee to the Franchising Authority to five percent (5%) of gross revenues received and provided for in subsection 9-3-5A1. The Franchise authority agrees that all amounts paid by the Grantee as franchise fees may be added to the price of cable services and collected from the Grantee's customers as "external costs", as such term is used in 47 C.F.R. 76.922 on the date of this agreement. In addition, all amounts paid as franchise fees may be separately stated on the customers' bills as permitted in 47 C.F.R. 76.985. The increase in franchise fees will be payable by Grantee to the City after: a) the approval of the City, if required, to the inclusion of the increase on customers' bills, including any required approval pursuant to 47 C.F.R. 6.933; b) notice to Grantee's customers of the inclusion; and c) the collection of the increase in franchise fees by the Grantee from its customers.
B. Rates and Charges:
1. The City may adopt the requisite ordinances to regulate rates for the provision of basic cable TV service and equipment as defined, provided and permitted by the 1984 Communications Act, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection
City of Salmon
9-3-5 9-3-6
and Competition Act of 1992 ("1992 Act") together with implementing regulations promulgated by the FCC.
2. The Grantee shall file with the City on December 31 of each year a full schedule of all subscribers and user rates and all other charges including, but not limited to, pay TV, lease channel and discrete services, made in connection with the cable communications system.
3. The Grantee shall not discriminate in the assessment, levy, charge, imposition or collection of rates on the basis of age, race, creed, color, religion, national origin, sex or marital status.
4. Nothing in this agreement shall be construed to prohibit the reduction or waiving of charges in conjunction with promotional campaigns for the purpose of attracting subscribers or users. (Ord. 94-576, 12-7-94)
9-3-6: RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE:
A. The Franchising Authority and the Grantee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the Franchising Authority that relate to the renewal of the Grantee's Franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of section 626 of the Cable Act, as amended, unless the procedures and substantive predictions set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted and superseded by the provisions of any subsequent provision of Federal or State law.
B. In addition to the procedures set forth in said section 626(a), the Franchising Authority agrees to notify the Grantee of all of its assessments regarding the identity of future cable-related community needs and interests, as well as, the past performance of the Grantee under the then current Franchise term. The Franchising Authority further agrees that such preliminary assessments shall be provided to the Grantee promptly so that the Grantee has adequate time to submit a proposal under section 626(b) of the Cable Act and complete renewal of the Franchise prior to expiration of its term. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this Section, the Grantee and the Franchising Authority agree that at any time during the term of the then current Franchise, while affording the public appropriate notice and opportunity to comment, the Franchising Authority and the Grantee may agree to undertake and finalize informal negotiations
City of Salmon
9-3-6 9-3-8
regarding renewal of the then current Franchise and the Franchising Authority may grant a renewal thereof. The Grantee and the Franchising Authority consider the terms set forth in this Section to be consistent with the express provisions of section 626 of the Cable Act. (Ord. 94-576, 12-7-94)
9-3-7: CONDITIONS OF SALE:
A. If a renewal or extension of the Grantee's Franchise is denied or the Franchise is lawfully terminated, and the Franchising Authority either lawfully acquires ownership of the system or by its actions lawfully effects a transfer of ownership of the system to another party, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at the price determined pursuant to the provisions set forth in section 627 of the Cable Act.
B. The Grantee and the Franchising Authority agree that in the case of a final determination of a lawful revocation of the Franchise, at the Grantee's request, which shall be made in its sole discretion, the Grantee shall be given a reasonable opportunity to effectuate a transfer of its system to a qualified third party. The Franchising Authority further agrees that during such a period of time, it shall authorize the Grantee to continue to operate pursuant to the terms of its prior Franchise; however, in no event shall such authorization exceed a period of time greater than six (6) months from the effective date of such revocation. If, at the end of that time, the Grantee is unsuccessful in procuring a qualified transferee or assignee of its system which is reasonably acceptable to the Franchising Authority, the Grantee and the Franchising Authority may avail themselves of any rights they may have pursuant to Federal or State law; it being further agreed that the Grantee's continued operation of its system during the six (6) month period shall not be deemed to be a waiver, nor an extinguishment of, any rights of either the Franchising Authority or the Grantee. (Ord. 94-576, 12-7-94)
9-3-8: TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE: The Grantee's right, title, or interest in the Franchise shall not be sold, transferred,
assigned, or otherwise encumbered, other than to an entity controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the Grantee, without the prior consent of the Franchising Authority, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of the Grantee in the Franchise or system in order to secure indebtedness. Within thirty (30) days of receiving the
City of Salmon
9-3-8 9-3-9
request for transfer, the Franchising Authority shall, in accordance with FCC rules and regulations, notify the Grantee in writing of the information it requires to determine the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the transferee. If the Franchising Authority has not taken action on the Grantee's request for transfer within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving such request, consent by the Franchising Authority shall be deemed given. (Ord. 94-576, 12-7-94)
9-3-9: COMPLIANCE AND MONITORING:
A. Testing for Compliance: The Franchising Authority may perform technical tests of the system during reasonable times and in a manner which does not unreasonably interfere with the normal business operations of the Grantee or the system in order to determine whether or not the Grantee is in compliance with the terms hereof and applicable State or Federal laws. Except in emergency circumstances, such tests may be undertaken only after giving the Grantee reasonable notice thereof, not to be less than two (2) business days, and providing a representative of the Grantee an opportunity to be present during such tests. In the event that such testing demonstrates that the Grantee has substantially failed to comply with a material requirement hereof, the reasonable costs of such tests shall be borne by the Grantee. In the event that such testing demonstrates that the Grantee has substantially complied with such material provisions hereof, the cost of such testing shall be borne by the Franchising Authority. Except in emergency circumstances, the Franchising Authority agrees that such testing shall be undertaken no more than once a year, and that the results thereof shall be made available to the Grantee.
B. Books and Records: The Grantee agrees that the Franchising Authority upon reasonable notice to the Grantee may review such of its books and records at the Grantee's business office, during normal business hours and on a nondisruptive basis, as is reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the terms hereof. Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to, any public records required to be kept by the Grantee pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, the Grantee shall not be required to disclose information which it reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature. The Franchising Authority agrees to treat any information disclosed by the Grantee as confidential and only to disclose it to employees, representatives, and agents thereof that have a need to know, or in order to enforce the provisions
City of Salmon
9-3-9 9-3-11
hereof. The Grantee shall not be required to provide subscriber information in violation of section 631 of the Cable Act. (Ord. 94-576, 12-7-94)
9-3-10: INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION:
A. Insurance Requirements: The Grantee shall maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, during the term of the Franchise, comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit for bodily injury, and property damage. The Grantee shall provide a certificate of insurance designating the Franchising Authority as an additional insured. Such insurance shall be noncancellable except upon thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the Franchising Authority.
B. Indemnification: The Grantee agrees to indemnify, save and hold harmless, and defend the Franchising Authority, its officers, boards and employees, from and against any liability for damages and for any liability or claims resulting from property damage or bodily injury (including accidental death), which arise out of the Grantee's construction, operation, or maintenance of its system, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys' fees and costs; provided, that the Franchising Authority shall give the Grantee written notice of its obligation to indemnify the Franchising Authority within ten (10) days of receipt of a claim or action pursuant to this Section. (Ord. 94-576, 12-7-94)
9-3-11: ENFORCEMENT AND TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE:
A. Notice of Violation: In the event that the Franchising Authority believes that the Grantee has not complied with the terms of the Franchise, it shall notify the Grantee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance.
B. Grantee's Right to Cure or Respond: The Grantee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice described in subsection 9-3-11 A: a) to respond to the Franchising Authority, contesting the assertion of noncompliance, or b) to cure such default, or c) in the event that, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the thirty (30) day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the Franchising Authority of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed.
City of Salmon
9-3-11 9-3-11
C. Public Hearing: In the event that the Grantee fails to respond to the notice described in subsection 9-3-11A pursuant to the procedures set forth in subsection 9-3-11B, or in the event that the alleged default is not remedied within thirty (30) days or the date projected pursuant to 9-3-11B above, the Franchising Authority shall schedule a public hearing to investigate the default. Such public hearing shall be held at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Franchising Authority which is scheduled at a time which is no less than five (5) business days therefrom. The Franchising Authority shall notify the Grantee in writing of the time and place of such meeting and provide the Grantee with an opportunity to be heard.
D. Enforcement: Subject to applicable Federal and State law, in the event the Franchising Authority, after such meeting, determines that the Grantee is in default of any provision of the Franchise, the Franchising Authority may:
1. Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages;
2. Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other equitable relief; or
3. In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the Franchise, declare the Franchise agreement to be revoked in accordance with the following subsection 9-3-11E.
E. Revocation of Franchise:
1. The Franchising Authority shall give written notice to the Grantee of its intent to revoke the Franchise on the basis of a pattern of noncompliance by the Grantee, including one or more instances of substantial noncompliance with a material provision of the Franchise. The notice shall set forth the exact nature of the noncompliance. The Grantee shall have forty five (45) days from such notice to object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection. In the event the Franchising Authority has not received a response satisfactory from the Grantee, it may then seek termination of the Franchise at a public meeting. The Franchising Authority shall cause to be served upon the Grantee, at least ten (10) days prior to such public meeting, a written notice specifying the time and place of such meeting and stating its intent to request such termination.
City of Salmon
9-3-11 9-3-13
2. At the designated meeting, the Franchising Authority shall give the Grantee an opportunity to state its position on the matter, after which it shall determine whether or not the Franchise shall be revoked. The Grantee may appeal such determination to an appropriate court, which shall have the power to review the decision of the Franchising Authority "de novo" and to modify or reverse such decision as justice may require. Such appeal to the appropriate court must be taken within forty two (42) days of the issuance of the determination of the Franchising Authority.
3. The Franchising Authority may, at its sole discretion, take any lawful action which it deems appropriate to enforce the Franchising Authority's rights under the Franchise in lieu of revocation of the Franchise.
F. Impossibility of Performance: The Grantee shall not be held in default or noncompliance with the provisions of the Franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating thereto, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults are caused by strikes, acts of God, power outages, or other events reasonably beyond its ability to control. (Ord. 94-576, 12-7-94)
9-3-12: ACTIONS OF PARTIES: In any action by the Franchising Authority or the Grantee that is mandated or permitted under
the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable, expeditious, and timely manner. Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, such approval or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. (Ord. 94-576, 12-7-94)
9-3-13: EQUAL PROTECTION: In the event the Franchising Authority enters into a franchise, permit, license,
authorization, or other agreement of any kind with any other person or entity other than the Grantee to enter into the Franchising Authority's streets and public ways for the purpose of constructing or operating a cable system or providing cable service to any part of the service area, the material provisions thereof shall be comparable to those contained herein, in order that one operator not be granted an unfair competitive advantage over another, and to provide all parties equal protection under the law. The Franchising Authority shall not authorize or permit a system to operate within the Franchise area on terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome to such operator than those applied to the Grantee pursuant to this Franchise. If the Franchising Authority authorizes or permits another system to operate within the Franchise area, it shall do so on condition that such system indemnify and hold harmless the Grantee
City of Salmon
9-3-13 9-3-14
for and against all costs and expenses incurred in strengthening poles, replacing poles, rearranging attachments, placing underground facilities, and all other costs including those of the Grantee, the Franchising Authority, and utilities, incident to inspections, make ready, and construction of an additional system in the Franchise area; and the Grantee shall be designated a third party beneficiary of such conditions as are incorporated into the authorizations granted to another system. (Ord. 94-576, 12-7-94)
9-3-14: SERVICE OF NOTICES:
A. Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or response required by this Franchise to be served upon the Franchising Authority or the Grantee shall be in writing, and shall be deemed to have been duly given to the required party five (5) business days after having been posted in a properly sealed and correctly addressed envelope when hand delivered or sent by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid.
B. The notices or responses to the Franchising Authority shall be addressed as follows:
City of Salmon
200 Main Street
Salmon. Idaho 83467
The notices or responses to the Grantee shall be addressed as
follows:
Independent Cable Systems of Idaho, LLC.
c/o Custer
Attn: Dennis Thornock
1111 South Main Street
P.O. Box 324
Challis, ID 83226
C. The Franchising Authority and the Grantee may designate such other address or addresses from time to time by giving notice to the other. (Ord. 94-576, 12-7-94)
City of Salmon
9-3-15 9-3-17
9-3-15: DESCRIPTIVE HEADINGS: The captions to sections contained herein are intended solely to facilitate the reading
thereof. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of the
text herein. (Ord. 94-576, 12-7-94)
9-3-16: SEVERABILITY: If any section, sentence, paragraph, term, or provision hereof is determined to be illegal, invalid, or
unconstitutional, by any court of competent jurisdiction or by any State or Federal regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof, such determination
shall have no effect on the validity of any other section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof, all of which will remain in full force and effect for the term of the Franchise, or any renewal or renewals thereof. (Ord. 94-576, 12-7-94)
9-3-17: EFFECTIVE DATE: The effective date of this Franchise is September 1, 1994, pursuant to the provisions of applicable
law. This Franchise shall expire on August 31, 2009, unless extended by the mutual agreement of the parties. (Ord. 94-576, 12-7-94)
City of Salmon
TITLE 10
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Subject Chapter
Building Codes ……………………………1
Moving Buildings…………………………..2
City of Salmon
10-1-1 10-1-1
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
10-1-1: Adoption Of Codes by Reference
10-1-2: Administration Of Codes
10-1-3: Building Permits Required
10-1-4: Penalty
10-1-1: ADOPTION OF CODES BY REFERENCE:
A. Code Adoption: That the approved editions of the following nationally recognized codes, as adopted by the state of Idaho or the Idaho Building Code Board, are adopted as the official building codes of the City of Salmon, except as provided in Section 2 and 3:
1. Building Code
2. Residential Code, parts 1-1V and IX
3. Energy Conservation Code
4. Fire Code
5. Mechanical Code
6. Fuel Gas Code
7. Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, ICBO
8. Uniform Sign Code, ICBO
City of Salmon
10-1-1 10-1-1
9. Uniform Building Code Fee Schedule, ICBO
The adopted versions of the foregoing codes shall be deemed superseded by successive versions of such codes as they are adopted or approved by the Idaho Building Code Board effective on the date any such codes are made effective by the Idaho Building Code Board. (amd. Ord. 15-813, 11-19-15)
B. Exemption: Idaho Code 39-4116 (4) agricultural building exemption.
1. Definitions:
a. “Agricultural building” means a structure that is designed and constructed for one or more of the following purposes:
1. Livestock shelters or buildings, including shade structures;
2. Poultry buildings or shelter;
3. Barns;
4. Horticultural structures, including detached production greenhouses and crop protection shelters;
5. Grain Silos
6. Stables
b. “Equipment and machinery used exclusively in agriculture” means farm implements and other equipment and machinery that are used exclusively on land actively devoted to agriculture, and are not used on public highways except as necessary for access to land actively devoted to agriculture.
c. “Land actively devoted to agriculture” means real property meeting the eligibility criteria for appraisal, assessment and taxation as agricultural property as set forth in Idaho Code 63-604.
d. The above definitions shall supersede any definitions of these terms that are contained in the IBC.
(amd. Ord. 15-813, 11-19-15)
2. Exemption from Building Code Requirements: A building that meets the definition of “agricultural building” contained in subsection (1) above shall be exempt from the requirements of the
City of Salmon
10-1-1 10-1-1
building codes enumerated in Chapter 41, Title 39, Idaho Code, and the rules promulgated by the Idaho Building Code Board, to the extent such exemption is provided in Idaho code 39-4116, provided that both of the following criteria are met:
a. The building is used solely for one or more of the purposes listed in subsection (1) (a) above; and
b. The property on which the building is sited has been determined by the Lemhi County Assessor to be land actively devoted to agriculture.
3. Requirements Applicable to Agricultural Buildings: Notwithstanding any other provision of the Ordinance, the following requirements shall apply to agricultural buildings.
a. An agricultural building shall not be:
1. Used as a place of human habitation.
2. Used as a place of employment where agricultural products are processed, treated, or packaged.
3. Open to use by the public.
4. A shop and/or machinery repair building.
5. A garage or building used for storage of personal use vehicles and/or vehicles licensed for use on public roads.
6. Sheds that are connected to public utilities and/or on permanent foundations that are used as shop or garages.
b. All agricultural buildings shall conform to the minimum placement standards established pursuant to the Salmon Development Code.
c. All agricultural buildings shall conform with the minimum snow, wind, frost, seismic, and all other engineering requirements of the code for safety reasons.
d. the owner of and agricultural building shall obtain a site permit for the building from the Salmon Building Department.
C. Severability: This ordinance is hereby declared to be severable. Should any portion of this ordinance be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall continue in
City of Salmon
10-1-1 10-1-4
full force and effect and shall be read to carry out the purpose(s) of the ordinance before the declaration of partial invalidity.
D. Repeal of conflicting Provisions: All provisions of Ordinance 99-606 of the City of Salmon and all other Ordinances or parts of Ordinances which conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. Exception: The “Salmon Development Code” is not repealed, nor any part of it, and it shall take precedence over this Ordinance. (Ord. 02-648, 2-05-2003)
E. Copies on File: Three (3) copies, paper or electronic, of said Codes, as adopted in subsection A above, shall be and remain on file in the office of the Building Department for use and examination by the public. (1995 Code, amd. Ord. 15-813, 11-19-15)
10-1-2: ADMINISTRATION OF CODES: The administration of said Codes and related ordinances herein or hereafter adopted
shall be carried out by such person or agency as the City Council may, by resolution or ordinance, designate. (1995 Code)
10-1-3: BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED: Unless exempted by the Building Code, no person shall erect, construct, enlarge,
alter, repair, improve, remove, convert or demolish any building or structure within the City without first obtaining a building permit, which permit shall be the evidence of the authority of said person to commence construction. Such permit shall be issued only upon payment of the required fees and upon authorization of the person or agency
designated to administer the Code and this Chapter. (1995 Code; amd. 2007 Code, amd. Ord. O9-735, 3-04-2009)
10-1-4: PENALTY: Unless otherwise prescribed, violations of this Chapter or the various Codes as herein adopted
constitute an infraction and shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. In addition to such penalties or in lieu thereof, at the election of the City, any or all City utilities services, including electricity, water, sewage and garbage disposal, may be denied or terminated to any new construction of a structure for which the building permit herein required has not been obtained. (1995 Code)
City of Salmon
TITLE 11
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Subject Chapter
Flood Hazard Areas ........................ 1
City of Salmon
11-1-1 11-1-1
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose, and
Objectives
11-1- 2: Definitions
11-1- 3: General Provisions
11-1- 4: Administration
11-1- 5: Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
11-1- 6: Legal Status Provisions
11-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT,
PURPOSE, AND INTERPRETATION:
A. Statutory Authority
The Legislature of the State of Idaho, pursuant to Idaho Code §§ 46-1020 through 46- 1024, authorizes local governments to adopt floodplain management ordinances that identify floodplains and minimum floodplain development standards to minimize flood hazards and protect human life, health, and property.
B. Findings of Fact
1. The flood hazard areas of the City of Salmon are subject to periodic inundation that results in:
a. loss of life and property;
b. health and safety hazards;
c. disruption of commerce and governmental services;
d. extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection; and
e. impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
City of Salmon
11-1-1 11-1-1
2. These flood losses are caused by structures in flood hazard areas, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
3. Local government units have the primary responsibility for planning, adopting, and enforcing land use regulations to accomplish proper floodplain management.
C. Statement of Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to promote public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
1. Protect human life, health, and property;
2. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in floodplains;
3. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas;
4. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
5. Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated with flooding, generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
6. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
7. Ensure potential buyers are notified the property is in an area of special flood hazard; and
8. Ensure those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.
D. Objectives and Methods of Reducing Flood Losses
In order to accomplish its purpose, this ordinance includes methods and provisions to:
City of Salmon
11-1-1 11-1-2
1. Require that development which is vulnerable to floods, including structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety, and welfare of citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
2. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion;
3. Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion;
4. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert flood waters or that may increase flood hazards to other lands;
5. Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which carry and store flood waters.
11-1-2: DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted according to the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
Accessory Structure A structure on the same lot or parcel as a (appurtenant structure) principal structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate to the incidental and subordinate to the principal structure.
Addition (to an An extension or increase in the floor area or existing building) height of a building or structure.
Appeal A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of provisions of this ordinance or request for a variance.
Area of Shallow A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, or AR/AH zone Flooding on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1 percent (1%) or greater annual
City of Salmon
11-1-2 11-1-2
chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of Special See Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
Flood Hazard
Base Flood The flood having a one (1) percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base Flood Elevation A determination by the Federal Insurance (BFE) Administrator of the water surface elevations of
the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. When the BFE has not been provided in a Special Flood Hazard Area, it may be obtained from engineering studies available from a Federal, State, or other source using FEMA-approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when combined with the Freeboard, establishes the Flood Protection Elevation.
Basement Any area of the building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building See Structure.
Critical Facilities Facilities that are vital to flood response activities or critical to the health and safety of the public before, during, and after a flood, such as a hospital, emergency operations center, electric substation, police station, fire station, nursing home, school, vehicle and equipment storage facility, or shelter; and facilities that, if flooded, would make the flood problem and its impacts much worse, such as a hazardous materials facility, power generation facility, water utility, or wastewater treatment plant.
City of Salmon
11-1-2 11-1-2
Datum The vertical datum is a base measurement point (or set of points) from which all elevations are determined. Historically, that common set of points was the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD29). The vertical datum currently adopted by the federal government as a basis for measuring heights is the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
Development Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
Per Idaho Code § 46-1021: "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures, or the construction of additions or substantial improvements to buildings, structures or accessory structures; the placement of mobile homes; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of materials; specifically including the construction of dikes, berms and levees. The term "development" does not include the operation, cleaning, maintenance or repair of any ditch, canal, lateral, drain, diversion structure or other irrigation or drainage works that is performed or authorized by the owner thereof pursuant to lawful rights and obligations.
Development Activity Any activity defined as Development which will necessitate a Floodplain Development Permit; such as: the construction of buildings, structures, or accessory structures; additions or substantial improvements to existing structures; bulkheads, retaining walls, piers, and pools; the placement of mobile homes; or the deposition or extraction of materials; the
City of Salmon
11-1-2 11-1-2
construction or elevation of dikes, berms and levees.
Digital Flood Insurance The digital official map of a community, issued Rate Map (DFIRM) by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the Special Flood Hazard Areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated.
Elevated Building For insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Elevation Certificate The Elevation Certificate is an important administrative tool of the NFIP. It is used to determine the proper flood insurance premium rate; it is used to document elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with community floodplain management regulations; and it may be used to support a request for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) or Letter of Map Revision based on fill (LOMR-F).
Enclosure An area enclosed by solid walls below the BFE/FPE or an area formed when any space below the BFE/FPE is enclosed on all sides by walls or partitions. Insect screening or open wood lattice used to surround space below the BFE/RFPE is not considered an enclosure.
Encroachment The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, structures, or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
Existing Construction For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. “Existing
City of Salmon
11-1-2 11-1-2
construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
Existing Manufactured A manufactured home park or subdivision
Home Park or where the construction of facilities for servicing
Manufactured Home the lots on which the manufactured homes are
Subdivision to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of installation ofinstallation of installation ofinstallation of installation ofinstallation ofinstallation ofinstallation ofinstallation of utilities, the construction of utilities, the construction of utilities, the construction of utilities, the construction of utilities, the construction of utilities, the construction of utilities, the construction of utilities, the construction of utilities, the construction of utilities, the construction of utilities, the construction of utilities, the construction of utilities, the construction of utilities, the construction of utilities, the construction of utilities, the construction of utilities, the construction of streets, and final streets, and finalstreets, and final streets, and final streets, and finalstreets, and finalstreets, and finalstreets, and finalstreets, and final streets, and finalstreets, and final site grading site grading site grading site grading site grading or the pouring or the pouring or the pouring or the pouring or the pouring or the pouring or the pouring or the pouring or the pouring or the pouring or the pouring or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain effective date of the original floodplain management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the management regulations adopted by the community, May 14, 1984 community, May 14, 1984community, May 14, 1984community, May 14, 1984community, May 14, 1984community, May 14, 1984 community, May 14, 1984 community, May 14, 1984community, May 14, 1984community, May 14, 1984community, May 14, 1984 community, May 14, 1984community, May 14, 1984 community, May 14, 1984community, May 14, 1984community, May 14, 1984community, May 14, 1984.
Existing Structures See Existing Construction.
Expansion to an The preparation of additional sites by the Existing Manufactured construction of facilities for servicing the lots on Home Park or which the manufacturing homes are to be Subdivision affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood or Flooding
a. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
3. Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in paragraph a.2. of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.
b. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe
City of Salmon
11-1-2 11-1-2
storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph a.1. of this definition.
Per Idaho Code § 46-1021: "Flood" means a general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas caused by the overflow or rise of rivers, streams or lakes, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Elevation See Base Flood Elevation (BFE)
Determination
Flood Elevation Study See Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
Flood Fringe Per Idaho Code §46-1021: "Flood fringe" is that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway covered by floodwaters during the regulatory flood.
Flood Hazard An official map of a community, issued Boundary Map (FHBM) by the Federal Insurance Administrator, where the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as Zones A, M, and/or E.
Flood Insurance Rate An official map of a community, on which the
Map (FIRM) Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
Flood Insurance An examination, evaluation, and determination
Study (FIS) of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations; or an examination, evaluation and determination of
City of Salmon
11-1-2 11-1-2
mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood Zone A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
Floodplain or Any land area susceptible to being inundated
Flood-Prone Area by water from any source (see definition of “flooding”).
Per Idaho Code § 46-1021: "Floodplain" is the land that has been or may be covered by floodwaters, or is surrounded by floodwater and inaccessible, during the occurrence of the regulatory flood. The riverine floodplain includes the floodway and the flood fringe.
Floodplain The individual appointed to administer and Administrator enforce the floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Any type of permit that is required in Development Permit conformance with the provisions of this ordinance, prior to the commencement of any development activity.
Floodplain Management The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and flood plain management regulations.
Per Idaho Code §46-1021: "Floodplain management" is the analysis and integration of the entire range of measures that can be used to prevent, reduce, or mitigate flood damage in a given location, and that can protect and preserve the natural, environmental, historical, and cultural values of the floodplain.
Floodplain Management Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
Regulations building codes, health regulations, special
City of Salmon
11-1-2 11-1-2
purpose ordinances (such as a flood plain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance), and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
Per Idaho Code § 46-1021: "Floodproofing" means the modifications of structures, their sites, building contents, and water and sanitary facilities, to keep water out or reduce the effects of water entry.
Flood Protection The Base Flood Elevation plus the Freeboard.
a. In “Special Flood Hazard Areas” where Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus 1.5 feet of freeboard; and
b. In “Special Flood Hazard Areas” where no BFE has been established, this elevation shall be at least 1.5 feet above the highest adjacent grade.
Per Idaho Code § 46-1021: "Flood protection elevation" means an elevation that shall correspond to the elevation of the one percent (1%) chance flood (one hundred (100) year flood) plus any increased flood elevation due to floodway encroachment, plus any required freeboard.
Flood Protection Those physical structural works for which funds
System have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to
City of Salmon
11-1-2 11-1-2
reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes dams, reservoirs, levees, or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodway The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation.
Per Idaho Code § 46-1021: "Floodway" is the channel of the river or stream and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to discharge and store the floodwater or flood flows associated with the regulatory flood.
Freeboard A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the hydrologic effects of urbanization in a watershed. The Base Flood Elevation (BFE) plus the freeboard establishes the Flood Protection Elevation (FPE). Freeboard shall be 1.5 feet.
Per Idaho Code § 46-1021: "Freeboard" represents a factor of safety usually expressed in terms of a certain amount of feet above a calculated flood level. Freeboard shall compensate for the many unknown factors that contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated. These unknown factors include, but are not limited to, ice jams, debris accumulation, wave action, obstruction of
City of Salmon
11-1-2 11-1-2
bridge openings and floodways, the effects of urbanization on the hydrology of the watershed, loss of flood storage areas due to development, and the sedimentation of a river or stream bed.
Functionally A facility that cannot be used for its intended
Dependent Use purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
Highest Adjacent The highest natural elevation of the ground
Grade (HAG) surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. Refer to the FEMA Elevation Certificate for HAG related to building elevation information.
Historic Structure A structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or to a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
1. by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
City of Salmon
11-1-2 11-1-2
2. directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Letter of Map A general term used to refer to the several Change (LOMC) types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be accomplished by letter. They include Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA), Letter of Map Revision (LOMR), and Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F)
1. Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA): an official amendment, by letter, to an effective National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) map. A LOMA establishes a property’s location in relation to the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). LOMAs are usually issued because a property has been inadvertently mapped as being in the floodplain but is actually on natural high ground above the base flood elevation.
2. Letter of Map Revision (LOMR): FEMA's modification to an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or a Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective Base Flood Elevations (BFEs), or the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). The LOMR officially revises the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM), and sometimes the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report, and when appropriate, includes a description of the modifications. The LOMR is generally accompanied by an annotated copy of the affected portions of the FIRM, FBFM, or FIS report.
3. Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F): FEMA's modification of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) based on
City of Salmon
11-1-2 11-1-2
the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. The LOMR-F does not change the FIRM, FBFM, or FIS report.
4. Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Insurance Study (FIS). Upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. Building Permits and/or Flood Development Permits cannot be issued based on a CLOMR, because a CLOMR does not change the NFIP map.
Levee A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed according to sound engineering practices, to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
Levee System A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
Local Government Per Idaho Code § 46-1021: "Local government," in the context of this chapter, means any county or city having planning and zoning authority to regulate land use within its jurisdiction.
City of Salmon
11-1-2 11-1-2
Lowest Adjacent The lowest point of the ground level next to the
Grade (LAG) structure. Refer to the FEMA Elevation Certificate for LAG related to building elevation information.
Lowest Floor The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; Provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR § 60.3 and this ordinance.
Manufactured Home A structure, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term “Manufactured Home” does not include a “Recreational Vehicle.”
Manufactured Home A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
Park or Subdivision into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Market Value The building value, not including the land value and that of any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value may be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated for age of building and quality of construction (Actual Cash Value); or adjusted tax assessed values.
Mean Sea Level For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum (such as North America Vertical Datum of 1988 - NAVD88) to which Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) shown on a community’s FIRM are referenced.
City of Salmon
11-1-2 11-1-2
Mitigation Per Idaho Code § 46-1021: "Mitigation" means any action taken which will reduce the impact, damage, or cost of the next flood that occurs.
Mudslide Describes a condition where there is a river, flow, or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A mudslide (i.e., mudflow) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a landslide is in progress, and will be recognized as such by the Administrator only if the mudflow, and not the landslide, is the proximate cause of damage that occurs.
Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing mudslide (i.e., mudflow) damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, mudslide control works, and flood plain management regulations.
Mudslide An area with land surfaces and slopes of
(i.e., mudflow) unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate indicate a potential for mudflow.
National Flood The NFIP is a Federal program created by
Insurance Program Congress to mitigate future flood losses
(NFIP) nationwide through sound, community-enforced building and zoning ordinances and to provide access to affordable, federally backed flood insurance protection for property owners.
New Construction For floodplain management purposes, a structure for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
City of Salmon
11-1-2 11-1-2
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after May 14, 1984 and before the effective start date of this floodplain management ordinance is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
New Manufactured A place where the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community December 4, 1984.
Person Per Idaho Code § 46-1021: "Person" means any individual, group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, political subdivision, public or private agency, or entity.
Post-FIRM Construction or other development for which the “start of construction” occurred on or after the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
Pre-FIRM Construction or other development for which the “start of construction” occurred before May 14, 1984, the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
Recreational Vehicle A vehicle that is:
a. Built on a single chassis, and
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, and
c. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty truck, and
d. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
City of Salmon
11-1-2 11-1-2
Regulatory Flood
Per Idaho Code § 46-1021:"Regulatory flood" is a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred in Idaho and which may be expected to occur on a particular stream because of like physical characteristics. The regulatory flood is based upon a statistical analysis of stream flow records available for the watershed or an analysis of rainfall and runoff characteristics in the watershed. In inland areas, the flood frequency of the regulatory flood is once in every one hundred (100) years. This means that in any given year there is a one percent (1%) chance that a regulatory flood may occur or be exceeded.
Regulatory Floodway See Floodway
Remedy a Violation To bring the structure or other development into compliance with State or local flood plain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its non-compliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing Federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
Repetitive Loss An NFIP-insured structure that has had at least Structure two paid flood losses of more than $1,000 each in any 10-year period since 1978.
Riverine Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard The land in the flood plain within a community
Area (SFHA) subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. For purposes of these regulations, the term “special flood hazard area” is synonymous in
City of Salmon
11-1-2 11-1-2
meaning with the phrase “area of special flood hazard”.
Start of Construction Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial Damage Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent (50%) of its market value before the damage occurred. See definition of “substantial improvement”. Substantial damage also means flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate
City of Salmon
11-1-2 11-1-2
occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
Improvement other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
2. Any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a “historic structure” and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant to this ordinance.
Technical Bulletins and FEMA publications that provide guidance
Technical Fact Sheets concerning the building performance standards of the NFIP, which are contained in Title 44 of the U S Code of Federal Regulations § 60.3. The bulletins and fact sheets are intended for use primarily by State and local officials responsible for interpreting and enforcing NFIP regulations and by members of the development community, such as design professionals and builders. New bulletins, as well as updates of existing bulletins, are issued periodically as needed. The bulletins do not create regulations. Rather they provide specific
City of Salmon
11-1-2 11-1-2
guidance for complying with the minimum requirements of existing NFIP regulations.
It should be noted that Technical Bulletins and Technical Fact Sheets provide guidance on the minimum requirements of the NFIP regulations. State or community requirements that exceed those of the NFIP take precedence. Design professionals should contact the community officials to determine whether more restrictive State or local regulations apply to the building or site in question. All applicable standards of the State or local building code must also be met for any building in a flood hazard area.
Temperature Controlled Having the temperature regulated by a heating and/or cooling system, built-in or appliance.
Variance A grant of relief by the governing body from a requirement of this ordinance.
Violation The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations. A structure or other development without the Finished Construction Elevation Certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Water Surface The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Elevation Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other specified datum), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the flood plains of coastal or riverine areas.
Watercourse A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.
City of Salmon
11-1-3 11-1-3
11-1-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Lands to Which This Ordinance Applies
This Ordinance shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Salmon. Nothing in this ordinance is intended to allow uses or structures that are otherwise prohibited by the zoning ordinance.
B. Basis for Special Flood Hazard Areas
The Special Flood Hazard Areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for The City of Salmon, dated December 4, 1984, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) or Digital Flood Insurance Rate Maps (DFIRM), and other supporting data, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this ordinance. The FIS and the FIRM are on file at the office of the City clerk at 200 Main Street Salmon, Idaho 83467.
C. Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit
A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activities within Special Flood Hazard Areas determined in accordance with the provisions of Article IV Section B.
D. Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
E. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This ordinance shall not in any way repeal, abrogate, impair, or remove the necessity of compliance with any other laws, ordinances, regulations, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions, etcetera. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes more stringent or greater restrictions shall control.
F. Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance all provisions shall be:
City of Salmon
11-1-3 11-1-4
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
G. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the Special Flood Hazard Areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of The City of Salmon or by any officer or employee thereof for flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or an administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
H. Penalties for Violation
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or altered unless in full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Salmon from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
11-1-4: ADMINISTRATION
A. Designation of Floodplain Ordinance Administrator
City of Salmon
11-1-4 11-1-4
The City Planning & Zoning Administrator hereinafter referred to as the “Floodplain Administrator”, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance.
B. Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the following duties:
1. Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for all proposed development within Special Flood Hazard Areas to assure that the requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied.
2. Review all proposed development within Special Flood Hazard Areas to assure that all necessary Local, State, and Federal permits have been received, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.
3. Notify adjacent communities and the Idaho Department of Water Resources State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
4. Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained.
5. Prevent encroachments into floodways and flood fringe areas unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of Article V, Section E are met.
6. Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of Article IV, Section C.3.
7. Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed, in accordance with the provisions of Article IV, Section C.3.
8. Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public utilities in accordance with the provisions of Article IV, Section C.3.
City of Salmon
11-1-4 11-1-4
9. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with the provisions of Article IV, Section C.3. and Article V, Section B.2.
10. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Areas, floodways, or flood fringe areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article.
11. When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in accordance with the provisions of Article III, Section B, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with floodway data or flood fringe area data available from a Federal, State, or other source, including data developed pursuant to Article V, Section C.2.b., in order to administer the provisions of this ordinance.
12. When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway or flood fringe area data has been provided in accordance with the provisions of Article III, Section B, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or flood fringe area data available from a Federal, State, or other source in order to administer the provisions of this ordinance.
13. When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure or the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) is above the Base Flood Elevation (BFE), advise the property owner of the option to apply for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) from FEMA.
14. Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of this ordinance and make these records available for public inspection, recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended.
15. Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has a right,
City of Salmon
11-1-4 11-1-4
upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
16. Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this ordinance, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor.
17. Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of State or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable State or local law may also be revoked.
18. Make periodic inspections throughout the Special Flood Hazard Areas within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
19. Follow through with corrective procedures of Article IV, Section D.
20. Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests.
21. Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the FIS Report, FIRM and other official flood maps, and studies adopted in accordance with the provisions of Article III, Section B of this ordinance, including any revisions thereto including Letters of Map Change, issued by FEMA. Notify the NFIP State Coordinator and FEMA of your community’s mapping needs.
City of Salmon
11-1-4 11-1-4
22. Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including Letters of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-Fs) and Letters of Map Revision (LOMRs).
C. Floodplain Development Application, Permit, and Certification Requirements
1. Application Requirements. Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development activities located within Special Flood Hazard Areas. The following items shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain development permit:
a. A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain development:
i. the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems, grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and other development;
ii. the boundary of the Special Flood Hazard Area as delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in Article III, Section B, or a statement that the entire lot is within the Special Flood Hazard Area;
iii. the flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in Article III, Section B;
iv. the boundary of the floodway(s) or flood fringe area(s) as determined in Article III, Section B;
v. the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in Article III, Section B; Article III, Section C; or Article V, Section C;
vi. the old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
b. Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a Special Flood Hazard Area including but not limited to:
i. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed reference level (including basement) of all structures;
City of Salmon
11-1-4 11-1-4
ii. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure in Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30 will be floodproofed; and
iii. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
c. If floodproofing, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33) with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise, and maintenance of floodproofing measures.
d. A Foundation Plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this ordinance are met. These details include but are not limited to:
i. The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation, or on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
ii. Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on walls in accordance with Article V, Section B.4.d.i-vi when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-30.
e. Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
f. Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
g. Certification that all other Local, State, and Federal permits required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
h. Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of Article V, Section B.6 and 7 of this ordinance are met.
i. A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation, when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and
i. A map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation.
City of Salmon
11-1-4 11-1-4
2. Permit Requirements. The Floodplain Development Permit shall include, but not be limited to:
a. A complete description of all the development to be permitted under the floodplain development permit (i.e. house, garage, pool, septic, bulkhead, cabana, pole barn,
chicken coop, pier, bridge, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials, etcetera).
b. The Special Flood Hazard Area determination for the proposed development in accordance with available data specified in Article III, Section B.
c. The Flood Protection Elevation required for the reference level and all attendant utilities.
d. The Flood Protection Elevation required for the protection of all public utilities.
e. All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
f. A statement that no fill material or other development shall encroach into the floodway or flood fringe area of any watercourse, as applicable.
g. The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30.
h. A statement of the limitations of below BFE enclosure uses, if applicable. (i.e., parking, building access and limited storage only).
i. A statement that all materials below BFE/FPE must be flood resistant materials.
3. Certification Requirements.
a. Elevation Certificates
i. A final as-built Finished Construction Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 86-0-33) is required after construction is completed and prior to Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to
City of Salmon
11-1-4 11-1-4
withhold the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.
b. Floodproofing Certificate. If non-residential floodproofing is used to meet the Flood Protection Elevation requirements, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level. Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a Floodplain Development Permit. Failure to construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.
c. If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance with the provisions of Article V, Section B.3.b.
d. If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, the following shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit:
i. a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; and
ii. a professional engineer’s certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and
iii. a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation; and
iv. an Idaho Stream Channel Alteration Permit approval shall be provided by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.
e. Certification Exemptions. The following structures, if located within Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30, are exempt from the
City of Salmon
11-1-4 11-1-4
elevation/floodproofing certification requirements specified in items a and b of this subsection:
i. Recreational Vehicles meeting requirements of Article V, Section B.6.a;
ii. Temporary Structures meeting requirements of Article V, Section B.7; and
iii. Accessory Structures less than 200 square feet meeting requirements of Article V, Section B.8.
4. Determinations for Existing Buildings and Structures. For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the Building Official, shall:
a. Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work. In the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made;
b. Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure;
c. Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
d. Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the adopted Idaho Building Code and this ordinance is required.
D. Corrective Procedures
1. Violations to be Corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator finds violations of applicable State and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such notification.
City of Salmon
11-1-4 11-1-4
2. Actions in Event of Failure to Take Corrective Action. If the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by personal service, stating:
a. that the building or property is in violation of the floodplain management regulations;
b. that a hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten (10) days after the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
c. that following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as applicable.
3. Order to Take Corrective Action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the building or development is in violation of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, he or she shall issue an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period, not less than sixty (60) calendar days, nor more than 180 calendar days. Where the Floodplain Administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he or she may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible.
4. Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the clerk within ten (10) days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order.
5. Failure to Comply with Order. If the owner of a building or property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished at the discretion of the court.
City of Salmon
11-1-4 11-1-4
E. Variance Procedures
1. The City/County Building Board of Appeals as established by the City of Salmon and Lemhi County, hereinafter referred to as the “appeal board”, shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance.
2. Variances may be issued for:
a. the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure;
b. functionally dependent facilities, if determined to meet the definition as stated in Article II of this ordinance, provided provisions of Article IV, Section E.9.b, c, and e, have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety; or
c. any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements of this Section.
3. In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and:
a. the danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
b. the danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
c. the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
d. the importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
e. the necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined under Article II of this ordinance as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
f. the availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
g. the compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
h. the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
City of Salmon
11-1-4 11-1-4
i. the safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
j. the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
k. the costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
4. The applicant shall include a written report addressing each of the above factors in Article IV, Section E.3.a-k with their application for a variance.
5. Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this ordinance.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction below the BFE increases risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance.
7. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the State of Idaho upon request.
8. Conditions for Variances:
a. Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the structure in violation of other Federal, State, or local laws, regulations, or ordinances.
b. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or flood fringe area if the variance would result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge.
c. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
d. Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit approval.
City of Salmon
11-1-4 11-1-5
e. Variances shall only be issued upon:
i. a showing of good and sufficient cause;
ii. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and
iii. a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
9. A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities that are located in Special Flood Hazard Areas provided that all of the following conditions are met.
a. The use serves a critical need in the community.
b. No feasible location exists for the use outside the Special Flood Hazard Area.
c. The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to at least the Flood Protection Elevation.
d. The use complies with all other applicable Federal, State and local laws.
10. The City of Salmon will notify the State NFIP Coordinator of the Idaho Department of Water Resources of its intention to grant a variance at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to granting the variance.
11. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision to the Court, as provided in Idaho Code 67-6535.
11-1-5 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
A. General Standards
In all Special Flood Hazard Areas the following provisions are required:
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
City of Salmon
11-1-5 11-1-5
damage in accordance with the Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
3. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
4. All new and replacement electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding to the Flood Protection Elevation. These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.
5. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
6. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
7. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
8. A fully enclosed area, of new construction and substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor shall:
a. be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least to the Flood Protection Elevation; and
b. include, in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-30, flood openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum design criteria:
i. A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding;
ii. The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one (1) square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
City of Salmon
11-1-5 11-1-5
iii. If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit;
iv. The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the interior or exterior adjacent grade;
v. Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; and
vi. Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
9. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, shall meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this ordinance.
10. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this ordinance and located totally or partially within the floodway, flood fringe area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the Flood Protection Elevation in the floodway, flood fringe area, or stream setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this ordinance.
11. New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not be permitted, except by variance as specified in Article IV, Section E.10. A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment facility may be located in a Special Flood Hazard Area only if the structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the Flood Protection Elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of Article IV, Section C.3.
12. All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and determined to be reasonably safe from flooding.
City of Salmon
11-1-5 11-1-5
13. All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
14. All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
15. All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.
16. When a structure is partially located in a Special Flood Hazard Area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and substantial improvements.
17. When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest Base Flood Elevation (BFE) shall apply.
B. Specific Standards
In all Special Flood Hazard Areas where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in Article III, Section B, or Article V, Section D, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of Article V, Section A, are required:
1. Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the Flood Protection Elevation, as defined in Article II of this ordinance.
2. Non-Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the Flood Protection Elevation, as defined in Article II of this ordinance. Structures located in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 may be floodproofed to the Flood Protection Elevation in lieu of elevation provided that all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the Flood Protection Elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components
City of Salmon
11-1-5 11-1-5
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AH and AO Zones, the floodproofing elevation shall be in accordance with Article V, Section F.2. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the floodproofing standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in Article IV, Section C.3, along with the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance plan.
3. Manufactured Homes.
a. New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the Flood Protection Elevation, as defined in Article II of this ordinance.
b. Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most current edition of the Idaho Division of Building Safety’s “Idaho Manufactured Home Installation Standard” in accordance with Idaho Code § 44-2201(2). Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis thirty-six (36) inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above thirty-six (36) inches in height, an engineering certification is required.
c. All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the requirements of Article V, Section B.4.
d. An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents of all new, substantially improved, or substantially damaged manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the local Emergency Management Coordinator.
4. Additions/Improvements.
a. Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to the existing structure are
i. not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more non-conforming than the existing structure; or
City of Salmon
11-1-5 11-1-5
ii. a substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new construction.
b. Additions to post-FIRM structures that are a substantial improvement with no modifications to the existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.
c. Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to the existing structure are
i. not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction; or
ii. a substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new construction.
d. Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a 5 year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started, must comply with the standards for new construction. For each building or structure, the 5 year period begins on the date of the first improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The requirement does not, however, include either:
i. any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assume safe living conditions; or
ii. any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.
5. Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall be either:
a. Temporary Placement
i. be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days or be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
City of Salmon
11-1-5 11-1-5
only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached additions); or
b. Permanent Placement.
i. Recreational vehicles that do not meet the limitations of Temporary Placement shall meet all the requirements for new construction, as set forth in Article V, Section A.
6. Temporary Non-Residential Structures. Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure(s) in the event of a flash flood or other type of flood warning notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
a. a specified time period for which the temporary use will be permitted. Time specified may not exceed six (6) months, renewable up to one (1) year;
b. the name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;
c. the time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be removed (i.e., immediately upon flood warning notification);
d. a copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
e. designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside the Special Flood Hazard Area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
7. Accessory Structures. When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, etc.) are to be placed within a Special Flood Hazard Area, elevation or floodproofing certifications are required for all accessory structures in accordance with Article IV, Section C.3, and the following criteria shall be met:
a. Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation (including working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas);
b. Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
c. Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential;
d. Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
e. Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with the provisions of Article V, Section A.1;
City of Salmon
11-1-5 11-1-5
f. All service facilities, such as electrical, shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of Article V, Section A.4; and
g. Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below Flood Protection Elevation in conformance with the provisions of Article V, Section B.4.d.
An accessory structure with a footprint less than 200 square feet and satisfies the criteria outlined in a - g above is not required to meet the elevation or floodproofing standards of Article V, Section B.2.
8. Tanks. When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within a Special Flood Hazard Area, the following criteria shall be met:
a. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the base flood, including the effects of buoyancy (assuming the tank is empty);
b. Elevated above-ground tanks, in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement during conditions of the base flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area;
c. Not elevated above-ground tanks, that do not meet the elevation requirements of Article V, Section B.2 of this ordinance shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris.
d. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be:
i. at or above the flood protection elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the base flood; and
ii. anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood.
9. Construction of Below-Grade Crawlspace.
City of Salmon
11-1-5 11-1-5
a. The interior grade of a crawlspace must not be below the BFE and must not be more than two (2) feet below the exterior lowest adjacent grade (LAG).
b. The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall, must not exceed four (4) feet at any point.
c. There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should be drained within a reasonable time after a flood event.
d. The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five (5) feet per second for any crawlspace.
See Technical Bulletin 11 for further information.
Caution:
Buildings that have below-grade crawlspaces will have higher flood insurance premiums than buildings that have the preferred crawlspace construction, with the interior elevation of the crawlspace soil at or above the Base Flood Elevation (BFE).
10. Other Development in regulated floodways and flood fringe.
a. Fences that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, in regulated floodways and flood fringe shall meet the limitations of Article V, Section E of this ordinance.
b. Retaining walls, bulkheads, sidewalks, and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways and flood fringe shall meet the limitations of Article V, Section E of this ordinance.
c. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings, and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, which encroach into regulated floodways and flood fringe, shall meet the limitations of Article V, Section E of this ordinance.
d. Drilling water, oil, and/or gas wells including fuel storage tanks, apparatus, and any equipment at the site that encroach into regulated floodways and flood fringe shall meet the limitations of Article V, Section E of this ordinance.
e. Docks, piers, boat ramps, marinas, moorings, decks, docking facilities, port facilities, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities that encroach into regulated floodways and flood fringe shall meet the limitations of Article V, Section E of this ordinance
City of Salmon
11-1-5 11-1-5
C. Standards for Floodplains without Established Base Flood Elevations
Within the Special Flood Hazard Areas designated as Zone A (also known as Unnumbered A Zones) and established in Article III, Section B, where no Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of Article V, Section A, shall apply:
1. No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or new development shall be permitted, unless a determination of the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) is provided.
2. The BFE used in determining the Flood Protection Elevation (FPE) shall be determined based on the following criteria:
a. When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is available from other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this ordinance and shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in Article V, Sections A and B.
b. When floodway or flood fringe data is available from a Federal, State, or other source, all new construction and substantial improvements within floodway and flood fringe areas shall also comply with the requirements of Article V, Sections B and E.
c. All subdivision, manufactured home park, and other development proposals shall provide Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data if development is greater than five (5) acres or has more than fifty (50) lots/manufactured home sites. Such Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in accordance with Article III, Section B and utilized in implementing this ordinance. The applicant/developer shall submit an application for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) prior to Preliminary Plat approval and have obtained a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) prior to any building permits for structures being issued.
See FEMA 480 and/or FEMA 265 for further information
d. When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is not available from a Federal, State, or other source as outlined above, the reference level shall be elevated or floodproofed (non-residential) to or above the Flood Protection Elevation, as
City of Salmon
11-1-5 11-1-5
defined in Article II. All other applicable provisions of Article V, Section B shall also apply.
D. Standards for Riverine Floodplains with Base Flood Elevations but without Established Floodways or Flood Fringe Areas.
Along rivers and streams where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided by FEMA or is available from another source but neither floodway nor flood fringe areas are identified for a Special Flood Hazard Area on the FIRM or in the FIS report, the following requirements shall apply to all development within such areas:
1. Standards of Article V, Sections A and B; and
2. Until a regulatory floodway or flood fringe area is designated, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood at any point within the community.
E. Standards for Floodways and Flood Fringe Areas
Areas designated as floodways or flood fringe areas are located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in Article III, Section B. The floodways and flood fringe areas are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and potential projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in Article V, Sections A and B, shall apply to all development within such areas:
1. No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other developments shall be permitted unless:
a. it is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain Administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or
b. a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) has been approved by FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) must
City of Salmon
11-1-5 11-1-5
also be obtained within six months of completion of the proposed encroachment.
2. If Article V, Section E.1 is satisfied, all development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this ordinance.
3. Manufactured homes may be permitted provided the following provisions are met:
a. the anchoring and the elevation standards of Article V, Section B.3; and
b. the encroachment standards of Article V, Section E.1.
F. Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (Zone AO, AH, AR/AO, or AR/AH)
Located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in Article III, Section B, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. In addition to Article V, Sections A and B, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the following requirements:
1. The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet, plus a freeboard of 1.5 feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least 1.5 feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
2. Non-residential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be floodproofed to the same level as required in Article V, Section F.1 so that the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below that level shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required in accordance with Article IV, Section C.3, and Article V, Section B.2.
3. Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
City of Salmon
11-1-6 11-1-6
11-1-6: LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
A. Effect on Rights and Liabilities under the Existing Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
This ordinance, in part, comes forward by re-enactment of some of the provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted May 14, 1984 as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this ordinance shall not affect any action, suit, or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance of the City of Salmon enacted on May 14, 1984, as amended, which are not reenacted herein are repealed.
B. Effect upon Outstanding Floodplain Development Permits
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof for which a Floodplain Development Permit has been granted by the Floodplain Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of this ordinance. Provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding permit within a period of 180 days subsequent to the date of issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
C. Severability
The ordinance is hereby declared to be severable. Should any portion of this ordinance be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect and shall be read to carry out the purpose(s) of the ordinance before the declaration of partial invalidity. (Ord. 17-821, 6-21-2017)
City of Salmon
TITLE 12
CEMETERY
Subject Chapter
Cemetery Regulations ........................ 1
City of Salmon
12-1-1 12-1-1
CHAPTER 1
CEMETERY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
12-1-1: Definitions of Terms
12-1-2: Conveyance of Cemetery Plots and Niches
12-1-3: Interment Standards
12-1-4: Regulations For Plot and Niche Use
12-1-5: General Use of the Cemetery
12-1-6: Cemetery Administration
12-1-7: General Regulations and Policy
12-1-8 General Disclaimers and Reservations
12-1-9 Fees
12-1-10 Payments
12-1-11 Penalties
12-1- 12 Severability
12-1- 13 Repealer
12-1-1: DEFINITIONS OF TERMS
ACTIVATE: To create a grave or open a niche for human remains or cremains. (Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009, amd. Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019)
CEMETERY: The City of Salmon burial park for human interments.
CITY: The City of Salmon, Idaho, Lemhi County.
CITY CLERK: The City Clerk of the City of Salmon, Idaho.
COLUMBARIUM: A stand-alone wall with niches to hold urns containing human cremains. (Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019)
City of Salmon
12-1-1 12-1-1
COUNTY: Lemhi County.
CREMAINS: The cremated remains of a single human body, in a container suitable for interment.
DISINTERMENT: The removal of human remains and containers from a grave or niche. ( amd. Ord. 06-709; 3-21-2007, amd. Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019)
GRAVE: Excavation for burial of human remains. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009)
HEAD OF PLOT: The west end of the cemetery plot. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009)
INFANT GRAVE: Excavation for burial of human infant remains where the coffin length will not exceed four (4) feet. ( amd. Ord. 06-709; 3-21-2007, amd. Ord 09-732; 2-18-2009)
INFANT PLOT: A three (3) foot by six (6) foot defined space for an infant grave.
INTERMENT: The burial of human remains within a grave or placement of cremains in a niche. (amd. Ord. 06-709; 3-21-2007, amd. Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019)
MARKER: A monument, flat marker, tablet, headstone or tombstone.
NICHE: A display vault in a wall or structure specifically designed to hold cremation urns. (Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019)
NONRESIDENT: Any individual who does not live within the official city boundaries.
PETS: Dogs, cats, ferrets, or other animals or reptiles kept within the home for domestic purposes.
PLOT: A defined space for a grave. (Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009)
City of Salmon
12-1-1 12-1-2
RESIDENT: Any individual who currently resides within the official city boundaries and has proof of residing within city boundaries for a period of at least 6 months.
12-1-2 CONVEYANCE OF CEMETERY PLOTS AND NICHES:
A. General Conveyance: Under authority of Idaho Code Section 50- 320, the City shall convey cemetery plots and niches for burial rights by deeds signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the City Clerk, to individuals who pay a fee therefore. Such deeds shall be in the form of a minimum of one plot or niche per deed, which shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder without further acknowledgment.
Each deed shall contain the language “this deed is subject to the current Salmon City Code in affect at the time of purchase”. The deed shall also contain interment options as allowed in the current City Code. Such deeds shall vest in the owner, his or her heirs and assigns, a right in fee-simple to the plots and niches for the sole purpose of interment. The rights of heirs and assigns to interment in plots and niches conveyed by deeds shall be determined as set forth hereinafter.
Ownership of burial rights may be transferred only as specified hereinafter. All burial rights owners shall be subject to the City Code herein. (See Section 12-1-7-I) The deed of burial rights and any amendments thereto shall be the sole agreement between the City and the plot and/or niche owner, his heirs and assigns. (amd. Ord. 06-709; 3-21-2007, amd. Ord. 09-732, 2-18-2009; amd. Ord 19-842; 11-06-2019)
B. Procedure for Conveyance of Cemetery Plots and Niches: A deed shall be issued for each plot and niche sold for burial rights in the cemetery. (See 12-1-2-A) An application form, accompanied by the appropriate fee, shall be filled out prior to issuance of the deed, indicating the name of the party(ies) to whom the plot and/or niche is being sold and the name in which the deed to the plot and/or niche is to be issued. Right to use a plot or niche for interment shall not be granted until all appropriate fees have been paid and the necessary deed obtained.
City of Salmon
12-1-2 12-1-2
However, in the case of a licensed mortuary’s request in writing, via e-mail or by certified mail for a plot or niche, the application may be filled out by the City staff on behalf of the mortuary, listing the mortuary as the requesting party, with the name of the deceased to be placed on the deed as owner and the mortuary billed monthly for all such plots and niches requested the previous month. If such payments are not kept current, the City Clerk may refuse to issue further deeds and may prohibit interment until payment in full has been received.
Deeds shall be issued by the Office of the City Clerk in the name specified on the application. All deeds shall be recorded with the
Lemhi County Clerk. (amd. Ord. 06-709; 3-21-2007, amd Ord 09-732, 2-18-2009, amd. Ord 19-842; 11-06-2019)
C. Rights of Interment: The person whose name is subscribed on the deed as the owner shall have the right to be interred in the plot or niche specified on the deed, unless a legal transfer of ownership pursuant to this City Code was made prior to his demise. The owner shall also have the right to specify, by means of a will or other legal document, that an additional interment be allowed in this plot or niche subject to the provisions set forth elsewhere in the City Code. If the owner is interred elsewhere, the plot or niche otherwise reserved for his interment shall be available to his heirs and assigns in the order of their demise, subject to proof of assignment or inheritance being presented to the City. Such heirs and assigns shall also have the right to transfer ownership, subject to presentations of proof of assignment or inheritance. Transfer of ownership must meet criteria as set forth in section 12-1-2 D. Plots or niches can be used only for the purposes as provided by this City Code. (amd. Ord. 06-709; 3-21-2007,amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009, amd. Ord. 10-766; 11-3-2010, amd. Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019)
D. Transfers, Assignment: Burial rights may be transferred to those persons eligible to be original purchasers of burial spaces or niches. If a “resident” wishes to transfer burial rights to a “nonresident” the difference in fees plus recording fees will be charged according to the current rate. A resident that loses residency due to nursing home care shall not lose resident burial fee rights. No transfer or assignment of any plot or niche or interest therein shall be valid until a new burial permit is issued, recorded, and the original permit is terminated. Such transfer or assignment permit shall be recorded in the office of the County Clerk. If the legal holder of a Cemetery Deed wishes to sell burial rights back to
City of Salmon
12-1-2 12-1-3
the City of Salmon, they must establish proof of ownership. The seller shall execute a deed giving rights to burial back to the City of Salmon. Buyback amounts with a fixed minimum shall be set by resolution. If maintenance and recording fees were paid at the time of purchase, they shall not be refunded. ( amd. Ord. 06-709; 3-21-2007, amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009; amd. Ord. 10-766; 11-3-2010; amd. Ord. 17-826; 09-20-2017, amd. Ord 19-842; 11-06-2019)
12-1-3 INTERMENT STANDARDS:
A. Caskets and Cremains Containers: All caskets laid in opened graves in the cemetery shall be placed either in concrete or metal vaults in accordance with industry standards. The container for cremated remains to be inurned in a niche in the columbarium shall be of material approved by the City of Salmon and shall be of a size suitable for the niche. No cardboard boxes will be permitted in a niche. (amd. Ord. 06-709; 3-21-2007, amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009, amd. Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019)
B. Markers: All interments shall include a marker as defined by this Code. The placement of markers or monuments as herein required is to be at the head of each plot. Such markers are to be placed on a concrete base that shall be a minimum of four (4) inches thick. The concrete base shall be constructed so no less than six (6) inches of concrete borders the marker and/or any other permanent object such as vases, statues, or any other ornamental items. The concrete base shall be constructed to specifications set by the City and shall be flush with the surface of the ground. There shall be no more than two markers per plot, with the exception of a single military marker as defined below. If two markers are placed on one plot, they must be placed side by side at the head of the plot and mounted on a single concrete base as stipulated above. If there is an existing embedded monument that cannot be removed from its base, a second base shall be added. It must be placed in line with, abutting, and beside the existing base. If a military marker is placed on the plot, it may be placed at the head of the plot (not to exceed two markers) or placed six (6) feet from the head of the plot. Any military marker placed not at the head of the plot shall be flush with the surface of the ground and bordered with six (6) inches of concrete and a minimum of four (4) inches thick. No marker(s) or its accompanying items shall exceed the measurements of the plot(s) purchased. Concrete forms shall be inspected by the Sexton prior to the pouring of concrete. All placements of markers shall be approved by the Cemetery Sexton
City of Salmon
12-1-3 12-1-4
prior to actual placement. (amd. Ord. 06-709; 3-21-2007; amd. Ord 10-754: 5-5-2010)
Niche Covers: Upon placement of cremains in a niche an engraving shall be required for identification purposes. In order to maintain the columbarium in a uniform manner, the City of Salmon will arrange for the engraving of the niche cover. Only name, birth date and death dates will be allowed. To recognize Veterans one line will be available for the Veterans service upon proof of honorable discharge. A military emblem or plaque may also be applied to the niche cover. Application of the emblem will be arranged by the City of Salmon. Only one font pattern will be allowed on all niche covers. An engraving fee will be assessed at the time of the engraving at the current rate. Engraving of the niche cover is allowed before interment of the cremains. A temporary replacement cover will be installed by the City of Salmon until the engraved cover is returned. (Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019)
C. Ashes: Ashes may be spread on a purchased plot subject to the conveyance and assignment standards set forth in Section 2 of this City Code. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009)
12-1-4 REGULATIONS FOR PLOT AND NICHE USE:
A. Floral Regulations:
1. The City shall have the authority to remove all floral designs, flowers, weeds, trees, shrubs, plants, or herbage of any kind from the Cemetery as soon as, in the judgment of the sexton, they become unsightly, dangerous, detrimental or diseased, or when they do not conform to the standards maintained. Vases or items taped, glued, or stuck to the niches or walls are not allowed. (amd. Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019)
2. Shrubs or ornamental trees less than four (4) feet in height at maturity may be placed at the head of the plot. The owner will be responsible for the planting and initial care of such shrubs or ornamental trees. (amd. Ord. 06-709; 3-21-2007, amd. Ord 09-732; 2-18-2009)
3. The City shall not be liable for lost, misplaced or broken flower vases. The City shall not be responsible for plants, herbage or plantings of any kind damaged by the elements, thieves, vandals or by other causes beyond its control.
City of Salmon
12-1-4 12-1-5
4. The City reserves the right to regulate the method of decorating graves so that a uniform beauty may be maintained.
5. The City reserves the right to prevent the removal or destruction of wild flowers, trees, shrubs, plants, or herbage of any kind unless it gives its consent. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009)
B. Ornament Regulations: No glass objects of any kind are allowed. Permanent objects such as vases, statues, or any other ornamental items will only be allowed at the head of the grave as provided by Section 12-1-3-B.
C. Prohibited Structures: No person shall erect or maintain any fence, corner post, coping, hedge or boundary of any kind upon any plot in the Cemetery. No person shall grade the ground of any plot in the Cemetery, except under the supervision of the sexton. The sexton shall, whenever requested, furnish the true lines of the plot according to the official markers, and shall prevent and prohibit any grading thereof that might destroy symmetry of the land. (amd. Ord. 09-732, 2-18-2009)
D. Subdivision of Plots or Niches: The subdivision of plots or niches is not allowed, and no one shall be interred in any plot or niche not having any interest therein, except by written consent of the City and of all parties interested in such plot or niche. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009, amd. Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019)
12-1-5 GENERAL USE OF THE CEMETERY:
A. Improprieties: It is of the utmost importance that there shall be strict observance of all of the proprieties of the cemetery, whether embraced in the City Code or not, as no improprieties shall be allowed, and the City shall have the power to prevent improper assemblages.
B. Use of Walks: Persons within the cemetery grounds shall use the avenues, walks, alleys and roads provided as much as possible. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009)
C. Safety: The City shall owe no duty to the plot owner to keep the property, or the memorial thereon, in a reasonably safe condition. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009)
City of Salmon
12-1-5 12-1-6
D. Children: Children under fifteen (15) years shall not be permitted within the cemetery or its buildings unless accompanied by an adult. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009)
E. Hunting: No hunting is allowed in the Cemetery. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009)
F. Smoking: Expectorating or smoking within any of the cemetery buildings is prohibited.
G. Littering: The throwing of rubbish on the drives and paths, or any part of the ground, or in the buildings, is prohibited. Receptacles for waste material are located at convenient places.
H. Motorized Vehicles: Motorized vehicles shall not be driven through the grounds at a speed greater than the posted speed limit and must always be kept on the right-hand side of the cemetery roadway. Motorized vehicles are not allowed to park or to come to a full stop in front of an open grave unless such vehicles are in attendance at the funeral. Motorized vehicles are not allowed to drive on any grass areas unless approved by the sexton. (Amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009)
I. Peddling or Soliciting: Peddling of flowers or plants, or soliciting the sale of any commodity, is prohibited within the confines of the cemetery. Solicitation of any kind is strictly forbidden at any time in the cemetery without the approval of the City.
J. Firearms: No firearms shall be permitted within the cemetery except on special permit from the Sexton. The American Legion and other military, police and fire organizations that routinely perform interment ceremonies requiring the use of firearms shall be exempt from this section. (Amd. Ord 05-691; 1-19-2005)
K. Pets: Pets shall not be allowed on the cemetery grounds or in any buildings.
12-1-6 CEMETERY ADMINISTRATION:
A. Admission to Cemetery: The City reserves the right to refuse admission to anyone not a plot or niche owner or relative of a person interred in the cemetery, and to refuse the use of any of the
City of Salmon
12-1-6 12-1-7
cemetery facilities at any time to any persons whom the management may deem objectionable to the best interests of the cemetery. (amd. Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019)
B. Dates and Times Cemetery is Open: The cemetery will be open seven (7) days a week between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. to four-thirty o’clock (4:30) P.M. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009)
C. Authority of Sexton: All funeral processions upon reaching the Cemetery shall be under the supervision of the sexton. The sexton and such other employees as the City may designate are empowered to enforce this City Code, and to exclude from the cemetery any person violating the same. The sexton and his assistants shall have charge of the grounds and buildings at all times.
12-1-7 GENERAL REGULATIONS AND POLICY:
A. Subject to Laws: Besides being subject to this City Code, all interments, disinterment and removals are made subject to the orders and laws of the properly constituted authorities of the City, County and State.
B. Fees: Fees will be set by Resolution by the City Council. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009)
C. Holidays and Sundays: No interments, disinterment, removal or interment service shall be permitted on Sundays or any of the following holidays: New Year’s Day, President’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, the day after Thanksgiving Day, or Christmas Day. When any of the holidays mentioned in this subsection falls, or is legally observed on a Saturday or Monday, funerals will be received on the last business day preceding the holiday up to twelve o’clock (12:00) noon, but no further or final disposition will be made. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009, amd Ord. 16-815; 6-01-2016)
D. Authorization to Inter or for Disinterment:
1. Authorization to Inter: The City may open a grave in a plot or niche for the purpose of interment upon receipt of a burial transit permit or equivalent document, as required by Idaho Code § 54 -1120, and payment of all fees upon proper written authorization by any plot or niche owner of record made out on forms approved by
City of Salmon
12-1-7 12-1-7
the City and duly filed in its office, unless there are written instructions to the contrary already on file in the office. No interment may occur without the owner or mortuary first scheduling such a request, with the City. Requirements for the presence of funeral director or designated official during interments are set forth by the State Statute or County Ordinance at the time of interment. (amd. Ord. 06-709; 3-21-2007, amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009, amd. Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019).
2. Authorization for Disinterment: No disinterment shall take place without presenting the proper approval as required by the State of Idaho and arrangements for the disinterment made with the cemetery sexton at least one week prior to the disinterment. No disinterment of cremains in a columbarium niche will be allowed on weekends or holidays as defined in Section 12-1-7-C. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009, amd. Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019)
E. Location of Plot or Niche: If instructions from the plot owner cannot be obtained, or are indefinite, or when for any reason the plot or niche cannot be opened where specified, the City may, in its discretion, open it in such location in the plot or columbarium as it deems best and proper, so as not to delay the funeral; and the City shall not be liable in damages for any error so made. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009, amd. Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019)
F. No Interment Permitted Unless Property Paid For and Transit Permit Received: No interment shall be permitted or marker placed or niche engraved in or on any plot or niche not fully paid for, except by special emergency arrangement. Such exceptions shall be by written consent of the City Clerk and under the terms specified by the City. (amd. Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019)
Prior to interment, an Authorization for Final Disposition-Transit Permit or equivalent document must be received by the office of the City Clerk. If circumstances do not allow for documentation to be left at city offices, the permit may be left with the Cemetery Sexton at the time of interment. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009)
G. Control of Work by the City: All landscaping, improvements, alterations and care on plots shall be under the direction of and subject to the consent and approval of the Sexton. All trees, shrubs
and herbage of any kind may be planted, trimmed, cut, or removed by the City.
City of Salmon
12-1-7 12-1-7
All openings and closing of graves and niches, and all interments, disinterment, and removals shall be provided for by the City. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009, amd. Ord 19-842; 11-06-2019)
H. Gratuities Prohibited: No person, while employed by the City, shall receive any fee, gratuity, or commission, except from the City, either directly or indirectly, under penalty of immediate dismissal.
I. Interment of More Than One Body: Multiple interments as provided herein may be allowed for members of a niche or plot owner’s immediate family, heirs, or assigns, subject to presentation of proof in writing to the City that the owner gave permission for the additional interment. No such additional use of an owner’s plot or niche shall be permitted without documentation of this written permission. Multiple interments shall be allowed as follows:
A. Cemetery Plots Sold Prior to December 1, 2006
1) Activated – A maximum of four (4) interments shall be allowed in any given activated plot consisting of solely one of the following combinations:
a) One (1) body plus three (3) cremains
b) Four (4) Cremains
c) One (1) Infant body or two (2) infant cremains in an infant plot
2) Non-Activated – All non-activated plots are subject to the current Salmon City Code in affect at the time of Activation.
B. Cemetery Plots Sold After December 1, 2006 – A maximum of two (2) interments shall be allowed in any given plot consisting solely of one of the following combinations:
1) One (1) body plus one (1) cremains
2) Two cremains
3) One (1) infant body or two (2) infant cremains in an infant plot
C. New Plots Sold after February 26, 2009
All plots sold after February 26, 2009 shall be subject to and will be posted with the current Salmon City Code in affect at the time of purchase.
Proper identification shall be made of such interment or interments on no more than two (2) regulation markers, with the
City of Salmon
12-1-7 12-1-8
exception of a military marker, as set forth in Section 12-1-3 B. Military markers may be attached to the regulation marker or as defined in 12-1-3 B. All names of those interred in the grave shall be identified on the markers. (amd. Ord. 06-709; 3-21-2007, amd. Ord. 10-754; 5-5-2010)
D. Columbarium Niches
A maximum of two (2) human cremains shall be allowed in any given niche. All names of those interred in the niche shall be identified on the niche cover. (Ord 19-842; 11-06-2019)
J. Removal to Other Plot or Niche: A body may be disinterred from its original grave or niche and interred in another plot or niche in the cemetery, when there has been an exchange or purchase for that purpose. (amd. Ord. 06-709; 3-21-2007, amd. Ord 09-732; 2-18-2009, amd. Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019)
K. Payment of Service Charges: The charges for the cemetery services must be paid at the time of the issuance of the order of interment, disinterment or removal. On line banking payments shall be accepted from Funeral Directors if payment is no more than fourteen (14) working days from activation of a cemetery plot or niche. Fees in addition to normal interment as set forth in Section 9, shall be billed to the owner and made payable according to the current payment policy of the City of Salmon. (amd. Ord. 06-709; 3-21-2007; amd. Ord. 15-798, 03-04-15, amd. Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019)
12-1-8 GENERAL DISCLAIMERS AND RESERVATIONS:
A. Disclaimers:
1. Loss of Damage: Whether or not guards are used, the City disclaims all responsibility for loss or damage caused by the elements, an act of God, common enemy, thieves, vandals, strikers, malicious mischief-makers, explosions, unavoidable accidents, invasions, insurrections, riots, or order of any military or civil authority, whether the damage is direct or collateral.
2. Telephoned/Verbal Orders: The City shall not accept any order given by telephone. Orders shall be in writing, via e-mail or by certified mail. The City shall not be held responsible for any mistake occurring from the want of precise and proper instructions
City of Salmon
12-1-8 12-1-8
as to the particular plot or niche, size and location in a plot or niche where interment is desired. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009, amd. Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019)
3. Delays Caused by Protests: The City shall in no way be liable for any delay in the interment of a body where a protest to the interment has been made, or where this Code has not been complied with.
4. Embalming or Identification: The City shall not be liable for the interment permit nor for the identity of the person sought to be interred; nor shall the City be liable in any way for the embalming of the body.
5. Removal: The City shall exercise due care in making disinterment and removal, but it shall assume no liability for damage to any casket or burial case or urn incurred in making disinterment and removal.
B. Reservations:
1. Roadways and Replatting: The right and privilege to resurvey, enlarge, diminish, replat, alter in shape or size, or otherwise to change all or any part of the property mapped and platted, including the right to lay out, establish, close, eliminate or otherwise modify or change the location of roads, walks, or drives, and to file amended maps or plots thereof, and to use the same for the erection of buildings or for any purposes or uses connected with, incidental to or convenient for the care, preservation or preparation for the disposal or interment of human dead bodies, or other cemetery purposes, together with easements and rights of way over and through the premises, and the right of installing, maintaining and operating pipelines, conduits or drains for sprinklers, drainage, electric or communication lines or for any other purpose is expressly reserved.
2. Easement-Right of Interment: No easement or right of interment is granted to any plot owner in any road, drive, alley or walk within the cemetery, but such road alley or walk may be used as a means of access to the cemetery or buildings as long as the City devotes it to that purpose.
3. Notice Provisions: The right is reserved by the City to insist upon at least twenty-four (24) hours’ notice before any interment,
City of Salmon
12-1-8 12-1-9
and to at least one week’s notice prior to any disinterment or removal.
4. Correction of Errors: The City reserves, and shall have the right to correct any errors that may be made by it either in making
interments, disinterment or removals, or in the description, transfer or conveyance and substituting and conveying in lieu thereof other interment property of equal value and similar location as far as possible, or as may be selected by the City, or by refunding the amount of money paid on account of the purchase. In the event the error shall involve the interment of the remains of any person in such property, the City reserves, and shall have the right to remove and re-inter the remains to such other property of equal value and similar location as may be substituted and conveyed in lieu thereof. The City shall also have the right to correct any errors made by city personnel. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009)
12-1-9 FEES: Cemetery fees and charges shall be set and adopted each fiscal year by resolution of the City
Council and copies of the resolutions shall be kept on file and made available in the office of the City Clerk.
A. Establishment of Fees: Fees established by this Code and set by resolution shall be:
Resident Fees
a. Infant Cemetery Plot
b. Standard Cemetery Plot
c. Cremation Interment
d. Infant Interment
e. Standard Interment
f. Weekend Interment
g. Outside Normal Working Hours as set forth in Section 6.B.
h. Disinterment
i. Disinterment of Cremains
j. Recording Fees
Nonresident Fees
a. Infant Cemetery Plot
b. Infant Plot Maintenance Endowment
c. Standard Cemetery Plot
d. Standard Plot Maintenance Endowment
City of Salmon
12-1-9 12-1-11
e. Cremation Interment
f. Infant Interment
g. Standard Interment
h. Weekend Interment
i. Disinterment
j. Disinterment of Cremains
k. Outside Normal Working Hours
l. Recording Fees
( amd. Ord. 06-709; 3-21-2007, amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009, amd. Ord 10-766: 11-03-2010)
12-1-10 PAYMENTS: Payment plans for the purchase of cemetery plots or niches are provided with the following conditions;
A. Monthly payment schedule for a period not to exceed twenty-four months. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009)
B. A handling and administrative fee of five (5) percent of the purchase price will be added to the base purchase price. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009)
C. Purchaser may pay the balance at any time during the payment term.
D. Balance must be paid in full prior to activating the plot or niche. (amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009, amd. Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019)
E. Delinquent Account: When payments are not made within ten (10) days from the past due date, the City shall issue a written notice of delinquency and possible termination of the purchase plan. When bills are not paid within twenty-five (25) days from the past due date, the City will terminate the payment plan, the purchaser will forfeit the cemetery plot and/or niche, and there will be no refund of previous payments. ( amd. Ord. 06-709; 3-21-2007, amd. Ord. 19-842; 11-06-2019)
12-1-11 PENALTIES: Any violation of this Code shall be a misdemeanor and punishable as a General Offense as
defined in Section 5-2-1 Salmon Municipal Code, Ord. 99-609, 8-9-1999,
by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days. ( amd. Ord. 06-709; 3-21-2007)
City of Salmon
12-1-12 12-1-13
12-1-12 SEVERABILITY: The provisions of this code are hereby declared to be severable and if any provision of this code
or the application of such provision to any person or circumstance is declared invalid for any reason, such declaration shall not effect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance.
12-1-13 REPEALER: All Codes or parts of Codes in conflict herewith are herby repealed. (Ord. 04-676; 12-01-2004; amd. Ord. 09-732; 2-18-2009)
City of Salmon
INDEX
City of Salmon
-A- -A-
-A-
ABANDONED AND INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
Definitions .......................................................................................................5-4-2
Disposition Of Vehicles ...................................................................................5-4-10
Immunity From Damages ................................................................................5-4-12
Investigation Of Premises ...............................................................................5-4-4
Liability Of Owner Or Occupant .......................................................................5-4-13
Notice Procedures ...........................................................................................5-4-7
Action On Violation ..................................................................................5-4-7A
Contents Of Notice ..................................................................................5-4-7B
Notice To Remove ..........................................................................................5-4-5
Affixing Notice To Vehicle .......................................................................5-4-5B
Notice To Property Owner Or Occupant .................................................5-4-5A
Penalty ............................................................................................................5-4-14
Redemption Of Impounded Vehicles ...............................................................5-4-11
Removal Of Vehicle From Property .................................................................5-4-9
Notice Of Impoundment ..........................................................................5-4-9B
Removal By Law Enforcement ................................................................5-4-9A
Request For Hearing .......................................................................................5-4-8
Responsibility For Removal .............................................................................5-4-6
Storing, Parking Or Leaving Vehicles Prohibited; Nuisance;
Exceptions ................................................................................................5-4-3
Exclusion .................................................................................................5-4-3C
Prohibited ................................................................................................5-4-3A
Public Nuisance Declared .......................................................................5-4-3B
Title ..........................................................................................................5-4-1
ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS, UNIFORM CODE
ADOPTED ...............................................................................................................10-1-1A-7
ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES ..............................................................................4-2
ADMINISTRATION
City Initiative And Referendum ........................................................................1-10
City Officers And Employees ...........................................................................1-7
Attorney ...................................................................................................1-7C
Clerk ........................................................................................................1-7A
Engineer/Surveyor ..................................................................................1-7E
Public Works Superintendent ..................................................................1-7D
Finance Director/Treasurer .....................................................................1-7B
City Personnel System ...................................................................................1-8
City Planning And Development ......................................................................1-11
Definitions .......................................................................................................1-3
Elections ..........................................................................................................1-9
City of Salmon
-A- -A-
ADMINISTRATION (cont)
General Penalty ..............................................................................................1-4
Mayor And City Council ..................................................................................1-6
Official And Corporate Provisions ...................................................................1-5
Official City Code ............................................................................................1-1
Saving Clause .................................................................................................1-2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES (See Also LIQUOR CONTROL) ..................................3-1
ALTERATION OF CITY CODE ...............................................................................1-1-4
AMENDMENTS TO OFFICIAL CITY CODE ...........................................................1-1-3
ANIMAL CONTROL
Animals ...........................................................................................................5-3A
Animals Running At Large Prohibited .....................................................5-3A-1
Freeing Impounded Animals Prohibited ..................................................5-3A-6
Impounding Of Animals; Fee ...................................................................5-3A-3
Notice And Sale Of Animals ....................................................................5-3A-4
Poultry Running At Large Prohibited .......................................................5-3A-2
Revenue From Sale ...............................................................................5-3A-5
City Park, Pets In Designated Parking Areas Only ..........................................7-2-3
Dogs (See Also DOGS) ...................................................................................5-3B
Livestock; Wild Animals (See Also LIVESTOCK; WILD ANIMALS) ................5-3C
Vicious Animals ...............................................................................................5-3A-7
ANNEXATIONS, ORDINANCES RELATING TO DEEMED
SPECIAL .................................................................................................................1-2-1
APPEALS, HEARINGS
Abandoned And Inoperative Vehicles, Hearing On Notice To Remove ..........5-4-8
Beer License, Hearing On Revocation Or Suspension ...................................3-1 B-8
CATV Franchise
Revocation Hearing ....................................................................................9-3-11E
Violation Hearing ........................................................................................9-3-11C
Fair Housing Commission, Hearings By ..........................................................2-3-5E-8
Liquor By The Drink, Hearing On Revocation Of License ...............................3-1-A-8
Nuisance, Appeal Decision Of Hearing Officer ................................................4-2-8A
APPLICATIONS
Beer, License For Sale Of ...............................................................................3-1B-2
Flood Hazard Areas, Development Permit ......................................................11-1-5A
Initiative And Referendum ...............................................................................1-10
Itinerant Merchants and Vendors, License ......................................................3-2-3
Liquor By The Drink, License For Sale Of .......................................................3-1A-2
Livestock, Wild Animals Permit .......................................................................5-3C-1C
Sanitary Sewer System, Connection To ..........................................................8-4-11B
Water System, Connection To ........................................................................8-1-9B
City of Salmon
-A- -B-
APPROPRIATION ORDINANCES DEEMED SPECIAL ..........................................1-2-1
ASSESSMENT PROCEEDINGS, SPECIAL; DUTY OF CITY
ATTORNEY .............................................................................................................1-7C-2B
ATTORNEY, CITY
Appointment ....................................................................................................1-7-1 A, 1-7C-1
Duties ..............................................................................................................1-7C-2
Condemnation Proceedings ....................................................................1-7C-2B
Document Preparation ............................................................................1-7C-2C
Fair Housing Commission Counsel .........................................................2-3-5D
Legal Advisor ..........................................................................................1-7C-2A
Ordinance Preparation ............................................................................1-7C-2C
Special Assessments ..............................................................................1-7C-2B
Removal From Office ......................................................................................1-7-1B
Salary ..............................................................................................................1-7-4
Term Of Office .................................................................................................1-7C-1
-B-
BALLOT, INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM ............................................................1-10-5
BARBED WIRE .......................................................................................................7-1-3
BEER (See Also LIQUOR CONTROL) ...................................................................3-1-B
BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED VEHICLES, USE IN CITY PARK ...........................7-2-6
BICYCLES RESTRICTED IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT ....................7-3-1
BIRDS, WILD (See Also LIVESTOCK; WILD ANIMALS) ........................................5-3C
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES ....................................................2-1
Fair Housing Commission ...............................................................................2-3-5
Personnel Committee ......................................................................................1-8-4
Planning And Zoning Commission ..................................................................2-1
BOND ORDINANCES DEEMED SPECIAL .............................................................1-2-1
BONDS, INSURANCE AND DEPOSITS
CATV Franchise, Insurance ............................................................................9-3-10
Clerk/, City; Bond ............................................................................................1-7-3
Garbage Service Franchise, Comprehensive Liability
Insurance ........................................................................................................9-2-5
Treasurer/Finance Director, City; Bond ...........................................................1-7-3
BOUNDARIES, ORDINANCES RELATING TO DEEMED SPECIAL......................1-2-1
BUILDING CODES
Administration Of Codes ................................................................................10-1-2
Adoption Of Codes By Reference ..................................................................10-1-1
Codes Adopted ..............................................................................................10-1-1 A
City of Salmon
-B- -B-
BUILDING CODES (cont.)
Copies On File ...............................................................................................10-1-1 E
Building Permits Required ..............................................................................10-1-3
Energy Conservation Code ............................................................................10-1-1-A3
Penalty ...........................................................................................................10-1-4
Uniform Codes
Building Code ..........................................................................................10-1-1-A1
Energy Conservation Code .....................................................................10-1-1-A3
Fire Code ................................................................................................10-1-1-A4
Fuel Gas Code ........................................................................................10-1-1-A6
Mechanical Code ....................................................................................10-1-1-A5
Residential Code .....................................................................................10-1--A2
Uniform Building Code Fee Schedule .....................................................10-1-1-A9
Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings .......................10-1-1-A7
Uniform Sign Code ..................................................................................10-1-1-A8
BUILDING CONSERVATION, UNIFORM CODE FOR; ADOPTED .......................10-1-1A
BUILDING INSPECTOR ........................................................................................11-1-3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Building Codes ...............................................................................................10-1
BURNING OF GARBAGE PROHIBITED ................................................................4-3-2
BUS REGULATIONS ..............................................................................................6-1-6
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Business Licenses .........................................................................................3-4
Application and Standards for License ....................................................3-4-4
Compliance With Zoning Requirements ........................................3-4-4B
License Fee ...................................................................................3-4-4A
Change of Location .................................................................................3-4-7
Definitions ...............................................................................................3-4-1
Enforcement and Penalty ........................................................................3-4-10
Civil Liability ...................................................................................3-4-10A
Criminal Liability .............................................................................3-4-10B
Exemptions .............................................................................................3-4-3
License and Fee ......................................................................................3-4-5
License Required ....................................................................................3-4-2
Prohibition Against Dong Business Without a License ............................3-4-8
Regulation of Licensed Businesses ........................................................3-4-6
Repealer..................................................................................................3-4-12
Right of Appeal ........................................................................................3-4-9
Severability ..............................................................................................3-4-11
Itinerant Merchants and Vendors ...................................................................3-2
Junk Dealers ..................................................................................................3-3
Liquor Control ................................................................................................3-1
Beer Regulations ...........................................................................3-1B
City of Salmon
-B- -C-
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS (cont)
Liquor By The Drink .......................................................................................3-1A
Wine By The Drink .........................................................................................3-1C
-C-
CATV FRANCHISE
Action Of Parties ............................................................................................9-3-12
Compliance And Monitoring ...........................................................................9-3-9
Books And Records ................................................................................9-3-9B
Testing For Compliance ..........................................................................9-3-9A
Conditions Of Sale .........................................................................................9-3-7
Definition Of Terms ........................................................................................9-3-1
Descriptive Headings .....................................................................................9-3-15
Effective Date ................................................................................................9-3-17
Enforcement And Termination Of Franchise ..................................................9-3-11
Enforcement ............................................................................................9-3-11 D
Grantee's Right To Cure Or Respond ............................................................9-3-11B
Notice Of Violation .........................................................................................9-3-11 A
Public Hearing .........................................................................................9-3-11C
Revocation Of Franchise .................... ....................................................9-3-11E
Equal Protection ............................................................................................9-3-13
Grant Of Franchise ........................................................................................9-3-2
Additional Services ..................................................................................9-3-2B
Grant .......................................................................................................9-3-2A
Nonexclusivity .........................................................................................9-3-2D
Term ........................................................................................................9-3-2C
Insurance And Indemnification .......................................................................9-3-10
Indemnification ........................................................................................9-3-10B
Insurance Requirements .........................................................................9-3-10A
Regulation By Franchising Authority ..............................................................9-3-5
Franchise Fee .........................................................................................9-3-5A
Rates and Charges .................................................................................9-3-5B
Renewal Of Franchise ...................................................................................9-3-6
Service Of Notices .........................................................................................9-3-14
Severability ....................................................................................................9-3-16
Standards Of Service .....................................................................................9-3-3
Adaptation Of New Technology ...............................................................9-3-3N
Aerial And Underground Construction .....................................................9-3-3G
Conditions Of Street Occupancy .............................................................9-3-3A
City of Salmon
-C- -C-
CATV FRANCHISE (cont.)
Customer Service Standards .................................................................. 9-3-3L
Communications Between Grantee And Subscribers ................... 9-3-3L4
Definitions ..................................................................................... 9-3-3L1
Installations .................................................................................. 9-3-3L3
Outages ........................................................................................ 9-3-3L3
Service Calls ................................................................................ 9-3-3L3
System Office Hours ..................................................................... 9-3-3L2
Telephone Availability ................................................................... 9-3-3L2
Devices For The Hearing Impaired ......................................................... 9-3-30
Educational And Governmental Access .................................................. 9-3-3P
Emergency Use ....................................................................................... 9-3-3K
Parental Control Devices ........................................................................ 9-3-3M
Relocation At Request Of Franchising Authority ..................................... 9-3-3C
Relocation At Request Of Third Party ..................................................... 9-3-3D
Required Extensions Of Service ............................................................. 9-3-3H
Restoration Of Public Ways .................................................................... 9-3-3B
Safety Requirements ............................................................................... 9-3-3F
Service To Public Buildings ..................................................................... 9-3-3J
Subscriber Charges For Extensions Of Service ...................................... 9-3-31
Trimming Of Trees And Shrubbery ......................................................... 9-3-3E
Technical Standards ......................................................................................... 9-3-4
Applicable Law ........................................................................................ 9-3-4A
Preventive Maintenance .......................................................................... 9-3-4B
Transfer Of Franchise ...................................................................................... 9-3-8
CAMPING IN CITY PARK ....................................................................................... 7-2-5
Fees ................................................................................................................ 7-2-5B
Permit Required ................................................................................................ 7-2-5A
CAT (See Also ANIMAL CONTROL)....................................................................... 5-3A
CATCHLINES ......................................................................................................... 1-3-3
CATTLE (See Also ANIMAL CONTROL) ................................................................ 5-3A
CEMETERY REGULATIONS ..................................................................................12-1-1
Cemetery Administration ..................................................................................12-1-6
Admission to Cemetery ...........................................................................12-1-6A
Authority of Sexton ..................................................................................12-1-6C
Dates and Times Cemetery is Open .......................................................12-1-6B
Conveyance of Cemetery Plots & Niches .........................................................12-1-2
Assignments ............................................................................................12-1-2D
General Conveyance ..............................................................................12-1-2A
Procedure for Conveyance of Plots & Niches .........................................12-1-2B
Rights of Interment ..................................................................................12-1-2C
City of Salmon
-C- -C-
CEMETERY REGULATIONS (cont)
Transfers ........................................................................................................12-1-2D
Definition of Terms ...........................................................................................12-1-1
Fees ................................................................................................................12-1-9
General Disclaimers and Reservations ............................................................12-1-8
Disclaimers ..............................................................................................12-1-8A
Delays Caused by Protests .............................................................12-1-8A3
Embalming or Identification .............................................................12-1-8A4
Loss of Damage ..............................................................................12-1-81
Removal ..........................................................................................12-1-8A5
Telephone Orders ...........................................................................12-1-8A2
Verbal Orders .................................................................................12-1-8A2
Reservations ...........................................................................................12-1-8B
Correction of Errors .........................................................................12-1-8B4
Easement Right of Interment...........................................................12-1-8B2
Notice Provisions ............................................................................12-1-8B3
Roadways and Replatting ...............................................................12-1-8B1
General Regulations and Policy .......................................................................12-1-7
Authorization to Inter or for Disinterment ................................................12-1-7D
Authorization for Disinterment .........................................................12-1-7D2
Authorization to Inter .......................................................................12-1-7D1
Control of Work by the City .......................................................................12-1-7G
Fees ........................................................................................................12-1-7B
Establishment of Fees .....................................................................12-1-9A
Gratuities Prohibited .................................................................................12-1-7H
Holidays ....................................................................................................12-1-7C
Interment of More than One Body ............................................................12-1-7I
Columbarium Niches .......................................................................12-1-7ID
New Plots Sold after February 26, 2009 .........................................12-1-7IC
Plots Sold Prior to December 1, 2006 .............................................12-1-7IA
Activated Plots ...................................................................12-1-7IA1
Non-Activated Plots ............................................................12-1-7IA2
Plots Sold After December 1, 2006 .................................................12-1-7IB
Location of Plot or Niche .................................................................12-1-7E
Payment of Service Charges...........................................................12-1-7K
Payment Required Before Interment ...............................................12-1-7F
Removal to Other Plot or Niche .......................................................12-1-7J
Subject to Laws ...............................................................................12-1-7A
Transit Permit Required Before Interment .......................................12-1-7F
City of Salmon
-C- -C-
CEMETERY REGULATIONS (cont)
General Use of the Cemetery ...........................................................................12-1-5
Children ....................................................................................................12-1-5D
Firearms ...................................................................................................12-1-5J
Hunting .....................................................................................................12-1-5E
Improprieties .............................................................................................12-1-5A
Littering ....................................................................................................12-1-5G
Motorized Vehicles ...................................................................................12-1-5H
Peddling ...................................................................................................12-1-5I
Pets ........................................................................................................12-1-5K
Safety .......................................................................................................12-1-5C
Smoking ...................................................................................................12-1-5F
Soliciting ...................................................................................................12-1-5I
Use of Walks ............................................................................................12-1-5B
Interment Standards .........................................................................................12-1-3
Ashes .......................................................................................................12-1-3C
Caskets & Cremains Containers ..............................................................12-1-3A
Markers ....................................................................................................12-1-3B
Niche Covers ............................................................................................12-1-3B
Payments .........................................................................................................12-1-10
Administrative Fee ....................................................................................12-1-10B
Balance May Be Paid Off at Any Time .....................................................12-1-10C
Balance Paid in Full Prior to Activation .....................................................12-1-10D
Delinquent Account ..................................................................................12-1-10E
Monthly Schedule .....................................................................................12-1-10A
Penalties ..........................................................................................................12-1-11
Regulations For Grave & Niche Use ................................................................12-1-4
Floral Arrangements .................................................................................12-1-4A
Authority to Remove ............................................................................12-1-4A1
Herbage, Consent to Remove .............................................................12-1-4A5
Liability ...............................................................................................12-1-4A3
Method of Decorating ..........................................................................12-1-4A4
Shrubs or Ornamental Trees, Placement of ........................................12-1-4A2
Ornament Regulations ..............................................................................12-1-4B
Prohibited Structures ................................................................................12-1-4C
Subdivision of Plots or Niches ..................................................................12-1-4D
Repealer ...........................................................................................................12-1-13
Severability .......................................................................................................12-1-12
CHICKENS (See Also ANIMAL CONTROL) .......................................................... 5-3A
CHIEF OF POLICE
Appointment .....................................................................................................1-7-1 A, 5-1-2A
Custody Of Recovered Property ....................................................................... 5-1-2D
City of Salmon
-C- -C-
CHIEF OF POLICE (cont)
Duties .............................................................................................................. 5-1-2C
Enforcement Of Code ............................................................................... 5-1-2C2
Records And Reports ............................................................................... 5-1-2C1
Rank ...............................................................................................................5-1-2B
Removal From Office ...................................................................................... 1-7-1B
Salary ............................................................................................................. 1-7-4
CITATIONS, ISSUANCE FOR GENERAL OFFENSE VIOLATION ........................ 5-2-2
CITY CODE (See Also OFFICIAL CITY CODE) ..................................................... 1-1
CITY PARK
Bicycles And Motorized Vehicles .................................................................... 7-2-6
Camping ........................................................................................................ 7-2-5
Fees ....................................................................................................7-2-5B
Permit Required ...................................................................................7-2-5A
Definitions ....................................................................................................... 7-2-1
Hours............................................................................................................... 7-2-2
Operation of Concessions and Special Events ............................................... 7-2-7
Definitions ........................................................................................... 7-2-7A
Fees ....................................................................................................7-2-7D
Limited Concession Operations ..........................................................7-2-7B
Special Events Concession Primacy ...................................................7-2-7C
Other fees ....................................................................................................... 7-2-8
Parking/Driving on Grass ................................................................................7-2-7C
Penalty ............................................................................................................ 7-2-9
Pet Control ...................................................................................................... 7-2-4
Accompaniment and Clean Up............................................................7-2-4-2
City Water Pump Station .....................................................................7-2-4-4
Damages .............................................................................................7-2-4-3
Restricted Leash Requirements on “Island” ....................................................7-2-4-1
Speed Limit .....................................................................................................7-2-3
CITY TREE CARE
Appeals ...........................................................................................................7-4-12
Application To Prune, Plant or Remove Public Trees ..................................... 7-4-6
Compensatory Payments ................................................................................ 7-4-7
Definitions ....................................................................................................... 7-4-2
Emergencies ................................................................................................... 7-4-11
Nuisance Trees ............................................................................................... 7-4-9
Penalties For Violation .................................................................................... 7-4-13
Protection Of Public Trees .............................................................................. 7-4-4
Required Maintenance .................................................................................... 7-4-5
Statement of Purpose...................................................................................... 7-4-1
Topping Prohibited .......................................................................................... 7-4-8
Tree Department ............................................................................................. 7-4-3
City of Salmon
Work On City Property .................................................................................... 7-4-10
-C- -C-
CLAIMS AGAINST CITY ......................................................................................... 1-7A-3
CLERK, CITY ..........................................................................................................1-7-1
Appointment .................................................................................................... 1-7-1 A, 1-7A-1
Bond ................................................................................................................ 1-7-3
Claims for Damages ................................................................................ 1-7A-3B
Filing; Approval ....................................................................................... 1-7A-3A
Payment of Claims .................................................................................. 1-7A-3C
Duties and Responsibilities ............................................................................. 1-7A-2
City Council and Municipal Elections ...................................................... 1-7A-2B
Custodian of Official Seal ........................................................................ 1-5-2C, 1-7A-2E
Duties ...................................................................................................... 1-7A-2A
Licensing and Records Management ...................................................... 1-7A-2C
Office Management ................................................................................. 1-7A-2D
CODES, STATE STATUTES ADOPTED
Building Code .................................................................................................. 10-1-1-A1
City Code ....................................................................................................... 1-1
Criminal Code ................................................................................................. 5-2-1
Development Code ........................................................................................ 1-11-3
Energy Conservation Code ............................................................................. 10-1-1-A3
Ethics, Code of ............................................................................................... 1 -7-5
Fire Code ........................................................................................................ 10-1-1-A4
Fuel Gas Code ................................................................................................. 10-1-1-A6
Liquor Control .................................................................................................. 3-1
Mechanical Code ............................................................................................10-1-1-A3
Power Franchise Ordinance ........................................................................... 9-1-1
Residential Code, Parts 1-IV and IX ................................................................10-1-1-A2
Uniform Building Code Fee Schedule .............................................................10-1-1-A9
Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings .....................................10-1-1-A7
Uniform Sign Code .......................................................................................... 10-1-1 A8
Vehicle Code ................................................................................................... 6-1-1
COMPENSATION, SALARIES
Appointive Officers .......................................................................................... 1-7-4
Councilmembers ............................................................................................. 1-6-4B
Mayor .............................................................................................................. 1-6-4A
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ...................................................................................... 1-11-1
Adoption .......................................................................................................... 1-11-1A
Signatures; Copies on File .............................................................................. 1-11-1 B
CONDEMNATION PROCEEDINGS, DUTY OF CITY ATTORNEY ....................... 1-7C-2B
CONFLICT OF INTEREST, CITY OFFICIALS ........................................................ 1-7-5D
CONTRACTS, CITY; ORDINANCES RELATING TO DEEMED
SPECIAL ................................................................................................................. 1-2-1
CORPORATE LIMITS ............................................................................................. 1-5-1
City of Salmon
-C- -C-
CORPORATE SEAL ............................................................................................... 1-5-2
Adoption .......................................................................................................... 1-5-2B
Custodian ....................................................................................................... 1-5-2C, 1-7A-2E
Design ............................................................................................................. 1-5-2A
COUNCIL, CITY (see also MAYOR, CITY)
Appointments and Appointment Approvals by
Attorney, City ........................................................................................... 1-7-1A, 1-7C-1
Chief of Police ......................................................................................... 1-7-1A
Clerk ........................................................................................................ 1-7A-1
Engineer, City .......................................................................................... 1-7-1A, 1-7E-1
Fair Housing Commissioners .................................................................. 2-3-5A
Personnel Committee .............................................................................. 1-8-4
Personnel Officer .................................................................................... 1-8-3A
Planning and Zoning Commission ........................................................... 2-1-2
Superintendent of Public Works .............................................................. 1-7-1A, 1-7D-1
Treasurer/Finance Director, City ............................................................ 1-7-1A, 1-7B-1
Election .......................................................................................................... 1-6-1
Meetings ......................................................................................................... 1-6-5
Attendance of Members .......................................................................... 1-6-6
Emergency Meetings .............................................................................. 1-6-5C
Open to Public ......................................................................................... 1-6-5D
Presiding Officer ..................................................................................... 1-6-5E
Quorum ................................................................................................... 1-6-6
Regular Meetings ................................................................................... 1-6-5A
Special Meetings .................................................................................... 1-6-5B
Ordinances Of City ......................................................................................... 1-6-7
Powers And Duties ......................................................................................... 1-6-3C
Qualifications .................................................................................................. 1-6-3A
Salary ............................................................................................................. 1-6-4B
Term Of Office ................................................................................................ 1 -6-3A
Vacancies In Office ........................................................................................ 1-6-3B
COWS (See Also ANIMAL CONTROL) .................................................................. 5-3A
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
Additional Remedies ...................................................................................... 8-2-5
Cross-Connection Inspection ......................................................................... 8-2-3
Installation Permits ......................................................................................... 8-2-4
Use Of Backflow Devices ................................................................................ 8-2-2
Additional Approval ................................................................................ 8-2-2E
Approval And Supervision Of City .......................................................... 8-2-2D
Backflow Prevention Device Required ................................................... 8-2-2A
Auxiliary Water Supply ................................................................ 8-2-2A1
History Of Cross-connection ........................................................ 8-2-2A4
City of Salmon
Internal Cross-Connections ......................................................... 8-2-2A2
-C- -D-
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL (cont)
Restricted Entry ........................................................................... 8-2-2A3
Substances Under Pressure ........................................................ 8-2-2A5
Toxic Materials ............................................................................ 8-2-2A6
Types Of Facilities ....................................................................... 8-2-2A7
Inspection And Testing ............................................................................ 8-2-2F
Location................................................................................................... 8-2-2C
Noncompliance ...................................................................................... 8-2-2H
Type Of Protective Device....................................................................... 8-2-2B
Underground Sprinkling Device .............................................................. 8-2-2G
Water Supply Protection.................................................................................. 8-2-1
Water System Design...................................................................................... 8-1-25L
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED ................................................................. 5-3C-3
CURFEW
Age Limitations, Hours Of Curfew .................................................................. 5-5-1
Parental Responsibility ................................................................................... 5-5-2
-D-
DEFINITIONS
Abandoned And Inoperative Vehicles .............................................................5-4-2
CATV Franchise ..............................................................................................9-3-1, 9-3-3L
Catchlines ......................................................................................................1-3-3
Code Of Ethics ...............................................................................................1-7-5
Construction Of Words ...................................................................................1-3-1
Cross-connection ...........................................................................................8-1-1
Definitions, General .........................................................................................1-3-2
Dogs ...............................................................................................................5-3B-1
Fair Housing ...................................................................................................2-3-2
Fiscal Year .....................................................................................................1 -3-2
Flood Hazard Areas .......................................................................................11-1-2
Garbage .........................................................................................................9-2-1
Industrial Waste .............................................................................................8-4-1
Itinerant Merchants and Vendors ...................................................................3-2-2
Junk Dealers ..................................................................................................3-3-1
Manufactured Home .......................................................................................11-1-2
Official Time ...................................................................................................1-3-2
Planning And Zoning Commission ..................................................................2-1-1
Sewer Use Regulations ...................................................................................8-4-1
Water Use Regulations ...................................................................................8-1-1
DEPOSITORIES, OFFICIAL ...................................................................................1-5-3
DEVELOPMENT CODE ..........................................................................................1-11-3
Adoption ..........................................................................................................1-11-3A
Copies On File ................................................................................................1-11-3B
City of Salmon
DISTURBING THE PEACE .....................................................................................5-2-9
-D- -D-
DOGS
Authority Of Animal Control Officer .................................................................5-3B-10
Definitions .......................................................................................................5-3B-1
Disposition Of Unclaimed Or Infected Animals ................................................5-3B-9
Retention Of Animals ..............................................................................5-3B-9A
Unredeemed Animals ..............................................................................5-3B-9B
Impoundment Procedures ...............................................................................5-3B-8
Licensed, Tagged Dog Running At Large ...............................................5-3B-8B
Unlicensed, Untagged Dog Running At Large.........................................5-3B-8A
Leash Requirements .......................................................................................5-3B-3
Failure To Have Leash ............................................................................5-3B-3B
Leash Required .......................................................................................5-3B-3A
Licensing .........................................................................................................5-3B-2
Application ...............................................................................................5-3B-2C3
Conditions ...............................................................................................5-3B-2C10
Exceptions ...............................................................................................5-3B-2A3
Exemptions .............................................................................................5-3B2C6
Fee ..........................................................................................................5-3B-2A1
Food, Water And Bedding Requirements ................................................5-3B-2C9
Kennels And Shelters ..............................................................................5-3B-2C7
Kennel Structure Specifications ..............................................................5-3B-2C8
License Required ....................................................................................5-3B-2A1, 5-3B-2C1
License Valid for ......................................................................................5-3B-2C2
Public Notices .........................................................................................5-3B-2C5
Rabies Vaccination, Proof Of ..................................................................5-3B-2A2
Renewal ..................................................................................................5-3B-2C4
Sanitation ................................................................................................5-3B-2C10
Tag And Collar ........................................................................................5-3B-2B
Unlicensed Dogs .....................................................................................5-3B-2D
Violations.................................................................................................5-3B-2C11
Muzzling ..........................................................................................................5-3B-4
Nuisance .........................................................................................................5-3B-7
Authority Of Animal Control Officer .........................................................5-3B-7E
Biting, Chasing Or Barking ......................................................................5-3B-7B
Complaint, Filing Of .................................................................................5-3B-7D
Destruction Of Property ...........................................................................5-3B-7A
Harboring Nuisance Prohibited ...............................................................5-3B-7C
Violation ..................................................................................................5-3B-7F
Prohibited Acts ................................................................................................5-3B-6
Dogs In City Parks Prohibited .................................................................5-3B-6B
Dogs Unrestrained in Parked Vehicle or Conveyance ............................5-3B-6C
Running At Large ....................................................................................5-3B-6A
Rabies; Notice .................................................................................................5-3B-5
City of Salmon
Removal From City Prohibited ................................................................5-3B-5B
-D- -F-
DOGS (cont)
Suspicion Of Rabies ................................................................................5-3B-5A
Violation An Infraction .....................................................................................5-3B-11
DUCKS (See Also ANIMAL CONTROL) .................................................................5-3A
-E-
ELECTION DAYS, SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ......................................3-1A-5A3
ELECTION ORDINANCES DEEMED SPECIAL .....................................................1-2-1
ELECTIONS
City Elections ..................................................................................................1-9-1
City Officers .....................................................................................................1 -6-1
Election Records .............................................................................................1-7A-2C
Initiative And Referendum ...............................................................................1-10-5
Polling Places ..................................................................................................1-9-3
Precincts .........................................................................................................1-9-2
ELECTRIC FENCES ...............................................................................................7-1-3
ENGINEER/SURVEYOR, CITY
Appointment ....................................................................................................1-7-1A, 1-7E-1
Qualifications ...................................................................................................1-7E-2
Removal From Office ......................................................................................1-7-1B
Salary ..............................................................................................................1-7-4
Term Of Office .................................................................................................1-7E-1
EXCAVATIONS, STREET .......................................................................................7-1-4
EXPLOSIVES, INFLAMMABLE LIQUIDS DECLARED NUISANCE .......................4-2-2I
-F-
FAIR HOUSING
Definitions .......................................................................................................2-3-2
Exclusions .......................................................................................................2-3-4
Fair Housing Commission ...............................................................................2-3-5
Chairman.................................................................................................2-3-5C
Counsel ...................................................................................................2-3-5D
Creation...................................................................................................2-3-5A
Membership ............................................................................................2-3-5A
Original Terms .........................................................................................2-3-5B
Powers And Duties ..................................................................................2-3-5E
Attempt To Eliminate Unfair Practice ............................................2-3-5E7
Complaints ...................................................................................2-3-5E3
Federal And State Laws ...............................................................2-3-5E17
Findings ........................................................................................2-3-5E11
City of Salmon
Hearings .......................................................................................2-3-5E8
-F- -F-
FAIR HOUSING (cont)
Investigation And Review .............................................................2-3-5E4
Issuance Of Complaint By Commission .......................................2-3-5E5
Meetings; Quorum ........................................................................2-3-5E2
Order Directed To Respondent ....................................................2-3-5E12
Order Dismissing Complaint .........................................................2-3-5E13
Power To Summons .....................................................................2-3-5E15
Probative Evidence.......................................................................2-3-5E9
Record Of Evidence .....................................................................2-3-5E10
Research And Study .....................................................................2-3-5E16
Rules And Regulations .................................................................2-3-5E1
Service Of Complaint(s) ...............................................................2-3-5E6
Service Of Order...........................................................................2-3-5E14
Term ........................................................................................................2-3-5A
Time Limitations ......................................................................................2-3-5F
Judicial Review And Penalties ........................................................................2-3-7
Remedies For Persons Accused Of Unfair Housing
Practices .........................................................................................................2-3-6
Title And Purpose ............................................................................................2-3-1
Unfair Housing Practices Forbidden ................................................................2-3-3
FEES, RATES, AND CHARGES
Animals Running At Large, Impoundment Fee ................................................5-3A-3
Beer, License For Sale Of ...............................................................................3-1 B-3
CATV Franchise
Franchise Fee .........................................................................................9-3-5A
Rates And Charges .................................................................................9-3-5B
Garbage Service Franchise
Franchise Fee .........................................................................................9-2-3C
Service Fees ...........................................................................................9-2-3B
Itinerant Merchants and Vendors, License ......................................................3-2-5
Liquor By The Drink, License For Sale Of .......................................................3-1 A-4
Livestock, Wild Animals
Impoundment Fee ...................................................................................5-3C-4A
Permit Fee ...............................................................................................5-3C-1C
Sanitary Sewer System
Disconnection/Restoration Charges ........................................................8-4-29A
Equivalent User Schedule .......................................................................8-4-25D
Monthly Sewer Rates ..............................................................................8-4-25
Service Call Charges ..............................................................................8-4-24
Service Line Installation Fee ...................................................................8-4-23
Sewer Connection Fee ............................................................................8-4-21
Sewer Main Construction Charge ...........................................................8-4-22
Sewer Service Discontinuance Fee ........................................................8-4-30
City of Salmon
-F- -F-
FEES, RATES, AND CHARGES (cont)
Sidewalks, Repair Of; Assessment Of Costs ..................................................7-1-1C
Street Excavation Permit Fee ..........................................................................7-1-4B
Water User Fees
Monthly Fees ...........................................................................................8-1-18
Restoration Or Discontinuance Fee ........................................................8-1-21 A
FINES (See Also PENALTY, GENERAL) ................................................................1-4
FIRE CODE ADOPTED, UNIFORM ........................................................................10-1-1A4
FIRE HYDRANTS
Drainage ..........................................................................................................8-1-25G4
Hydrant Leads .................................................................................................8-1-25G3
Location And Spacing .....................................................................................8-1-25G1
Valves And Nozzles ........................................................................................8-1-25G2
FIREARMS, DISCHARGE PROHIBITED ................................................................5-2-7
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Abrogation And Greater Restrictions ...............................................................11-1-3E
Administration .................................................................................................11-1-4
Corrective Procedures ............................................................................11-1-4D
Actions in Event of Failure to Take Corrective Action ...................11-1-4D2
Appeal ..........................................................................................11-1-4D4
Failure to Comply with Order ........................................................11-1-4D5
Order to Take Corrective Action ...................................................11-1-4D3
Variance Procedures ....................................................................11-1-4E
Conditions for Variances .....................................................11-1-4E8
Violations to be Corrected ............................................................11-1-4D1
Designation of Floodplain Ordinance Administrator ................................11-1-4A
Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator ....................11-1-4B
Floodplain Development Application, Permit, and Certification ...............11-1-4C
Application Requirements .............................................................11-1-4C1
Certification Requirements ...........................................................11-1-4C3
Determination for Existing Buildings and Structures .....................11-1-4C4
Permit Requirements ....................................................................11-1-4C2
Definitions .......................................................................................................11 -1 -2
Findings Of Fact ..............................................................................................11-1-1 B
Flood Hazard Areas ........................................................................................11-1
General Provisions ..........................................................................................11-1-3
Abrogation and Greater Restrictions .......................................................11-1-3E
Applicable Lands .....................................................................................11-1-3A
Basis For Special Flood Hazard Areas ...................................................11-1-3-B
Compliance .............................................................................................11-1-3D
Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit ...................................11-1-3C
Interpretation ...........................................................................................11-1-3F
Penalties for Violation .............................................................................11-1-3H
City of Salmon
Warning and Disclaimer of Liability .........................................................11-1-3G
-F- -G-
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION (cont.)
Legal Status Provisions ...................................................................................11-1-6
Objectives and Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses .......................................11-1-1D
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction ...........................................................11-1-5
General Standards .................................................................................11-1-5A
Specific Standards .................................................................................11-1-5B
Accessory Structures ....................................................................11-1-5B7
Additions/Improvements ................................................................11-1-5B4
Construction Below Grade Crawlspace .........................................11-1-5B9
Manufactured Homes ....................................................................11-1-5B3
Non-Residential Construction ........................................................11-1-5B2
Other Development in Regulated Floodways and Flood Fringe ....11-1-5B10
Recreational Vehicles ....................................................................11-1-5B5
Residential Construction ...............................................................11-1-5B1
Temporary Non-Residential Structures .........................................11-1-5B6
Tanks ............................................................................................11-1-5B8
Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (Zone AO, AH, AR/AO, or AR/AH) .. 11-1-5F
Standards for Floodplains Without Established Base Flood Elevations ..11-1-5C
Standards for Floodways and Flood Fringe Areas ..................................11-1-5E
Standards for Riverine Floodplains with Base Flood Elevations but without
Established Floodways or Flood Fringe Areas ........................................11-1-5D
Statement Of Purpose .....................................................................................11-1-1C
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose, and Interpretation ...........11-1-1
Findings of Fact .......................................................................................11-1-1B
Objectives and Methods of Reducing Flood Losses ...............................11-1-1D
Statutory Authority ...................................................................................11-1-1A
FOWL (See Also ANIMAL CONTROL) ...................................................................5-3A
FRANCHISE ORDINANCES DEEMED SPECIAL ..................................................1-2-1
FRANCHISES
CATV Franchise ......................................................................................................9-3
Garbage Service Franchise .............................................................................9-2
Power Franchise .............................................................................................9-1
FUNDS
Wastewater Collection And Treatment System Improvement
Fund .............................................................................................................8-4-31
Water System Improvement Fund ...................................................................8-1-23
FUNERAL PROCESSIONS ....................................................................................6-1-4
-G-
GAMBLING PROHIBITED ......................................................................................3-1A-7B
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Burning Prohibited ...........................................................................................4-3-2
City of Salmon
-G- -H-
GARBAGE AND REFUSE (cont)
Containers And Disposal .................................................................................4-3-1
Compliance Required ..............................................................................4-3-1 C
Litter Prohibited .......................................................................................4-3-1 B
Specifications ..........................................................................................4-3-1 A
Refuse Accumulation Declared Nuisance .......................................................4-2-2D
GARBAGE SERVICE FRANCHISE ........................................................................9-2
Assignment Of Franchise ................................................................................9-2-6
Comprehensive Liability Insurance .................................................................9-2-5
Extension Of City Limits ..................................................................................9-2-9
Forfeiture .........................................................................................................9-2-7
Grant Of Franchise ..........................................................................................9-2-1
Indemnity .........................................................................................................9-2-4
Police Power ...................................................................................................9-2-8
Specific Conditions ..........................................................................................9-2-3
Compliance With Regulations .................................................................9-2-3d
Franchise Fee .........................................................................................9-2-3C
Garbage Trucks ......................................................................................9-2-3A
Service Fees ...........................................................................................9-2-3B
Term ................................................................................................................9-2-2
GEESE (See Also ANIMAL CONTROL) .................................................................5-3A
GENERAL OFFENSES
Code Adopted, State .......................................................................................5-2-1
Encouraging Delinquency ...............................................................................5-2-3
Firearms, Discharge ........................................................................................5-2-7
Issuance Of Citations ......................................................................................5-2-2
Loudspeakers Or Sound Trucks ......................................................................5-2-4
Open Container Law .......................................................................................5-2-8
Playing Ball On Streets ...................................................................................5-2-5
Water Flowing Upon Streets ...........................................................................5-2-6
GENERAL PENALTY (See Also PENALTY, GENERAL) ........................................1-4
-H-
HORSES (See Also ANIMAL CONTROL) ...............................................................5-3A
HOURS
Beer, Hours For Sale Of ..................................................................................3-1B-7D
CATV Franchise
Educational And Governmental Access Programming ............................9-3-3P
System Office Hours And Telephone Availability ....................................9-3-3L
City Park, Hours of Use ...................................................................................7-2-2
Liquor by the Drink, Hours of Sale ..................................................................3-1A-5
Snowmobile, Hours of Operation ....................................................................6-4-3L
City of Salmon
Sprinkler Systems, Hours of Use ....................................................................8-3-2B1
-H- -I-
HYDRANTS (see FIRE HYDRANTS) ......................................................................8-1-25
- I-
IMPOUNDMENT
Abandoned and Inoperative Vehicles ..............................................................5-4-10
Animals Running at Large ...............................................................................5-3A-3
Dogs
Procedure for Licensed, Tagged Dog Running at Large .........................5-3B-8B
Procedure for Unlicensed, Untagged Dog Running at Large ..................5-3B-8A
Livestock, Wild Animals ...................................................................................5-3C-4
IMPROVEMENT ORDINANCES DEEMED SPECIAL ............................................1-2-1
INFLAMMABLE LIQUIDS, EXPLOSIVES DECLARED NUISANCE .......................4-2-2I
INFRACTION ..........................................................................................................1-4-1B
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM, CITY
Ballot, Form of .................................................................................................1-10-5
Creation of Rights ...........................................................................................1-10-1
Petition
Election ...................................................................................................1-10-5
Requirements ..........................................................................................1-10-3
Time for Filing .........................................................................................1-10-4
Petitioners, Number Required .........................................................................1-10-2
INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS
Backflow Prevention Device Inspection...........................................................8-2-2F
Beer License, Investigation of Applicant..........................................................3-1 B-4
Cross-Connection Inspection ..........................................................................8-2-3
Fair Housing Commission, Investigations by ...................................................2-3-5E4
Itinerant Merchants and Vendors License, Investigation for ............................3-2-4B
Side Sewer Extension or Repair Inspection ....................................................8-4-12
INTOXICATING INHALANTS (SEE LIQUOR AND INTOXICATING
INHALANTS CONTROL) .....................................................................................5-2-8
IRRIGATION WATER
Days of Use .....................................................................................................8-3-1
Even-Numbered Days .............................................................................8-3-1 A
Odd-Numbered Days ..............................................................................8-3-1 B
Thirty First Day of Month .........................................................................8-3-1 C
Penalty ............................................................................................................8-3-3
Sprinkler Systems; Restrictive Devices ...........................................................8-3-2
Hoses .....................................................................................................8-3-2A
Sprinkler Systems ...................................................................................8-3-2B
Anti-Siphon Valves ..........................................................................................8-3-2B3
Discharge ........................................................................................................8-3-2B2
City of Salmon
Hours of Use ...................................................................................................8-3-2B1
-I- -L-
ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND VENDORS
Application, Required Information ...................................................................3-2-3
Definition .........................................................................................................3-2-2
Invitation to Peddle or Solicit Required............................................................3-2-6
Issuance of License ........................................................................................3-2-4
Investigation ............................................................................................3-2-4B
Issuance ..................................................................................................3-2-4A
License Fee .....................................................................................................3-2-5
Extension ................................................................................................3-2-5B
Fee ..........................................................................................................3-2-5A
Form of Payment .....................................................................................3-2-5C
License Revocation .........................................................................................3-2-8
Penalty ............................................................................................................3-2-9
Prohibited Acts ................................................................................................3-2-7
Purpose ...........................................................................................................3-2-1
-J-
JUNK, ACCUMULATIONS DECLARED NUISANCE ..............................................4-2-2M
JUNK DEALERS .....................................................................................................3-3
Definitions .......................................................................................................3-3-1
Junk Enclosed Within Building Or Fence ........................................................3-3-2
Noncompliance A Nuisance ............................................................................3-3-3
Penalty ............................................................................................................3-3-5
Storage Of Junk ..............................................................................................3-3-4
-K-
KENNEL, DOG; LICENSE ......................................................................................5-3B-2C
-L-
LAND DEVELOPMENT, A PART OF DEVELOPMENT CODE ..............................1-11-3
LAW
Leash ..............................................................................................................5-3B-3
Open Container ...............................................................................................5-2-8
LEGAL ADVISOR, CITY .........................................................................................1-7C-2
LICENSES, PERMITS, AND CERTIFICATES
Beer, Sale Of ...................................................................................................3-1B-1
Building Permits ..............................................................................................10-1-3
Cross-Connection Control Devices, Installation Permits .................................8-2-4
Dog Kennel License ........................................................................................5-3B-2C
Dog License ....................................................................................................5-3B-2
Engineer, City; State License Required...........................................................1-7E-2
Flood Hazard Areas, Development Permit ......................................................11-1-5
City of Salmon
Issuance By Clerk ...........................................................................................1-7A-2C
-L- -L-
LICENSES, PERMITS, AND CERTIFICATES (cont.)
Liquor By The Drink, License For Sale Of .......................................................3-1 A-1
Livestock, Wild Animals; Permit ......................................................................5-3C-1A
Loading And Unloading Permit ........................................................................6-2-1 B
Parades And Processions Permit ....................................................................6-1-4D
Sanitary Sewer System
Connection To Sewer System Permit .....................................................8-4-11B
Excavation Permit ...................................................................................8-4-11C
Installation Or Alteration Of Sewer Line Permit .......................................8-4-11 A
Street Excavation Permit .................................................................................7-1-4B
Water System
Application For Connection Permit ..........................................................8-1-9B
As-Built Plans, Engineer Certification ......................................................8-1-26B
Connection To Public Water Main Line Permit ........................................8-1-9B
Excavation Permit ...................................................................................8-1-9C
Installation Or Alteration Of System Or Service Line
Permit ......................................................................................................8-1-9A
Wine By The Drink, Sale Of ............................................................................3-1 C-1
LIQUOR AND INTOXICATING INHALANTS CONTROL
Adoption Of State Laws...................................................................................3-1-1
Adoption ..................................................................................................3-1-1 A
Copies On File ........................................................................................3-1-1 B
Beer Regulations .............................................................................................3-1 B
Application For License ...........................................................................3-1 B-2
Grant Or Denial Of Application ................................................................3-1 B-5
Hearing And Appeals On License Denials, Suspension
Or Revocation .........................................................................................3-1 B-8
Investigation Of Applicant........................................................................3-1 B-4
License Classification And Fees .............................................................3-1 B-3
Classifications Of Licenses ...........................................................3-1B-3B
Fees .............................................................................................3-1B-3A
License Period ........................................................................................3-1 B-5
License Required ....................................................................................3-1 B-1
Limitations And Conditions Of License ....................................................3-1 B-7
Hours Of Sale ...............................................................................3-1B-7D
License For One Location Only ....................................................3-1B-7A
License To Be Posted ..................................................................3-1B-7C
Transfer Of License ......................................................................3-1B-7B
Record Of Proceedings ...........................................................................3-1 B-6
Minutes .........................................................................................3-1B-6B
Retention Of Record; Transcription ..............................................3-1B-6A
Violation And Penalty ..............................................................................3-1 B-9
Container, Open ..............................................................................................5-2-8
City of Salmon
Liquor By The Drink .......................................................................................3-1A
-L- -L-
LIQUOR AND INTOXICATING INHALANTS CONTROL (cont.)
Access To Premises ...............................................................................3-1 A-6
Applicant, Location Restrictions ..............................................................3-1 A-3
Application For License ...........................................................................3-1 A-2
Council Approval ..........................................................................3-1A-2B
Required Information ....................................................................3-1A-2A
Conditions Of License; Fee .....................................................................3-1 A-4
License Fee ..................................................................................3-1A-4A
Term Of License ...........................................................................3-1A-4B
Transferability ...............................................................................3-1A-4C
Hours Of Sale ..........................................................................................3-1A-5
License Required ....................................................................................3-1 A-1
License Revocation; Hearing ..................................................................3-1 A-8
Prohibited Sales And Conduct ................................................................3-1 A-7
Gambling ......................................................................................3-1A-7B
Underage, Intoxicated Or Disorderly Persons ..............................3-1A-7A
Open Container Law .......................................................................................5-2-8
Possession, Consumption, and Transportation of Alcoholic Beverages
And Intoxicating Inhalants ...............................................................................5-2-8
Wine By The Drink ..........................................................................................3-1 C
License Fee And Term ............................................................................3-1 C-2
License Required ....................................................................................3-1 C-1
Violation And Penalty ..............................................................................3-1 C-3
LIVESTOCK; WILD ANIMALS
Cruelty To Animals Prohibited .........................................................................5-3C-3
Impoundment ..................................................................................................5-3C-4
Failure To Redeem .................................................................................5-3C-4B
Fee ..........................................................................................................5-3C-4A
Notice ......................................................................................................5-3C-4A
Recovery Of Possession .........................................................................5-3C-4C
Redemption .............................................................................................5-3C-4A
Penalty ............................................................................................................5-3C-5
Permit ..............................................................................................................5-3C-1
Application; Fee ......................................................................................5-3C-1 C
Exception ................................................................................................5-3C-1 E
Permit Required ......................................................................................5-3C-1 A
Term ........................................................................................................5-3C-1 D
Regulations .....................................................................................................5-3C-1 B
Running At Large Prohibited ...........................................................................5-3C-2
LOUD NOISES ........................................................................................................5-2-9
LOUDSPEAKERS OR SOUND TRUCKS ...............................................................5-2-4
City of Salmon
-M- -N-
-M-
MAYOR, CITY (See Also COUNCIL, CITY)
Appointments By
Attorney, City ...........................................................................................1-7-1A. 1-7C-1
Chief Of Police ........................................................................................1-7-1A
Clerk, City ................................................................................................1-7-1A, 1-7A-1
Engineer, City ..........................................................................................1-7-1A, 1-7E-1
Fair Housing Commission Chairman .......................................................2-3-5C
Fair Housing Commissioners ..................................................................2-3-5A
Planning And Zoning Commission ..........................................................2-1-2
Superintendent Of Public Works .............................................................1-7-1A, 1-7D-1
Treasurer/Finance Director, City .............................................................1-7-1A, 1-7B-1
Election ...........................................................................................................1-6-1
Powers And Duties ..........................................................................................1-6-2D
Qualifications ...................................................................................................1-6-2A
Salary ..............................................................................................................1-6-4A
Term Of Office .................................................................................................1 -6-2B
Vacancy In Office ............................................................................................1-6-2C
MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED ...........................................................................10-1-1A5
MEETINGS
City Council .....................................................................................................1 -6-5
City Council And City Employees ....................................................................1-8-3D
Fair Housing Commission ...............................................................................2-3-5E2
Planning And Zoning Commission ..................................................................2-1-4
METERS, WATER; INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE ...................................8-1-12
MINORS
Alcoholic Beverages, Sale To .........................................................................3-1A-7A1
Curfew Regulations .........................................................................................5-5
Encouraging Delinquency ...............................................................................5-2-3
Snowmobile Operation ....................................................................................6-4-3N
MISDEMEANOR .....................................................................................................1-4-1
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
General Traffic Provisions ...............................................................................6-1
Parking Regulations ........................................................................................6-2
Snowmobile Operations ..................................................................................6-4
MOTORCYCLES, RIDING ON ................................................................................6-1-7E
MUNICIPAL CODE, OFFICIAL ...............................................................................1-1
MUZZLING, DOGS .................................................................................................5-3B-4
-N-
NEPOTISM .............................................................................................................1-7-5D5
City of Salmon
NEWSPAPER, OFFICIAL .......................................................................................1-5-4
-N- -N-
NOISE
Loud Speakers or Sound Trucks .....................................................................5-2-4
Unnecessary; Declared Nuisance ...................................................................4-2-2J
NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
Abandoned and Inoperative Vehicles
Hearing....................................................................................................5-4-9A
Impoundment ..........................................................................................5-4-9B
Removal ..................................................................................................5-4-5
Abatement of Nuisance ...................................................................................4-2-3
CATV Franchise
Educational and Governmental Access ..................................................9-3-3P
Public Hearing .........................................................................................9-3-11 C
Revocation ..............................................................................................9-3-11 E
Service of Notices ...................................................................................9-3-14
Violation ..................................................................................................9-3-11 A
Development Activity .......................................................................................1-11-2E
Impounded Animals, Sale ...............................................................................5-3A-4
Itinerant Merchant and Vendor, Revocation of License ...................................3-2-8
Liquor by the Drink, Revocation of License .....................................................3-1 A-8
Livestock, Wild Animals; Impoundment ...........................................................5-3C-4A
Nuisances, Appeal of Decision of Hearing Officer ...........................................4-2-8A
Reciprocal Notice of Changes in Plans and Ordinances .................................1-11-2E
Sewer User Fees, Delinquency .......................................................................8-4-29
Sidewalk, Repair .............................................................................................7-1-1 B
Water User Fees, Delinquency .......................................................................8-1-21 A
NOXIOUS FUMES, SMOKE DECLARED NUISANCE ...........................................4-2-2G
NOXIOUS WEEDS DECLARED NUISANCE ..........................................................4-2-2F
NUISANCES
Abandoned and Inoperative Vehicles ..............................................................5-4-3B
Abandoned Refrigerators ................................................................................4-2-2N
Abatement by City ........................................................................................... 4-2-6
Carcasses ....................................................................................................... 4-2-2C
Contents of Notice to Abate ............................................................................ 4-2-4
Abatement by City ................................................................................... 4-2-4E
Acts Necessary ....................................................................................... 4-2-4D
Description .............................................................................................. 4-2-4C
Location................................................................................................... 4-2-4B
Order to Abate or Request for Hearing ................................................... 4-2-4A
Costs of Abatement, Collection of ................................................................... 4-2-7
Defined ............................................................................................................ 4-2-2
Diseased Animals Running at Large ............................................................... 4-2-2A
City of Salmon
Excavations ..................................................................................................... 4-2-2K
Explosives ....................................................................................................... 4-2-2I
-N- -O-
NUISANCES (cont.)
Fire Hazards .................................................................................................... 4-2-2Q
Inflammable Liquids ........................................................................................ 4-2-2I
Junk Accumulation .......................................................................................... 4-2-2M
Junk Dealers, Noncompliance with Code ........................................................ 3-3-4
Method of Service ........................................................................................... 4-2-5
Motor Vehicles, Disassembled ........................................................................ 4-2-2P
Noise, Unnecessary ........................................................................................ 4-2-2J
Notice to Abate ................................................................................................ 4-2-3
Noxious Fumes ............................................................................................... 4-2-2G
Noxious Weeds ............................................................................................... 4-2-2F
Obstructions .................................................................................................... 4-2-2K
Peddling or Soliciting Without Invitation .......................................................... 3-2-6
Penalty ............................................................................................................ 4-2-9
Pollution ..................................................................................................... 4-2-2E
Prohibited .................................................................................................... 4-2-1
Refuse Accumulation ...................................................................................... 4-2-2D
Request for Hearing and Appeal ..................................................................... 4-2-8
Decision of Hearing Officer; Appeal ........................................................ 4-2-8B
Request for Hearing ................................................................................ 4-2-8A
Smoke ............................................................................................................. 4-2-2G
Stagnant Water ............................................................................................... 4-2-2B
Unlawful Condition or Use of Premises ........................................................... 4-2-2O
Unsafe Buildings ............................................................................................. 4-2-2H
Uses Gathering Large Crowds ........................................................................ 4-2-2L
Vibrations, Annoying ....................................................................................... 4-2-2J
-O-
OFFENSES, GENERAL (see GENERAL OFFENSES) .......................................... 5-2
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES, CITY .................................................................... 1-7
Animal Control Officer ..................................................................................... 5-3B, 5-3B-10
Appointment and Removal of Officers ............................................................. 1-7-1
Attorney, City ................................................................................................... 1 -7C
Bonds of Officers ............................................................................................. 1 -7-3
Clerk ................................................................................................................ 1-7A
Code of Ethics ................................................................................................. 1 -7-5
Conflict of Interest ...................................................................................1-7-5D
Disclosing Confidential Information ..............................................1-7-5D4
Nepotism ......................................................................................1-7-5D5
Public Disclosure of Financial or Personal Interest.......................1-7-5D1
City of Salmon
Receiving Gifts .............................................................................1-7-5D3
Representation of Private Persons ...............................................1-7-5D2
-O- -O-
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES, CITY (cont.)
Declaration of Policy ...............................................................................1-7-5A
Definitions ...............................................................................................1-7-5B
Fair and Equal Treatment........................................................................1-7-5C
Election of Officers ..........................................................................................1-6-1
Engineer, City ..................................................................................................1-7E
Liability ............................................................................................................1 -4-3
Public Works Superintendent ..........................................................................1-7D
Salaries of Appointive Officers ........................................................................1-7-4
Terms of Office ................................................................................................1 -7-2
Treasurer/Finance Director, City .....................................................................1-7B
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
Corporate Limits ..............................................................................................1-5-1
Annexation Ordinances ...........................................................................1-5-1B
City Map Adopted ....................................................................................1-5-1A
Corporate Seal ................................................................................................1-5-2
Official Depositories ........................................................................................1-5-3
Official Newspaper ..........................................................................................1-5-4
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
Acceptance .....................................................................................................1-1-2
Amendments ...................................................................................................1-1-3
Code Alterations .............................................................................................1-1-4
Definitions, General .........................................................................................1-3-2
Penalty, General .............................................................................................1-4-1
Saving Clause .................................................................................................1-2
Title .................................................................................................................1-1-1
ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, AND MOTIONS
City Attorney, Prepared by ..............................................................................1-7C-2C
Ordinances of the City .....................................................................................1-6-7
Special Ordinances
Annexations ............................................................................................1-2-1
Appropriations .........................................................................................1-2-1
Bonds ......................................................................................................1-2-1
Boundaries, Relating to ..........................................................................1-2-1
Contracts .................................................................................................1-2-1
Elections..................................................................................................1-2-1
Franchises ...............................................................................................1-2-1
Improvements .........................................................................................1-2-1
Real Estate, Relating to Transfer or Acceptance ....................................1-2-1
Salaries ...................................................................................................1-2-1
City of Salmon
Streets, Alleys or Other Public Places; Ordinances
Establishing, Naming or Vacating ...........................................................1-2-1
-O- -P-
ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, AND MOTIONS (cont.)
Tax Levies ...............................................................................................1-2-1
Warrants, Issuance of ............................................................................1-2-1
-P-
PARADES AND PROCESSIONS, PERMIT REQUIRED ........................................6-1-4D
PARENTAL CONTROL DEVICES, CATV FRANCHISE .........................................9-3-3M
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY, CURFEW FOR MINORS .....................................5-5-2
PARK (see CITY PARK) .........................................................................................7-2
PARKING REGULATIONS
Adjacent to Schools ........................................................................................6-2-7
Angle Parking ..................................................................................................6-2-2
Leaving Vehicle Unattended ...........................................................................6-2-11
Lights on Parked Vehicles ...............................................................................6-2-10
Narrow Streets ................................................................................................6-2-8
Obstructing Traffic ...........................................................................................6-2-4
One-Way Streets .............................................................................................6-2-9
Parking Prohibited in Specific Places ..............................................................6-2-3
Parking Spaces for Persons with Disabilities ..................................................6-2-12
Parking Tickets and Procedures .....................................................................6-2-13
Penalty ............................................................................................................6-2-14
Prohibited Parking ...........................................................................................6-2-5
Business District ......................................................................................6-2-5C
Certain Purposes ....................................................................................6-2-5D
Extended Parking ....................................................................................6-2-5B
Near Hazardous or Congested Places ....................................................6-2-5F
Parking in Alleys ......................................................................................6-2-5A
Prohibited During Certain Hours .............................................................6-2-5E
Standing or Parking Close to Curb ..................................................................6-2-1
Parallel Parking .......................................................................................6-2-1 A
Permit for Loading or Unloading at Angle to Curb ...................................6-2-1 B
Time Limited ....................................................................................................6-2-7
PEDDLERS (see ITINERANT MERCHANTS) ........................................................3-2
PENALTY, GENERAL
Application of Provisions .................................................................................1-4-2
Civil Penalty ....................................................................................................1-4-1C
Criminal Penalty ..............................................................................................1-4-1C
Infraction .........................................................................................................1-4-1B
Liability of Officers ...................................................................................1-4-3
City of Salmon
Misdemeanor ..................................................................................................1-4-1 A
-P- -P-
PERSONNEL COMMITTEE
Appointment ....................................................................................................1-8-4
Duties ..............................................................................................................1-8-3C, 1-8-4
PERSONNEL OFFICER
Designation of Position....................................................................................1-8-3A
Duties and Responsibilities .............................................................................1-8-3B
Advise City Council .................................................................................1-8-3B4
Annual Report .........................................................................................1-8-3B5
Encourage and Exercise Leadership ......................................................1-8-3B1
Enforcement of Policies ..........................................................................1-8-3B7
Investigation of Law and Policies ............................................................1-8-3B2
Personnel Records ..................................................................................1-8-3B3
Programs for Improvement ......................................................................1-8-3B6
PERSONNEL SYSTEM, CITY
Administration .................................................................................................1-8-3
Meetings ..........................................................................................................1-8-3D
Personnel Committee ......................................................................................1-8-3C
Designation of Position for Duties ...........................................................1-8-3A
Duties and Responsibilities .....................................................................1-8-3B
Agreements Authorized ...................................................................................1-8-6
Cooperate with Governmental Agencies .................................................1-8-6B
Reciprocal Agreements ...........................................................................1-8-6A
Classified Service ............................................................................................1 -8-2
Exceptions ...............................................................................................1-8-2A
Use of Service .........................................................................................1 -8-2B
Personnel Committee ......................................................................................1-8-4
Personnel Policies and Procedures ................................................................1-8-5
Administration .........................................................................................1-8-5C
Adoption ..................................................................................................1-8-5A
Copies of File ..........................................................................................1-8-5B
Political Activity, Prohibition Against ...............................................................1-8-7
Purpose ...........................................................................................................1-8-1
Establishing Pay Rates ...........................................................................1-8-1B
Fair Treatment of Applicants and Employees ..........................................1-8-1E
Recruiting, Selecting and Advancing Employees ....................................1-8-1 A
Retention of Employees ..........................................................................1-8-1D
Training Employees ................................................................................1-8-1C
Unlawful Acts Prohibited .................................................................................1-8-8
Falsifying Statements or Certificates .......................................................1-8-8A
Influencing of Appointment or Promotion ................................................1-8-8B
City of Salmon
-P- -P-
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT, CITY
Area of City Impact ..........................................................................................1-11-2
Boundaries ..............................................................................................1-11-2A
Comprehensive Plan ...............................................................................1-11-2B
Notice of Development Activity ................................................................1-11-2E
Reciprocal Notice of Changes in Plans and Ordinances .........................1-11-2E
Subdivision Ordinance ............................................................................1-11-2D
Transfer of Jurisdictions ..........................................................................1-11-2F
Zoning Ordinance ....................................................................................1-11-2C
Comprehensive Plan .......................................................................................1-11-1
Development Code .........................................................................................1-11-3
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Appointment of Commission ...........................................................................2-1-3
Creation of Commission ..................................................................................2-1-2
Definitions .......................................................................................................2-1-1
Duties ..............................................................................................................2-1-5
Rules; Organization and Meetings ..................................................................2-1-4
PLAYING BALL ON STREETS PROHIBITED ........................................................5-2-5
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Appointments ..................................................................................................5-1-1
Chief of Police .................................................................................................5-1-12
Appointment ............................................................................................5-1-2A
Custody of Recovered Property ..............................................................5-1-2D
Duties ......................................................................................................5-1-2C
Enforcement of Code ..............................................................................5-1-2C2
Records and Reports ..............................................................................5-1-2C1
Rank ........................................................................................................5-1-2B
Department Created ........................................................................................5-1-1
Jurisdiction ......................................................................................................5-1-5
Police Training Aid ..........................................................................................5-1-6
Powers and Duties of Department Members ...................................................5-1-4
Arrest Powers ..........................................................................................5-1-4B
Generally .................................................................................................5-1-4A
Qualifications ...................................................................................................5-1-1
Supervision of Police Officers .........................................................................5-1-3
POLICE REGULATIONS
Abandoned and Inoperative Vehicles ..............................................................5-4
Animal Control .................................................................................................5-3
Animals ...................................................................................................5-3A
Dogs ........................................................................................................5-3B
City of Salmon
Livestock; Wild Animals...........................................................................5-3C
Curfew .............................................................................................................5-5
-P- -P-
POLICE REGULATIONS (cont.)
Fair Housing ....................................................................................................2-3
General Offenses ............................................................................................5-2
Police Department ...........................................................................................5-1
PORTABLE TOILETS
Allowed Uses..................................................................................................4-4-2
American With Disabilities Act Requirements.................................................4-4-5
Application for Waiver ....................................................................................4-4-6
Effect on Existing Self-Contained Portable Toilets .........................................4-4-7
Maintenance Requirements ...........................................................................4-4-4
Prohibited Uses ..............................................................................................4-4-3
Self-Contained Portable Toilets Defined ........................................................4-4-1
Violation – Penalty ..........................................................................................4-4-8
POULTRY (see ANIMAL CONTROL) .....................................................................5-3A
POWER FRANCHISE ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE........................9-1-1
PRECINCTS, ELECTION ........................................................................................1-9-2
PROCESSIONS, FUNERAL AND OTHER .............................................................6-1-4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Garbage And Refuse ......................................................................................4-3
Nuisances .......................................................................................................4-2
PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES ............................................................................1-2-2
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
City Parks ........................................................................................................7-2
Ordinances Relating To...................................................................................1-2-2
Salmon Valley Center......................................................................................7-5
Meeting Room Fees ...................................................................................7-5-1
Streets, Sidewalks And Public Ways ..........................................................7-1
PUBLIC WAYS, USE OF
Central Business District Restrictions .............................................................7-3-1
Business District Definition .......................................................................7-3-3
Enforcement ............................................................................................7-3-6
Exceptions ................................................................................................7-3-5
Operation Of Bicycles, Skateboards, Scooters,
Unicycles, Rollerblades, And Wheeled Conveyances .....................................7-3-1
Use In The Central Business District .......................................................7-3-2
Pedestrian Bridge ............................................................................................7-3-4
Penalties .........................................................................................................7-3-6
Severability ......................................................................................................7-3-7
Sidewalks, Restrictions On Use Of .................................................................7-3-2
City of Salmon
PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT (See Also
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS) ....................................................1-7D
-P- -S-
PUBLICATION AND POSTING
Beer, License For Sale Of ...............................................................................3-1B-7C
Nuisance, Posting Notice To Abate .................................................................4-2-5 -Q-
QUORUM
City Council .....................................................................................................1 -6-6
Fair Housing Commission ...............................................................................2-3-5E2
-R-
RABIES
Proof Of Vaccination Required ........................................................................5-3B-2A2
Removal Of Animal From City Prohibited ........................................................5-3B-5B
Suspicion Of ....................................................................................................5-3B-5A
REAL ESTATE, ORDINANCES RELATING TO TRANSFER OR
ACCEPTANCE OF ..............................................................................................1-2-1
RECORD-HERALD, OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER .......................................................1-5-4
RECOVERED PROPERTY, CUSTODY OF ...........................................................5-1-2D
REFERENDUM AND INITIATIVE (See INITIATIVE AND
REFERENDUM, CITY)
REFUSE (See Also GARBAGE AND REFUSE) .....................................................4-3, 4-2-2D
REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES .................................................................1-2-1
REPTILE (See Also LIVESTOCK; WILD ANIMALS) ...............................................5-3C
REVISED CODE OF ORDINANCES ......................................................................1-1
REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION
CATV Franchise, Revocation ..........................................................................9-3-11 E
Itinerant Merchant and Vendor, Revocation Of License ..................................3-2-8
Liquor By The Drink, License For Sale Of .......................................................3-1 A-8
ROLLERBLADES RESTRICTED IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS
DISTRICT ..............................................................................................................7-3-2
RUNNING AT LARGE
Animals ...........................................................................................................5-3A-1
Diseased Animals ...........................................................................................4-2-2A
Impoundment Procedure For Dogs Running At Large ...................................5-3B-8
Livestock ........................................................................................................5-3C-2
Poultry .............................................................................................................5-3A-2
-S-
SALARIES (See COMPENSATION, SALARIES)
SALARY ORDINANCES DEEMED SPECIAL .........................................................1-2-1
City of Salmon
SALMON CITY CODE .............................................................................................1-1
-S- -S-
SALMON VALLEY CENTER (USE OF)
Meeting Room Fees ........................................................................................7-5-1
SAVING CLAUSE
Court Proceedings ..........................................................................................1 -2-3
Public Utility Ordinances .................................................................................1-2-2
Public Ways ....................................................................................................1-2-2
Repeal Of General Provisions .........................................................................1-2-1
Severability Clause .........................................................................................1-2-4
SCOOTERS RESTRICTED IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS
DISTRICT ................................................................................................................7-3-2
SELF-CONTAINED PORTABLE TOILETS .............................................................4-4
SERVICE OF NOTICE
CATV Franchise ..............................................................................................9-3-14
Nuisance Abatement .......................................................................................4-2-5
SEVERABILITY CLAUSE .......................................................................................1-2-4, 9-3-16
SEWER SYSTEM DESIGN .....................................................................................8-4-33
Compliance With State Health Department Requirements..............................8-4-33B
Depth...............................................................................................................8-4-33D
Design .............................................................................................................8-4-33K
Drawings .........................................................................................................8-4-33J
Lateral Sewer Line Connections And Manholes ..............................................8-4-33H
Location Of Manholes .....................................................................................8-4-33F
Location Of Water And Sewer Lines And Storm Drains ..................................8-4-331
Plans Signed By Registered Professional Engineer ........................................8-4-33A
Sewer Mainline Drop Through Manholes ........................................................8-4-33G
Size And Capacity ...........................................................................................8-4-33C
Slope ...............................................................................................................8-4-33E
SEWER USE REGULATIONS
Approval Required For Wastewater ................................................................8-4-5
As-Built Drawings And Engineer's Certification ...............................................8-4-34
Certification By Engineer .........................................................................8-4-34B
Drawings .................................................................................................8-4-34A
Billing Procedure And Period ..........................................................................8-4-27
Deposit Required ....................................................................................8-4-27D
Deposits In Reserve Account .......................................................8-4-27D2
Credit to Account ..........................................................................8-4-27D4
Funds Returned, No Interest Paid On ..........................................8-4-27D7
In the Event of Account in Arrears ................................................8-4-27D5
Owner Tenant or Lessee To Pay Deposit .....................................8-4-27D1
Transferable .................................................................................8-4-27D3
City of Salmon
Upon Vacating Premises ..............................................................8-4-27D6
Waiver for Certain Circumstances ...............................................8-4-27E
-S- -S-
SEWER USE REGULATIONS (cont.)
Due Date, Payment For Service ..............................................................8-4-28
Initial Billing .............................................................................................8-4-27C
Monthly Statement ..................................................................................8-4-27B
Rate ........................................................................................................8-4-27A
Citation; Appearance .......................................................................................8-4-36
Connection Fee ...............................................................................................8-4-21
Exception ................................................................................................8-4-21 B
Rates .......................................................................................................8-4-21A
Construction Plans, Specifications And Inspection .........................................8-4-15
Definition Of Terms .........................................................................................8-4-1
Delinquent Accounts .......................................................................................8-4-29
Discontinuance Of Service ......................................................................8-4-29B
Restoration Costs ....................................................................................8-4-29C
Shutoff Order; Disconnection/Restoration Charges ................................8-4-29A
Discontinuance Fee ........................................................................................8-4-30
Extensions .......................................................................................................8-4-19
Contiguous To City ..................................................................................8-4-19B
Within The City ........................................................................................8-4-19A
Failure To Appear Unlawful .............................................................................8-4-37
Interceptor Or Removal Facilities Required To Remove
Harmful Ingredients .........................................................................................8-4-9
Industrial Wastes .............................................................................................8-4-17
Collection and Treatment Fees ...............................................................8-4-17C
Industrial Waste Fees......................................................................................8-4-17B
Report of Waste to be Discharged ..........................................................8-4-17A
Liability ............................................................................................................8-4-38
Metered Service ..............................................................................................8-4-26
Monthly Sewer Rates ......................................................................................8-4-25
Basis For Rates .......................................................................................8-4-25B
Equivalent User .......................................................................................8-4-25C
Equivalent User Schedule .......................................................................8-4-25D
General ...................................................................................................8-4-25A
Review And Revisions Of Rates .............................................................8-4-25G
Special Users ..........................................................................................8-4-25F
Surcharge For Excessive Strength ..........................................................8-4-25E
User Request For Rate Change .............................................................8-4-25H
Penalty ............................................................................................................8-4-39
Permits Required ............................................................................................8-4-11
Application For Connection ....................................................................8-4-11B
Excavation Permit ..................................................................................8-4-11C
City of Salmon
Installation Or Alteration Of Sanitary Sewer Line ...................................8-4-11 A
Prohibited Discharges .....................................................................................8-4-4
-S- -S-
SEWER USE REGULATIONS (cont.)
Refusal of Use Of System ...............................................................................8-4-6
Right To Enter Premises For Inspection..........................................................8-4-16
Conflict ...................................................................................................8-4-16B
Inspection ..............................................................................................8-4-16A
Right To Revoke Permission ...........................................................................8-4-14
Sanitary Sewer
Connection Required .............................................................................8-4-2
Injury To Or Tampering With System Unlawful ......................................8-4-8
Service Call Charges.......................................................................................8-4-24
Service Lines
Installation And Maintenance ..................................................................8-4-13
Installation By City ........................................................................8-4-13A
Installation By Other Than City Personnel ....................................8-4-13B
Installation Fee ........................................................................................8-4-23
Rate ..............................................................................................8-4-23A
Review Of Fees And Costs ..........................................................8-4-23B
Requirement And Maintenance ...............................................................8-4-7
Existing Branch Service Lines ......................................................8-4-7B
Independent Sewer Service Line Required ..................................8-4-7A
Maintenance ............................................................................................8-4-7C
Sewer Main Construction Charge ...................................................................8-4-22
Property Being Annexed .........................................................................8-4-22B
Rate ........................................................................................................8-4-22A
Sewer System
Design .....................................................................................................8-4-33
Materials And Installation ........................................................................8-4-32
City Approval ................................................................................8-4-32D
Main Lines ....................................................................................8-4-32A
Quality ..........................................................................................8-4-32C
Service Lines ................................................................................8-4-32B
Side Sewer Extension Or Repair And Inspection ............................................8-4-12
Extension ................................................................................................8-4-12B
Repair .....................................................................................................8-4-12A
Special Agreements ........................................................................................8-4-18
Subdivision Developer's Or Property Owner's Responsibility ..........................8-4-35
Sewage Lift Station .................................................................................8-4-35B
Sewer Lines ............................................................................................8-4-35A
City Responsibility ........................................................................8-4-35A2
Owner Or Developer, Construction Responsibility .......................8-4-35A1
City of Salmon
Sharing Of Costs ..........................................................................8-4-35A3
System Of Charges .........................................................................................8-4-20
-S- -S-
SEWER USE REGULATIONS (cont.)
Unpolluted Water ............................................................................................8-4-3
Discharged To Storm Drain .....................................................................8-4-3B
Prohibited From Sanitary Sewer .............................................................8-4-3A
Wastewater Collection And Treatment System Improvement
Fund ............................................................................................................8-4-31
Wastewater Operator, Duties Regarding Side Sewers ...................................8-4-10
SHEEP (See LIVESTOCK; WILD ANIMALS)
SHRUBBERY, TRIMMING OF ................................................................................9-3-3E
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
Assessment Of Costs ......................................................................................7-1-1C
Notification ......................................................................................................7-1-1 B
Responsibility ..................................................................................................7-1-1A
Specifications ..................................................................................................7-1-1 D
SIDEWALKS IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT, USE
RESTRICTIONS .................................................................................................7-3-2
SIGNS
Angle Parking ..................................................................................................6-2-2
Bus Stops And Stands ....................................................................................6-1-5E
Certain Vehicles Restricted .............................................................................6-1-2B2
Curb Zones .....................................................................................................6-1-5A
Parking Restricted
Adjacent To Schools ...............................................................................6-2-7
Narrow Streets ........................................................................................6-2-8
Near Hazardous Or Congested Places ...................................................6-2-5F
One-Way Streets .....................................................................................6-2-9
Spaces For Persons With Disabilities .....................................................6-2-12A3
Time Limited ............................................................................................6-2-6
Sign Code Adopted .........................................................................................10-1-1 A8
Speed ..............................................................................................................6-1-3
Taxicab Stands ...............................................................................................6-1-5E
SKATEBOARDS RESTRICTED IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS
DISTRICT ................................................................................................................7-3-1
SMOKE, NOXIOUS FUMES DECLARED NUISANCE ...........................................4-2-2G
SNOWMOBILE OPERATIONS
Definition .........................................................................................................6-4-1
Equipment .......................................................................................................6-4-2
Brake .......................................................................................................6-4-2C
Headlamps ..............................................................................................6-4-2A
City of Salmon
Muffler .....................................................................................................6-4-2D
Tail Lamps ...............................................................................................6-4-2B
-S- -S-
SNOWMOBILE OPERATIONS (cont.)
Operation Requirements And Restrictions ..............................................6-4-3
Age Limitation .........................................................................................6-4-3N
Allowing Operation By Underage Person ................................................6-4-3O
Capacity ..................................................................................................6-4-3C
Careless Operation .................................................................................6-4-3H
Designated Streets ..................................................................................6-4-3G
Driver's License .......................................................................................6-4-3M
Hours Of Operation .................................................................................6-4-3L
Ingress And Egress .................................................................................6-4-3K
Intoxicating Liquor ...................................................................................6-4-3F
Liability Insurance ...................................................................................6-4-3P
Manner Of Operation ..............................................................................6-4-3J
Operation On Sidewalks Prohibited ........................................................6-4-3A
Speed ......................................................................................................6-4-3B
Towing.....................................................................................................6-4-3D
Towing Person On Skis ...........................................................................6-4-3E
Traffic Controls ........................................................................................6-4-31
Penalty ............................................................................................................6-4-4
SOLICITORS (See Also ITINERANT MERCHANTS) .............................................3-2
SOUND TRUCKS OR LOUDSPEAKERS ...............................................................5-2-4
SPECIAL ORDINANCES DEEMED SPECIAL ........................................................1-2-1
SPEED LIMITS .......................................................................................................6-1-3
City Park ..........................................................................................................7-2-3
Snowmobiles ...................................................................................................6-4-3B
SPIRITS (See Also LIQUOR CONTROL) ...............................................................3-1
SPRINKLER SYSTEMS (See Also IRRIGATION WATER) ....................................8-3
STAGNANT WATER DECLARED NUISANCE .......................................................4-2-2B
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
Barbed Wire And Electric Fences ...................................................................7-1-3
Excavations, Street .........................................................................................7-1-4
Ordinances Relating To Establishing, Naming Or Vacating
Streets Deemed Special ...............................................................................1-2-1
Playing Ball On Streets Prohibited ..................................................................5-2-5
Sidewalk Construction And Maintenance ........................................................7-1-1
Snow, Hail, Sleet, and Ice Removal ................................................................7-1-5
Storm Waters In Streets, Restricting Flow .......................................................7-1-2
Vending Prohibited ..........................................................................................7-1-6B
Water Flowing Upon Unlawful .........................................................................5-2-6
City of Salmon
SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS, FLOOD HAZARD AREAS .......................................11-1-7-1 D
SUBDIVISIONS, PART OF DEVELOPMENT CODE ..............................................1-11-3
-S- -T-
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
Appointment ....................................................................................................1-7-1A, 1-7D-1
Duties ..............................................................................................................1-7D-2
Budget ....................................................................................................1-7D-2F
Employment And Supervision .................................................................1-7D-2E
Equipment ...............................................................................................1-7D-2D
Other Duties ............................................................................................1 -7D-2G
Reports....................................................................................................1 -7D-2G
Service Lines ...........................................................................................8-1-8
Sewer ......................................................................................................1 -7D-2B
Streets And Alleys ...................................................................................1-7D-2A
Water .....................................................................................................1-7D-2C
Removal From Office ......................................................................................1-7-1B
Salary .............................................................................................................1-7-4
SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION (See REVOCATION OR
SUSPENSION)
-T-
TAX LEVY ORDINANCES DEEMED SPECIAL ......................................................1-2-1
TERM OF OFFICE
Attorney, City ...................................................................................................1-7C-1
Councilmembers .............................................................................................1-6-3A
Engineer, City ..................................................................................................1-7E-1
Mayor ..............................................................................................................1-6-2B
Planning And Zoning Commissioners .............................................................2-1-2
TRAFFIC PROVISIONS, GENERAL
Bus Regulations ..............................................................................................6-1-6
Restricted Use Of Bus Stands .................................................................6-1-6B
Stopping, Standing And Parking .............................................................6-1-6A
Certain Vehicles Restricted ..........................................................................6-1-2
Load Restrictions ....................................................................................6-1-2A
Use Restrictions ......................................................................................6-1-2B
Penalty ............................................................................................................6-1-8
Processions, Funeral And Other .....................................................................6-1-4
Drivers In Procession ..............................................................................6-1-4B
Driving Through Procession ....................................................................6-1-4A
Funeral Processions To Be Identified .....................................................6-1-4C
Parades And Processions, When Permits Required ...............................6-1-4D
Prohibited And Restricted Acts ........................................................................6-1-7
Clinging To Vehicles ...............................................................................6-1-7F
City of Salmon
Crossing Fire Hose .................................................................................6-1-7B
Following Fire Apparatus Prohibited .......................................................6-1-7A
-T- -U-
TRAFFIC PROVISIONS, GENERAL (cont.)
Limitations On Backing ...........................................................................6-1-7D
Riding On Motorcycles ............................................................................6-1-7E
Use Of Privately-Owned Property To Avoid Signs ..................................6-1-7G
Vehicles On Sidewalks ............................................................................6-1-7C
Speed Limits ...................................................................................................6-1-3, 6-4-3B, 7-2-3
State Laws Adopted ........................................................................................6-1-1
Stopping For Loading Or Unloading Only........................................................6-1-5
Designation Of Curb Zones .....................................................................6-1-5A
Designation Of Public Carrier Stop And Stands ......................................6-1-5E
Permits For Curb Loading Zones ............................................................6-1-5B
Standing In Freight Curb Loading Zone ..................................................6-1-5D
Standing In Passenger Curb Loading Zone ............................................6-1-5C
TREASURER/FINANCE DIRECTOR, CITY
Appointment ....................................................................................................1-7-1A, 1-7B-1
Bond ................................................................................................................1-7-3
Duties ..............................................................................................................1-7B-2
Accounts And Funds ...............................................................................1-7B-2B
Accurate Accounting .....................................................................1-7B-2B1
Demand And Receive Funds ........................................................1-7B-2B3
Receive And Disburse Funds .......................................................1-7B-2B2
Deliver Records To Successor ................................................................1-7B-2E
Employee Payroll and Benefits ...............................................................1-7B-2D
Generally .................................................................................................1-7B-2A
Monthly Report ........................................................................................1-7B-2C
Removal From Office ......................................................................................1-7-1B
Salary ..............................................................................................................1-7-4
Term Of Office .................................................................................................1 -7B-1
TREE CARE (SEE CITY TREE CARE)
TREES, TRIMMING OF ..........................................................................................9-3-3E
TRUCKS
Garbage ..........................................................................................................9-2-3A
-U-
UNICYCLES RESTRICTED IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS
DISTRICT ................................................................................................................7-3-1
UNIFORM CODES ADOPTED
Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings ................................................................10-1-1A7
Fuel Gas ..........................................................................................................10-1-1 A6
Building ...........................................................................................................10-1-1A1
City of Salmon
Definitions .......................................................................................................10-1-1B1
Energy Conservation .......................................................................................10-1-1A3
-U- -W-
UNIFORM CODES ADOPTED (cont.)
Exemption .......................................................................................................10-1-1B
Fee Schedule ..................................................................................................10-1-1A9
Fire ..................................................................................................................10-1-1A4
Mechanical ......................................................................................................10-1-1 A5
Residential ......................................................................................................10-1-1A2
Repealer ..........................................................................................................10-1-1D
Requirements ..................................................................................................10-1-1B3
Severability ......................................................................................................10-1-1C
Sign .................................................................................................................10-1-1A8
UTILITY PLACEMENT, STREET EXCAVATION ....................................................7-1-4B
-V-
VACANCY IN OFFICE
City Council .....................................................................................................1 -6-3B
Mayor ..............................................................................................................1-6-2C
Planning And Zoning Commission ..................................................................2-1-2
VARIANCE PROCEDURE, FLOOD HAZARD AREAS ...........................................11-1-6
VENDING ON CITY STREETS/ALLEYS OR IN CITY PARKING LOTS .................7-1-6
Definition .........................................................................................................7-1-6A
Vending Not Permitted on City Streets/Alleys Without Council Approval ........7-1-6B
VIBRATIONS, ANNOYING; DECLARED NUISANCE.............................................4-2-2J
VICIOUS ANIMAL (See Also ANIMAL CONTROL) .................................................5-3A-7
-W-
WARRANTS, ORDINANCES ISSUING DEEMED SPECIAL ..................................1-2-1
WASTEWATER COLLECTION (See Also SEWER USE
REGULATIONS) .....................................................................................................8-4
WASTEWATER OPERATOR, DUTIES REGARDING SIDE
SEWERS .................................................................................................................8-4-10
WATER AND SEWER
Cross-Connection Control ...............................................................................8-2
Irrigation Water ................................................................................................8-3
Sewer Use Regulations ...................................................................................8-4
Water Use Regulations ...................................................................................8-1
City of Salmon
WATER FLOWING UPON STREETS PROHIBITED ..............................................5-2-6
WATER SYSTEM DESIGN .....................................................................................8-1-25
-W- -W-
WATER SYSTEM DESIGN (cont)
Air Relief Valves; Valve, Meter And Blow-Off Chamber ..................................8-1-25H
Air Relief Valve Piping .............................................................................8-1-25H2
Air Relief Valves ......................................................................................8-1-25H1
Chamber Drainage ..................................................................................8-1-25H3
Approval Of Design .........................................................................................8-1-25O
Compliance With Division Of Environment Requirements...............................8-1-25B
Cross-Connections And Interconnections .......................................................8-1-25L
Cooling Water .........................................................................................8-1-25L2
Cross-connections ..................................................................................8-1-25L1
Hydrants ..........................................................................................................8-1-25G
Drainage..................................................................................................8-1-25G4
Hydrant Leads .........................................................................................8-1-25G3
Location And Spacing .............................................................................8-1-25G1
Valves And Nozzles ................................................................................8-1-25G2
Installation Of Mains ........................................................................................8-1-25I
Bedding ...................................................................................................8-1-25I2
Blocking...................................................................................................8-1-25I4
Cover ......................................................................................................8-1-25I3
Disinfection ..............................................................................................8-1-25I6
Pressure And Leakage Testing ...............................................................8-1-25I5
Standards ................................................................................................8-1-25I1
Location Of Water Lines And Storm Drains .....................................................8-1-25N
Materials ..........................................................................................................8-1-25D
Minimum Size ..................................................................................................8-1-25C
Professional Engineer Required ......................................................................8-1-25A
Requirements For Drawings ............................................................................8-1-25O
Separation Of Water Mains, Sanitary Sewers And Storm
Sewers ............................................................................................................8-1-25J
Crossings ................................................................................................8-1-25J3
Exception ................................................................................................8-1-25J4
Force Mains ............................................................................................8-1-25J5
General ...................................................................................................8-1-25J1
Parallel Installation ..................................................................................8-1-25J2
Sewer Manholes .....................................................................................8-1-25J6
Surface Water Crossings ................................................................................8-1-25K
Above-Water Crossing ............................................................................8-1-25K1
Under-Water Crossings ...........................................................................8-1-25K2
Valves .............................................................................................................8-1-25F
City of Salmon
Water Main Design ..........................................................................................8-1-25E
Dead Ends ..............................................................................................8-1-25E6
-W- -W-
WATER SYSTEM DESIGN (cont.)
Diameter..................................................................................................8-1-25E2
Fire Protection .........................................................................................8-1-25E3
Flushing...................................................................................................8-1-25E7
Hydrants ..................................................................................................8-1-25E5
Pressure ..................................................................................................8-1-25E1
Small Mains .............................................................................................8-1-25E4
Water Services And Plumbing .................................................................8-1-25M
Booster Pumps ........................................................................................8-1-25M2
Plumbing .................................................................................................8-1-25M1
WATER USE REGULATIONS
As-Built Drawings And Engineer's Certification ...............................................8-1-26
Certification By Engineer .........................................................................8-1-26B
Drawings .................................................................................................8-1-26A
Billing Procedure And Periods .........................................................................8-1-19
Deposit Required ....................................................................................8-1-19D
Initial Billing .............................................................................................8-1-19C
Monthly Statement ..................................................................................8-1-19B
Rate ........................................................................................................8-1-19A
Citation; Appearance .......................................................................................8-1-29
Connection To Water System Required ..........................................................8-1-2
Construction, Plans, Specifications And Inspection ........................................8-1-14
Inspection ................................................................................................8-1-14A
Plans And Drawings Required ................................................................8-1-14B
Definition Of Terms .........................................................................................8-1-1
Delinquent Accounts .......................................................................................8-1-21
Failure To Pay .........................................................................................8-1-21 B
Notice ......................................................................................................8-1-21A
Discontinuance Of Service ..............................................................................8-1-22
Due Date, Payment .........................................................................................8-1-20
Duties Of Public Works Superintendent Regarding Service
Lines ............................................................................................................8-1-8
Existing Branch Service Lines .........................................................................8-1-5
Extension Of Water Mains Within City.............................................................8-1-16
Failure To Appear Unlawful .............................................................................8-1-30
Flood Plain Limitations ....................................................................................8-1-28
New Structures ........................................................................................8-1-28A
Replacements .........................................................................................8-1-28B
Independent Water Service Line And Meter Required ....................................8-1-4
Injury To Or Tampering With Water System Unlawful .....................................8-1-7
City of Salmon
Liability ............................................................................................................8-1-31
Monthly Water User Fees ................................................................................8-1-18
-W- -W-
WATER USE REGULATIONS (cont)
Base Rate Fees ......................................................................................8-1-18B
Equivalent Connection Definition ..................................................8-1-18B1
Equivalent Connection Determination ..........................................8-1-18B2
Special User Definition .................................................................8-1-18B3
Maximum Cap Limitation .........................................................................8-1-18G
Rate ........................................................................................................8-1-18A2
Review And Revision Of Rates ...............................................................8-1-18E
Special User Rate ...................................................................................8-1-18C
User Fee .................................................................................................8-1-18A1
User Request For Rate Change ..............................................................8-1-18F
Waiver of Payment for Certain Circumstances ........................................8-1-18H
Water Usage Fees ..................................................................................8-1-18D
Penalty ............................................................................................................8-1-32
Permits Required ............................................................................................8-1-9
Application For Connection .....................................................................8-1-9B
Connection To Public Water Main Line ...................................................8-1-9C
Excavation Permit ...................................................................................8-1-9D
Water System Or Service Line, Installation Or
Alteration ...............................................................................................8-1-9A
Refusal Of Use Of System ..............................................................................8-1-3
Right To Enter Premises For Inspection..........................................................8-1-15
Right To Revoke Permission To Connect .......................................................8-1-13
Service Call Charge ........................................................................................8-1-17
Turn Water Services On And Off .....................................................................8-1-17A
Service Line
Extension Or Repair Permit Required .....................................................8-1-10
Extension Of Service Line ............................................................8-1-10B
Repair Of Service Line .................................................................8-1-10A
Installation And Maintenance ..................................................................8-1-11
Installation And Maintenance By City ...........................................8-1-11 A
Installation By Contract .................................................................8-1-11B
Service Line And Meter Maintenance ......................................................8-1-6
Subdivision Developer's Or Property Owner's Responsibility
For Water Lines ............................................................................................8-1-27
Construction ............................................................................................8-1-27A
Development On One Side Of Street ......................................................8-1-27C
Line Over Six-Inch Diameter ...................................................................8-1-27B
Water Meters, Installation And Maintenance ...................................................8-1-12
City of Salmon
Cost .........................................................................................................8-1-12A
-W- -Z-
WATER USE REGULATIONS (cont)
Malfunctioning Meters .............................................................................8-1-12C
Readouts .................................................................................................8-1-12B
Water System Improvement Fund ...................................................................8-1-23
Water System Materials And Installation .........................................................8-1-24
City Approval ...........................................................................................8-1-24D
Main Lines ...............................................................................................8-1-24A
Quality Of Materials .................................................................................8-1-24C
Service Lines ...........................................................................................8-1-24B
WHEELED CONVEYANCES
Restricted Use In The Central Business District ..............................................7-3-2
Exceptions .......................................................................................................7-3-4
WILD ANIMALS, LIVESTOCK (See Also LIVESTOCK; WILD
ANIMALS) ...............................................................................................................5-3C
-Z-
ZONING DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS, PART OF
DEVELOPMENT CODE .................................................................................1-11-3
Salmon
Development
Code
Ordinance No. 17-819
Adopted March 1, 2017
Repealing Ordinance No. 92-561
and subsequent amendments in its entirety.
Page 1 of 135
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter 1 - Purpose, Authority, And General Provisions ...................................................................... 2
Chapter 2- Planning And Zoning Commission And Zoning Administrator .................................... 4
Chapter 3- Nonconforming Uses ..................................................................................................................... 5
Chapter 4 - Administrative Procedures........................................................................................................ 7
Chapter 5 - Establishment Of Zoning Districts ....................................................................................... 15
Chapter 6 - Zoning District Regulations .................................................................................................... 18
Chapter 7- Special Use Permits (Sup) ........................................................................................................ 21
Chapter 8 - Lot Splits, Subdivisions, Platting Requirements ............................................................. 23
Chapter 9- Planned Unit Development (Pud) ......................................................................................... 28
Chapter 10 - Performance Standards Applicable To All Developments ....................................... 31
Chapter 11- Manufactured Home Standards, Manufactured Home Park And Recreational Vehicle Park Regulations ................................................................................................................................ 38
Chapter 12 - Required Improvements, Development Agreement, Phased Development ..... 43
Chapter 13 - Sign Regulations ....................................................................................................................... 45
Chapter 14- Landscaping And Buffering ................................................................................................... 49
Chapter 15- Lighting Standards ................................................................................................................... 50
Chapter 16- Annexations ................................................................................................................................ 53
Chapter 17- Flood Hazard Zones ................................................................................................................. 56
Chapter 18- Performance Standards For Off-Street Parking And Loading ................................. 88
Chapter 19- Detailed Performance Standards For The Design And Construction Of Streets ................................................................................................................................................................................... 92
Chapter 20- Area Of Impact ........................................................................................................................... 95
Appendix A- Model Hearing Notices........................................................................................................... 96
Appendix B- Uses For Zoning Districts ...................................................................................................... 97
Page 2 of 135
Chapter 1 - Purpose, Authority, And General Provisions
1.1. Purpose. Pursuant to the Local Land Use Planning Act (LUPA) as found in I.C 67-65. The purpose of this act shall be to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the state of Idaho as follows:
1.1.1. To protect property rights while making accommodations for other necessary types of development such as low-cost housing and mobile home parks.
1.1.2. To ensure that adequate public facilities and services are provided to the people at reasonable cost.
1.1.3. To ensure that the economy of the state and localities is protected.
1.1.4. To ensure that the important environmental features of the state and localities are protected.
1.1.5. To encourage the protection of prime agricultural, forestry and mining lands and land uses for production of food, fiber and minerals, as well as the economic benefits they provide to the community.
1.1.6. To encourage urban and urban-type development within incorporated cities.
1.1.7. To avoid undue concentration of population and overcrowding of land.
1.1.8. To ensure that the development on land is commensurate with the physical characteristics of the land.
1.1.9. To protect life and property in areas subject to natural hazards and disasters.
1.1.10. To protect fish, wildlife and recreation resources.
1.1.11. To avoid undue water and air pollution.
1.1.12. To allow local school districts to participate in the community planning and development process so as to address public school needs and impacts on an ongoing basis.
1.1.13. To protect public airports as essential community facilities that provides safe transportation alternatives and contributes to the economy of the state.
1.2. Authority. This code is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by the Local Land Use Planning Act I.C Title 67 Chapter 65.
1.3. Conflicting Ordinances Repealed. All prior city ordinances are repealed to the full extent of their inconsistency with adoption of this code.
1.4. Vested Rights. A "vested right" is the right to proceed with development that is in progress or for which all required permits were obtained prior to the adoption of this code Chapter 3-Nonconforming Uses
1.4.1. Vested rights to proceed with development initiated prior to the adoption of these regulations shall be established only by:
1.4.1.1. Having obtained a permit in full compliance with the provisions of previous ordinances (such vested rights expire with the permit); or
Page 3 of 135
1.4.1.2. Having recorded a final plat in full compliance with previous ordinances. Recording of a final plat establishes a vested right to the lot layout and road network of the subdivision. It does not establish a vested right for any particular use or the development of any lot.
1.4.2. Vested rights to proceed with development under the provisions of this code shall be established only by:
1.4.2.1. Recording a final plat in full compliance with the provisions of this code;
1.4.2.2. Executing a development agreement in full compliance with this code; or
1.4.2.3. Obtaining a permit in full compliance with the provisions of this code. Such vested rights expire with the permit.
1.5. Non-Conforming Uses (Grandfathered). Any use that meets the definition of non-conforming use shall retain all such development rights as provided by Chapter 3-Nonconforming Uses.
1.6. Relationship to Other Laws. Pursuant to I.C. 67-6522, no provision of this code shall abrogate the statutory authority of a public health district, state and/or federal agency.
1.7. Impact on Private Agreements. This code does not nullify easements, covenants, deed restrictions, and similar private agreements, but where any such private agreement imposes standards that are less restrictive than those of this code, this code shall govern.
1.8. Burden of Proof. The burden of proof, in all proceedings pursuant to this code shall rest with the developer.
1.9. Interpretation. All code provisions shall be interpreted as being the minimum requirements necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare and to implement the Local Land Use Planning Act and the comprehensive plan. This code is designed to be consistent with the comprehensive plan and should be liberally construed to achieve the plan's purposes and intent.
1.10. Severability. If any provision of this code is held to be invalid by any court, the remainder shall continue in full force.
1.11. No Waivers. Any requirements of the code cannot be waived without proper procedures as set forth in this code.
Page 4 of 135
Chapter 2- Planning And Zoning Commission And Zoning Administrator
2.1. Purpose. This chapter provides for the duties of the City Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Zoning Administrator and Floodplain Administrator. A City Planning and Zoning Commission shall be provided for by City Code.
2.2. Duties of the Planning and Zoning Commission. It shall be the duty of the planning and zoning commission to conduct a comprehensive planning process designed to prepare, implement, review and update a comprehensive plan, hereafter referred to as the plan. The plan shall include all land within the jurisdiction of the governing board. The plan shall consider previous and existing conditions, trends, compatibility of land uses, desirable goals and objectives, or desirable future situations for each planning component.
2.3. Zoning Administrator. The City Zoning Administrator will serve as staff to the Planning and Zoning Commission and will meet all requirements of the job description set for this position by the City Council. This shall include performing the duties of the Floodplain Administrator for the City of Salmon.
2.3.1. Interpretations. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to make interpretations of this code and the boundaries of zoning districts on the official zoning map.
2.3.2. Appeal. Appeals of any interpretation under this chapter shall be made in accordance with Chapter 4 - Administrative Procedures of this code.
2.4. Liability. No individual, including City Council and Planning and Zoning Commission members and the Zoning Administrator or other city employees, who acts in good faith and without malice in the performance of duties assigned by this code shall be held liable for errors or omissions in its administration. A suit brought against such an individual shall be defended by the City and any judgment resulting from such a suit shall be the liability of the City of Salmon.
Page 5 of 135
Chapter 3-Nonconforming Uses
3.1. General Provisions. Pursuant to I.C 67-6538 No rights or authority granted pursuant to this chapter shall be construed to empower a city or county to enact any ordinance or resolution which deprives an owner of the right to use improvements on private property for their designed purpose based solely on the nonuse of the improvements for their designed purpose for a period of ten (10) years or less. Where an owner or his authorized agent permits or allows an approved or unlawful intervening use of the owner's property, the provisions of this section are not applicable.
3.2. Continuation of Nonconforming Uses. If the nonuse continues for a period of one (1) year or longer, the city or county may, by written request, require that the owner declare his intention with respect to the continued nonuse of the improvements in writing within twenty-eight (28) days of receipt of the request. If the owner elects to continue the nonuse, he shall notify the city or county in writing of his intention and shall post the property with notice of his intent to continue the nonuse of the improvements. He shall also publish notice of his intent to continue the nonuse in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the property is located. If the property owner complies with the requirements of this subsection, his right to use such improvements in the future for their designed purpose shall continue, notwithstanding any change in the zoning of the property.
3.2.1. The property owner may voluntarily elect to withdraw the use by filing with the clerk of the city or the county, as the case may be, an affidavit of withdrawn use. If the property is redesigned for a different use, the property owner shall be deemed to have abandoned any grandfathered right to the prior use of the property.
3.2.2. For purposes of this section "designed purpose" means the use for which the improvements were originally intended, designed and approved pursuant to any applicable planning and zoning ordinances.
3.2.3. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit a city or a county from passing or enforcing any other law or ordinance for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
3.3. Repair or Maintenance. There shall be no limit on repair or maintenance activities for nonconforming uses provided that no such activity shall increase the degree of nonconformity. Repair and maintenance of nonconforming signs and structures will be subject to the requirements of the Building Code. Repair of a nonconforming use, structure or improvement damaged by flood, fire or other disaster in a Special Flood Hazard area shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17- Flood Hazard Zones of this code.
3.4. Changes In and/or Additions to Nonconforming Uses. Changes in and/or additions to existing nonconforming uses will not be permitted.
3.5. Nonconforming Signs. New conforming signs shall be permitted to replace or repair any non-conforming sign on any commercial or industrial lot or parcel on which there is a nonconforming sign pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 13 - Sign Regulations.
Page 6 of 135
3.6. Nonconforming Lots or Parcels. New development of nonconforming lots or parcels shall meet access, setback, building height, lot coverage, building size and all other applicable performance requirements of the zone in which the property is located.
Page 7 of 135
Chapter 4 - Administrative Procedures
4.1. Purpose. This chapter requires a permit for all land development and establishes procedures for the administration of this ordinance, including the procedures for processing permit applications and the hearing procedures.
4.2. Permit Required. A permit shall be required for any division of land, or any land development or activity regulated by the Salmon Development Code, except as specifically exempted by Section 4.3, below. In addition, any development within a flood hazard area shall require a permit as set forth in Chapter 17- Flood Hazard Zones. Applications for permits shall be processed as described in this chapter.
4.3. Exemptions. Activities listed here are not exempt from any requirement of this ordinance, except the requirement for a permit. No permit shall be required for the following activities:
4.3.1. Lot line adjustments, in which no new lot is created, but property lines are adjusted in compliance with applicable performance standards of this code.
4.3.2. Accessory buildings that are also exempted from review by the Building Code, except where such accessory buildings or outbuildings are located within a special flood hazard area.
4.3.3. Fences of seven (7) feet or less in height in compliance with Chapter 10 - Performance Standards Applicable To All Developments of this code.
4.3.4. Minor utility installations, except where such installations are in a special flood hazard area.
4.3.5. Certain signs, as provided in Chapter 13 - Sign Regulations.
4.3.6. Municipal, county, state or federal services, projects or activities, emergency or essential services and communication facilities on city, county, state or federally owned land, with the exception of jails.
4.3.7. Aggregation or combination of smaller lots resulting in a larger lot or lots of conforming size and shape, subject to applicable performance standards of this code and the City Code.
4.3.8. Any land division that results from the settlement of an estate or a court decree for the distribution of specific parcels of property;
4.3.8.1. certified copy of settlement or court decree must be provided to the Planning & Zoning Administrator prior to recordation of land division.
4.3.9. Any land division that results from a condemnation proceeding or the voluntary sale or gift of land for a public purpose;
4.3.10. A cemetery plat;
4.3.11. Any land division in which all resulting parcels are one hundred-sixty (160) or more acres in size and not intended for development purposes or for the purpose of further lot splits.
Page 8 of 135
4.4. Applications. No incomplete application shall be accepted. Applications shall be submitted on forms provided by the city.
4.4.1. The administrator may delay consideration of any application when inclement weather or snow cover prevents a proper on-site inspection.
4.5. Application Fees. Fees for each type of permit and/or application established herein shall be set by the City Council.
4.6. Hearing Notices. Notice of a public hearing shall be provided (unless otherwise required by this code) as follows:
4.6.1. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, notice of the time and place, and a summary of the proposal shall be published in the official newspaper or paper of general circulation within the jurisdiction.
4.6.2. Notice shall be posted on the premises not less than one (1) week prior to the hearing.
4.6.3. Notice shall also be provided to property owners or purchasers of record within the land being considered by first class mail, three hundred (300) feet of the external boundaries of the land being considered, and any additional area that may be substantially impacted by the proposed special use as determined by the commission and provided further that;
4.6.3.1. when a special use permit is requested by reason of height allowance, that notice shall be provided individually by mail to property owners or purchasers of record within no less than three (3) times the distance of the height of the allowed height of a structure when more than one hundred (100) feet and within no less than one (1) mile when the peak height of a structure in an unincorporated area is four hundred (400) feet or more and, when four hundred (400) feet or more, the structure's proposed location and height shall be stated in the notice.
4.6.4. Any property owner entitled to specific notice pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall have a right to participate in public hearings before a planning commission, planning and zoning commission or governing board.
4.6.5. When notice is required to two hundred (200) or more property owners or purchasers of record, alternate forms of procedures which would provide adequate notice may be provided by local ordinance in lieu of mailed notice. In the absence of a locally adopted alternative notice procedure, sufficient notice shall be deemed to have been provided if the city or county provides notice through a display advertisement at least four (4) inches by two (2) columns in size in the official newspaper of the city or county at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date, in addition to site posting on all external boundaries of the site.
4.6.6. The actual costs of providing the required notice shall be added to the application fee.
4.6.7. Written comments from the public must be submitted seven days prior to the hearing.
Page 9 of 135
4.7. Hearing Procedure. This procedure shall be followed in all hearings involving the Planning and Zoning Commission;
4.7.1. The presiding officer shall announce the purpose and subject of the hearing.
4.7.2. The presiding officer shall determine whether proper notice of the hearing has been provided. That determination shall be based on proof of publication and posting showing full compliance with the notice requirements of this ordinance. If proper notice has not been provided, the hearing shall be re-scheduled.
4.7.3. The presiding officer shall determine whether the application is complete and includes all required supporting materials. The Planning and Zoning Commission may require additional information upon receiving the application. If the application is not complete, the hearing shall be re-scheduled.
4.7.4. The presiding officer shall ask if any Planning and Zoning Commission member wishes to declare a conflict of interest, as defined by I.C. 67-6506, in the matter to be heard and excuse any member who declares such a conflict from participation in the hearing.
4.7.5. The presiding officer shall remind those present that all statements given must address the merits of the proposal as measured by its compliance or lack of compliance with the comprehensive plan and this code.
4.7.6. The presiding officer shall ask for a statement from the applicant or his or her representative. The Planning and Zoning Commission may ask questions following this statement. All questions and replies shall be directed through the presiding officer.
4.7.7. The presiding officer shall ask for statements testimony from the public. Persons giving statements shall begin by stating their name and mailing address. Planning and Zoning Commission members may ask questions following any statement. All questions and replies shall be directed through the presiding officer. Public testimony shall be given as follows;
4.7.7.1. In favor
4.7.7.2. Neutral
4.7.7.3. Opposed
4.7.7.4. Rebuttal by the applicant or representative;
4.7.7.4.1. No new evidence may be entered into the record during the rebuttal or the public hearing will be reopened for further testimony.
4.7.8. The presiding officer shall close the public hearing and call for discussion and action by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
4.7.9. Written statements, plans, drawings, photographs, or other materials offered in support of statements at a hearing are part of that hearing's record and shall be retained by the City. Supporting materials shall be left with the Zoning Administrator after each statement is made.
Page 10 of 135
4.7.10. Additional Hearing Procedures. These procedures may be used to assist in the conduct of large or controversial hearings;
4.7.10.1. The Planning and Zoning Commission may impose time limits on the statements given in order to assure completion of the agenda.
4.7.10.2. The Planning and Zoning Commission may require persons who wish to make a statement to register their intention to do so with the Zoning Administrator. The presiding officer shall use the register to call on persons to present their statements.
4.8. Hearings to be Recorded. As required by I.C.67-6536, the Zoning Administrator shall keep a transcribable record of all hearings on file for at least six (6) months after the final hearing on the development.
4.9. Decision. Pursuant to I.C. 67-6535(1), The approval or denial of any application required shall be based upon standards and criteria which shall be set forth in the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance or other appropriate ordinance or regulation of the city. Such approval standards and criteria shall be set forth in express terms in land use ordinances in order that permit applicants, interested residents and decision makers alike may know the express standards that must be met in order to obtain a requested permit or approval. Whenever the nature of any decision standard or criterion allows, the decision shall identify aspects of compliance or noncompliance with relevant approval standards and criteria in the written decision and shall be effective upon publication in the official newspaper.
4.9.1.1. Every final decision rendered shall provide or be accompanied by notice to the applicant regarding the applicant's right to request a regulatory taking analysis pursuant to section 67-8003, Idaho Code
4.10. Decision Deadline. This section establishes the "reasonable time" for deliberation on applications by the Commission required by I.C. 67-6519. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a decision on any application for a permit within sixty (60) of the hearing, if a hearing is required by this code, or within thirty-five (35) days of the meeting at which the application first appeared on the commission agenda, except that: the Planning and Zoning Commission may table any application for which a development study is required a period of more than sixty (60) days while the required study is conducted. The maximum time permitted for a development study shall be one-hundred and twenty (120) days.
4.11. Approvals Valid for One (1) year. Unless provided for by a development agreement, or otherwise stipulated in this code, permits shall be void after one (1) year from the date of approval if building or development permits have not been approved, or building permits have expired.
4.12. Conditions. Conditions may be imposed on any development or special use permit approval, or variance, if:
4.12.1. The conditions are clearly designed to assure compliance with one or more specific requirements of this ordinance; and;
Page 11 of 135
4.12.2. A list of all conditions imposed is provided to the developer with notification of the commission's or Council decision. That list shall specifically identify the provision of this ordinance the condition is designed to implement.
4.13. Variances. A variance is a modification of the bulk and placement requirements of the ordinance as to lot size, lot coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard, setbacks, parking space, height of buildings, or other ordinance provision affecting the size or shape of a structure or the placement of the structure upon lots, or the size of lots. A variance shall not be considered a right or special privilege, but may be granted to an applicant only upon a showing of undue hardship because of characteristics of the site and that the variance is not in conflict with the public interest.
4.13.1. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve a variance only upon finding that:
4.13.1.1. The need for a variance results from physical limitations unique to the property on which the variance is requested; and
4.13.1.2. Failure to approve the variance will result in undue hardship because no reasonable conforming use of the property is possible without a variance; and
4.13.1.3. The alleged hardship has not been created by action of the property owner or occupants; and
4.13.1.4. Approval of the variance will not create a nuisance or result in potential harm to adjoining properties or the neighborhood; and
4.13.1.5. Approval of the variance will not have an adverse effect on the implementation of the comprehensive plan, development code; and
4.13.1.6. The variance is the minimum relief from the requirements of this ordinance necessary to permit a reasonable conforming use.
4.13.2. Additional findings are required for variances in Special Flood Hazard Areas, pursuant to Chapter 17- Flood Hazard Zones of this code.
4.13.3. Conditions may be attached to the approval of a variance.
4.14. Appeals. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or rules legally adopted hereunder have been incorrectly interpreted or the provisions of the code do not apply. The Council and/or Board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code. Any decision of the administrator may be appealed to the Commission and any decision of the Commission may be appealed to the City Council using the procedure described here.
4.14.1. Filing of Appeal. An official appeals form is available in the office of the City Clerk. The properly completed appeals form, required supporting materials, and fee (if required) shall be filed with the City Clerk after notice of intent to appeal a decision is received. The appellant shall file with the appeals form a written statement of grounds for the appeal.
4.14.2. Procedure. The appellant or affected person shall have bona fide interest as stated in I.C. 67-6521 and shall file a properly completed appeals form, the required
Page 12 of 135
supporting materials, and the required appeals fee with the with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days after publication of the decision.
4.14.2.1. The Zoning Administrator shall place the appeal on the agenda of either a regular Planning and Zoning Commission meeting or a regular City Council meeting. Fee requirements shall be the same as for the application. The cost of providing the required notice shall be borne by the appellants.
4.14.2.2. The Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council may schedule a public hearing if they determine it is necessary and essential for the good of the public (I.C 67-6521). Notice of a public hearing shall follow the requirements of section 4.6 of this chapter. No appeal shall be heard if the appellant or a representative and, when the appellant is not the developer, the developer or a representative are not present.
4.15. Decision. The Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council shall determine whether the decision being appealed is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan and this code. The City Council may affirm, modify, or overturn a decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission accordingly, or remand it back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for reconsideration.
4.15.1. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the appellant and interested parties of the decision within fourteen (14) days of the decision.
4.15.2. Every final decision rendered shall provide or be accompanied by notice to the applicant regarding the applicant's right to request a regulatory taking analysis pursuant to section 67-8003, Idaho Code. An affected person aggrieved by a final decision concerning matters identified in section 67-6521(1)(a), Idaho Code, may within twenty-eight (28) days after all remedies have been exhausted under local ordinances seek judicial review as provided by chapter 52, title 67, Idaho Code.
4.16. Violations.
4.17. Failure to Obtain a Permit. Whenever the Zoning Administrator becomes aware of an activity for which a permit is required by this ordinance, but for which a permit has not been approved, he or she shall notify the occupant (and owner, if they are not the same) of the site to immediately cease all unpermitted activity. Notice shall be given by posting on the site and/or first class mail. If activity does not cease, the Zoning Administrator shall ask the city attorney to take prompt action, as authorized by I.C. 67-6527, to end the unpermitted activity and, if a permit is not subsequently issued, to require restoration of the site to its original condition. Required restoration shall include restoration of vegetative cover where sites have been graded in violation of this ordinance.
4.17.1. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the occupant (and owner, if they are not the same) of the violation by first class mail and/or posting on the site. The notice shall describe the violation, cite the sections of this ordinance being violated, and order the occupant to attain compliance within 14 days.
4.17.2. Any person who receives a notice of violation may request inspection by the Zoning Administrator to show that compliance has been attained within the 14 days allowed, or:
Page 13 of 135
4.17.2.1. file a written request with the Zoning Administrator for an extension of time to attain compliance, with such extensions being limited to a maximum of sixty (60) days and culminated by an inspection to show that compliance has been attained; or
4.17.2.2. file an appeal of the Zoning Administrator's notice, following the appeals procedure of 4.11
4.17.3. The Zoning Administrator shall notify any occupant or owner who fails to attain compliance within the specified time, or to show, on appeal, that a violation has not occurred. This notice shall be posted on the site and sent by first class mail, repeat the description of the violation from the original notice, and state the penalties that may be imposed for violations of this ordinance.
4.17.4. The City may proceed with mitigation of the violation at the cost of the property owner. The city will submit an invoice for such mitigation and if unpaid may file a lien against the property until such invoice is paid. City may also restrict further development or other permits for the property until such invoice is paid.
4.17.5. The City reserves the right to deny any permit on property that is not in compliance with this Code. Violations of this ordinance are a misdemeanor in accordance with the Local Land Use Planning Act, Idaho Code Section 67-6527 and 18-113, and punishment for misdemeanor.
4.18. Certificate of Compliance. A certificate of compliance shall be issued before any building or use is occupied. A certificate of compliance indicates that an on-site inspection has shown that the building or use complies with this ordinance, including any conditions imposed upon its approval. Occupancy of a building or use without a certificate of compliance shall be a violation of this ordinance. The issuance of a certificate of compliance shall not be construed as approval of any violation of this ordinance that may have been undiscovered during the inspection.
4.18.1. Temporary Certificate of Compliance. A temporary certificate of compliance may be issued to permit temporary use of a building in cases where weather prevents the prompt completion of such required improvements as landscaping. No temporary certificate of compliance shall be issued for more than one-hundred and eighty (180) days.
4.19. Amendments To Comprehensive Plan and/or Development Code. Any person may petition for the amendment of the comprehensive plan or this ordinance. The amendment procedure shall be as described here and in the Local Planning Act.
4.19.1. The applicant shall file a properly completed application form, the required supporting materials, and the required application fee with the administrator. Public hearings will only be set after all supporting material has been submitted in writing. Written comments from the public must be submitted seven days prior to the hearing. No written material will be accepted from the public within the last seven days prior to the public hearing. This is to give the applicant a chance to review public concerns.
4.19.2. The administrator shall place a hearing on the application on the agenda of the next regular Commission meeting for which the notice requirements can be met and
Page 14 of 135
at which time will allow proper consideration of the proposed amendment. The administrator may contract for professional review of the application, with the cost of that review being in addition to the application fee. Such reviews shall be prepared in the form of a written report submitted to the administrator for use at the hearing. The administrator shall, upon its receipt, provide a copy of this report to the developer and place it on file for public review with the other application materials.
4.19.3. The administrator shall provide notice of the hearing as provided in I.C 67-6509
4.19.4. The Commission shall conduct a hearing on the proposed amendment following the procedure established in section 4.7. No application for an amendment shall be reviewed if the applicant is not present.
4.19.5. The Commission shall determine whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the comprehensive plan, development code, and recommend that the City Council approve or disapprove it accordingly.
4.19.6. The Zoning Administrator shall convey the Commission's recommendation to the City Council and, unless the application is withdrawn, place a hearing on the application on the agenda of the next regular City Council meeting for which the notice requirements can be met. Notice shall be provided in the same manner as for the hearing before the Commission.
4.19.7. The City Council shall conduct a hearing on the proposed amendment following the procedure established in section 4.7. No application for an amendment shall be reviewed if the applicant is not present.
4.19.8. The City Council shall determine whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the comprehensive plan, development code and approve or disapprove it accordingly.
4.19.9. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the developer and interested parties of the City Council decision within 14 days, but no amendment to this ordinance shall become effective until that amendment has been adopted as an ordinance and published or published by summary as required by law.
Page 15 of 135
Chapter 5 - Establishment Of Zoning Districts
5.1. Purpose. This chapter creates zoning districts and overlay zoning districts for use in the city and adopts an official map of those districts.
5.2. Zoning Districts. The following zoning districts are established to implement the Comprehensive Plan:
5.2.1. Low Density Residential (LDR) Zoning District.
5.2.2. Medium Density Residential (MDR) Zoning District.
5.2.3. Core Commercial (CC) Zoning District.
5.2.4. Commercial (C) Zoning District.
5.2.5. Industrial (I) Zoning District.
5.2.6. Agricultural (Ag) Zoning District.
5.3. Zoning District Boundaries. Zoning district boundaries shall be as shown on the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Salmon". The alteration or creation of zoning district boundaries shall follow property boundaries, as described in a legal description of the involved properties.
5.4. Official Zoning Map. The "Official Zoning Map of the City of Salmon" is adopted as part of this code. A dated copy of the official zoning map and subsequent amendments thereof, certified to be correct by the signatures of the Mayor and City Clerk, shall be maintained for public inspection at the office of the Zoning Administrator.
5.5. Change of Zoning Map Designation. Changes to the zoning map shall be approved by an ordinance adopted by the City Council, and may coincide with changes to the Future Land Use Map of the Comprehensive Plan. Changes to the Future Land Use Map may coincide with zoning map changes or text of the Comprehensive Plan. Such changes are based on periodic assessments of development patterns, new information, changing land use patterns, an overall public need for the change, to comply with changes in state land use statutes, or to provide for the continued efficient administration of this code.
5.5.1. An application for a zoning map change may be initiated by the property owner or agent of the owner of the property proposed; by the Zoning Administrator; by the Planning and Zoning Commission; or by City Council.
5.5.2. The application shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 4 - Administrative Procedures of this code.
5.5.3. A request for a change of zone designation may be approved if it meets the following criteria:
5.5.3.1. The proposed change of zone designation is consistent with I.C. 67-6509, the Comprehensive Plan, development code and Future Land Use Map; and
5.5.3.2. The property affected by the proposed change of zone designation is adequate in size and shape to facilitate any uses allowed in conjunction with such zoning; and
Page 16 of 135
5.5.3.3. The property affected by the proposed change of zone designation is properly served by public facilities to adequately serve the types of uses allowed in conjunction with such zoning; and
5.5.3.4. The proposed change of zone designation will have no significant adverse effect on the appropriate use, compatibility and development of adjacent properties.
Page 17 of 135
City of Salmon Zoning
** See end of document for larger image
Page 18 of 135
Chapter 6 - Zoning District Regulations
6.1. Purpose. This chapter establishes the purpose of each zoning district and lists the uses permitted in each district. All new development shall be subject to the applicable performance standards of this code. See Appendix B for use details.
6.2. Allowed Uses.
6.2.1. Agricultural. All uses other than Industrial
6.2.2. Commercial. All uses other than Industrial and Agricultural
6.2.3. Core Commercial. All uses other than Industrial & Agricultural
6.2.4. Industrial. All uses allowed
6.2.5. Low Density Residential (LDR). All uses limited to Low Density Residential (LDR)
6.2.6. Medium Density Residential (MDR). All uses included within MDR, Low Density Residential (LDR).
6.3. Prohibited Uses. Uses not identified in Appendix B but similar in nature to those specified herein may be cross referenced using the current tables when necessary to resolve any ambiguity in identifying a use per this chapter.
6.3.1. Any use or development not explicitly permitted by this ordinance is prohibited unless granted a conditional use by the commission and council.
6.4. Zoning Districts.
6.4.1. Low Density Residential (LDR) Zoning District. The (LDR) zoning district is designed to accommodate single-family dwellings.
6.4.2. Medium Density Residential (MDR) Zoning District. The (MDR) zoning district is designed to accommodate a diversity of housing types, single family dwellings, duplexes, higher density residential uses such as townhouses, manufactured/mobile home parks, multiple-family apartment dwellings and group quarters on smaller lots.
6.4.3. Core Commercial (CC) Zoning District. The (CC) zoning district is designed to accommodate development of retail and service commercial uses in the city's central business district. It is characterized by multi-story buildings, 100% lot coverage, and shared parking areas. Certain wholesale, manufacturing and heavier retail commercial uses may also be permitted.
6.4.4. Commercial (C) Zoning District. The (C) zoning district is designed to accommodate development of retail and service uses in the city.. Certain wholesale, manufacturing and heavier commercial uses that provide retail or wholesale goods and services, light processing, transportation, warehousing, distribution, manufacturing, or other light industrial uses may also be permitted.
6.4.5. Industrial (I) Zoning District. The (I) zoning is designed to accommodate areas where new industrial uses may be located. New development, changes in
Page 19 of 135
occupancy in or the expansion of existing industrial uses shall comply with the performance standards of this code.
6.4.6. Agricultural (Ag) Zoning District. The (Ag) zoning district provides a holding zone in which continuing agricultural uses will be permitted until the area is made available for development by an amendment to the official zoning map. Where an existing dwelling is replaced or expanded, it shall conform to the specification standards for the Low Density Residential zoning district. Home Occupations in existing dwellings, expansion or replacement of existing dwellings, accessory uses and buildings for existing dwellings, and minor public utility installations are permitted outright. 6.5. Overlay. The City of Salmon, through amendment to this ordinance may establish zoning overlay zones. Within an overlay area, the City shall establish clear and objective standards for the overlay zoning district while ensuring that application of such standards does not constitute a regulatory taking pursuant to Idaho or federal law.
6.5.1. Public Overlay. The P overlay is designed to accommodate emergency and essential services, municipal services, government offices, administrative and support services, educational services, telecommunications, and other public services on city, county, state and federal lands. All uses allowed in the underlying zone shall also be allowed and at such time the property is not held for public purposes the underlying zone shall prevail.
6.6. Setbacks, Exemptions, Lot Coverage and Density Standards. To assure adequate building and structural separation, minimize potential fire hazards, provide unrestricted vision onto public rights-of-way, and assure that buildings or structures are located a safe distance from public rights-of-way.
6.6.1. Setback Requirements
6.6.1.1. Corner Lots. For all new development, the front yard shall be designated by the front entrance door.
6.6.1.2. Through Lots. The rear yard setback standards shall apply to all development if the following criteria are met:
6.6.1.2.1. The front and rear of the lot is defined and identified.
6.6.1.2.2. The driveway for primary access to a public street is located in the front yard.
6.6.1.2.3. Where vehicular access is proposed to both the front and rear of the property, the front yard setback requirement shall apply.
6.6.1.3. Eave Encroachment. Eave encroachments into all required setbacks are subject to building code requirements.
Page 20 of 135
Table 6.1
Setbacks
(measurements in feet)
*See figure 6.1
Zoning
Front Yard
Collector, Local & Arterial Streets
Corner Lot Side Yard
Intersecting Streets
Side Yard
Rear Yard
LDR/MDR/AG
25
15
5 feet for the first 10 feet of wall height. 1:2
5 feet for the first 10 feet of wall height. 1:2
CC, C, ID, PU
0
0
0
0
6.7. Maximum Density. Maximum allowable densities in residential zoning districts are specified in Appendix B. Applicable performance standards (maximum lot coverage, street construction, parking and maneuvering, landscaping, height restrictions etc.) shall apply.
Figure 6.1
Wall Height
Side or Rear Property Line
Wall Height
Side or Rear Property Line
Page 21 of 135
Chapter 7- Special Use Permits (Sup)
7.1. Purpose. The Special Use Permit procedure implements the Comprehensive Plan by requiring a public review of specific uses and developments to assure compatibility with applicable performance standards of this code. Requiring that such uses and developments comply with applicable performance standards of this code also assures their compatibility with neighboring uses, the landscape and buffering setting, and the capacity of public facilities and services.
7.2. Basic Provisions. A Special Use Permit and conditions of approval is site-specific, is not transferable to other property, is binding on the specific use and development, the owner of the property, and to each subsequent owner or person acquiring ownership in the property. A Special Use Permit shall not be considered as establishing a binding precedent to grant other Special Use Permits.
7.3. Application. No incomplete application shall be accepted. Applications shall be submitted on forms provided by the city. Multiple copies of applications and supporting materials shall include a site plan, aerial photo and preliminary plat, and any other items that may pertain to any proposal required by the administrator. All applications shall demonstrate code compliance in writing, by addressing each section applicable to their development. Public hearings will only be set after all supporting material has been submitted in writing.
7.4. Conditions. Conditions may be attached to a special use permit including, but not limited to:
7.4.1. Minimizing adverse impact on other development;
7.4.2. Controlling the sequence and timing of development;
7.4.3. Controlling the duration of development;
7.4.4. Assuring that development is maintained properly;
7.4.5. Designating the exact location and nature of development;
7.4.6. Requiring the provision for on-site or off-site public facilities or services;
7.4.7. Requiring more restrictive standards than those generally required in an ordinance;
7.4.8. Requiring mitigation of effects of the proposed development upon service delivery by any political subdivision, including school districts, providing services within the planning jurisdiction.
7.4.9. Hours of operation
7.5. Requirements of Approval. All new developments including Special Use Permits shall comply with all applicable performance criteria of the Salmon Development Code and City Code.
7.5.1. A Special Use Permit and conditions of approval are binding on the specific use and location of the use, on the owner of the property, each subsequent owner, and each other person acquiring an interest in the property.
Page 22 of 135
7.5.2. A change in the approved use of the property will render a Special Use Permit null and void, and necessitate submittal of a new application for a Special Use Permit unless;
7.5.2.1. Change in use to revert back to an approved use within that zoning district.
7.5.3. The Zoning Administrator shall indicate compliance of all conditions of approval upon issuance of a Certificate of Compliance pursuant to Chapter 4 - Administrative Procedures of this code.
7.6. Time Limitation. Unless otherwise stipulated in a Development Agreement, a Special Use Permit will become null and void if all development permits and building permits have not been approved within one (1) year of the date of final special use permit approval, or if development permits or building permits have expired.
Page 23 of 135
Chapter 8 - Lot Splits, Subdivisions, Platting Requirements
8.1. Purpose. This chapter provides procedures and criteria for the division of land and development.
8.2. Basic Provisions. All lot splits and subdivisions shall comply with the following requirements:
8.2.1. A plat shall be required for all land divisions, and for all areas to be annexed. Plats shall meet all requirements of Title 50, Chapter 13 of the Idaho Code "Plats and Vacations" (I.C. 50-1301-1334), as amended, and all requirements and performance standards of this chapter.
8.2.2. Any lot created shall comply with the applicable lot size and shall be capable of accommodating a permitted use allowed by this code.
8.2.3. Any lot created shall have frontage on and direct access to a public street that meets the performance standards of this code.
8.2.4. Where a change of lots within an existing subdivision occurs it shall be considered an amended subdivision.
8.2.5. The provision of access and utilities to the lot created, including any necessary extension of streets or utility main lines shall be designed and installed at the expense of the owner or developer.
8.2.6. Pursuant to the performance standards of Chapter 10 - Performance Standards Applicable To All Developments of this code, all required improvements shall be installed by the owner or developer to the City’s satisfaction before a final plat is recorded or the development is offered for lease, sale, sold, or occupied. All required improvements shall be inspected by the City before acceptance.
8.2.7. Lot splits and subdivisions that are in, or include a portion of, the Special Flood Hazard Area shall comply with the additional requirements of Chapter 17- Flood Hazard Zones of this code.
8.2.8. Prior to final plat approval, or unless otherwise stipulated in a Development Agreement, all lots shall have direct access to the city's potable water system and sewage collection system, including any extension of mains required to serve the lots created.
8.2.9. Power and telephone connections for each lot, including any extension of lines or cables, shall be required to serve each lot in compliance with the standards established by the utility involved and the city.
8.2.10. Underground power and telephone lines shall be required as a condition of approval in all new developments.
8.2.11. No private street, road, highway or alley shall be deemed a public rights-of-way unless the dedication shall be accepted and confirmed by the City Council. (I.C. 50-1313)
Page 24 of 135
8.2.12. Approval of a subdivision shall not constitute acceptance by the City for maintenance of roads, streets, or public sites shown as dedicated on a Final Plat, unless accepted and confirmed by specific action of the City Council upon completion of all required improvements.
8.3. Lot Splits. The lot split procedure assures that the division of land complies with the performance requirements of this code, protects utility easements and public rights-of-way from encroachment.
8.3.1. Required Conditions of Approval.
8.3.1.1. Upon satisfaction of all conditions of approval, a final plat shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the platting requirements of this chapter and Title 50, Chapter 13 of the Idaho Code for official signatures and recordation. The City cannot attach new conditions on a final plat.
8.3.1.2. Conditions of approval are binding on the owner of the property, each subsequent owner, and each other person acquiring an ownership interest in the property. All conditions shall appear on the signature page of the final plat.
8.3.1.3. The Zoning Administrator shall indicate satisfaction of all conditions of approval upon issuance of a Certificate of Compliance pursuant to Chapter 4 - Administrative Procedures of this code.
8.3.1.4. Approval of a lot split does not constitute or imply approval of a permit for any prospective use of the lot created.
8.4. Subdivisions. The subdivision permit procedure is designed to assure compliance with the performance requirements of this code, that land development is accompanied by installation of the necessary on and off site public facilities, protection of utility easements and public rights-of-way from congestion and encroachment.
8.4.1. A subdivision is the act of dividing land or an area or tract of land into five (5) or more lots.
8.4.2. All subdivisions shall comply with all applicable performance standards and other applicable provisions of this ordinance and the City Code.
8.4.3. In the case of subdivisions consisting of fifty (50) or more lots, the applicant shall be required to provide a feasibility study showing the intended use is appropriate; to include a soil and geotechnical report, hydrologists report, water rights study and flood hazard mitigation where required.
8.4.4. If subdivision development is proposed to be phased, then a Development Agreement, as delineated in Chapter 12 - Required Improvements, Development Agreement, Phased Development, will be required.
8.4.5. An amended subdivision is the alteration of an existing platted subdivision. Any alteration must follow the platting requirements of this code and the procedures outlined below;
8.5. Lot Split within a subdivision. Any division of property within an existing platted subdivision shall follow the subdivision procedure as outlined in this code.
Page 25 of 135
8.6. Minor Lot Line Adjustments within a subdivision. A Minor Lot Line Adjustment within a subdivision must not affect more than four (4) lots within the subdivision. A Minor Lot Line Adjustment within a subdivision shall not change the size of the parcel by more than ten (10) percent. A Minor Lot Line Adjustment shall occur only once per parcel. Minor Lot Line Adjustments occurring more than once shall be considered a Major Lot Line Adjustment.
8.7. Major Lot Line Adjustments within a Subdivision. A Major Lot Line Adjustment within a subdivision may affect more than four (4) lots within the subdivision. A Major Lot Line Adjustment may change the size of the parcel more than then (10) percent. All Major Lot Line Adjustments shall follow the subdivision procedure as outlined in this code.
8.8. Application. No incomplete application shall be accepted. Applications shall be submitted on forms provided by the city. Multiple copies of applications and supporting materials shall include a site plan, aerial photo and preliminary plat, and any other items that may pertain to any proposal required by the administrator. All applications shall demonstrate code compliance in writing, by addressing each section applicable to their development. Public hearings will only be set after all supporting material has been submitted in writing. The preliminary plat shall be submitted with the application in accordance with the platting requirements of Section 8.11 of this chapter.
8.9. Procedures. The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall follow the hearing procedures of Chapter 4 - Administrative Procedures this code.
8.10. Required Conditions of Approval.
8.10.1. Upon satisfaction of all conditions stipulated in the approval process, a final plat shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the platting requirements of this chapter and Title 50 Chapter 13 of the Idaho Code for official signatures and recordation. The City cannot attach new conditions on a final plat.
8.10.2. Conditions of approval are binding on the owner of the property, each subsequent owner, and each other person acquiring an ownership interest in the property. Evidence of such shall appear on the signature page of the final plat.
8.10.3. The Zoning Administrator shall indicate satisfaction of all conditions of approval upon issuance of a Certificate of Compliance pursuant to Chapter 4 - Administrative Procedures of this code.
8.10.4. Approval of a subdivision plat does not constitute or imply approval of a permit for any prospective use of any lot created.
8.11. Required Improvements. The following required improvements shall be provided in all subdivisions:
8.11.1. Construction or improvement of all roads including base, sub-base, surface paving, sidewalks, curbs and gutters. See Chapter 19- Detailed Performance Standards For The Design And Construction Of Streets
8.11.2. Street lights meeting requirements of Chapter 15- Lighting Standards of this code where all exterior lighting shall be full cut-off fixtures with the light source fully shielded.
Page 26 of 135
8.11.3. Any other improvement required for compliance with this code.
8.11.4. Open space, landscape and buffering as required by Chapter 14- Landscaping And Buffering of this code.
8.12. Platting Requirements. As defined by Chapter 4 - Administrative Procedures of this code, both a preliminary and final plat for a lot split or subdivision shall accompany a completed application form and all other supporting materials. Both stages of the plat (preliminary and final) shall contain the following information:
8.12.1. Preliminary and final plats shall be professionally prepared by an Idaho licensed surveyor or engineer, to scale with all dimensions shown in feet and decimals thereof. Plats of large areas may be prepared on multiple, serially numbered sheets with match lines and a sheet index map, which may be combined with the vicinity map. The vicinity and index maps shall appear on the first of the serially numbered sheets.
8.12.2. The developer shall provide the City with at least one (1) copy of the preliminary plat suitable for reproduction, and one electronic copy.
8.12.3. Preliminary and final plats shall include:
8.12.3.1. the streets and alleys, with widths and courses clearly shown; each street named;
8.12.3.2. all lots numbered consecutively in each block, and each block lettered or numbered, provided however, in a platted cemetery, that each block, section, district or division and each burial lot shall be designated by number or letter or name;
8.12.3.3. each and all lengths of the boundaries of each lot shall be shown, provided however, in a platted cemetery, that lengths of the boundaries of each burial lot may be shown by appropriate legend;
8.12.3.4. the exterior boundaries shown by distance and bearing; descriptions of survey monuments; point of beginning with ties to at least two (2) public land survey corner monuments in one (1) or more of the sections containing the subdivision, or in lieu of public land survey corner monuments, to two (2) monuments recognized by the surveyor; and also, if required by the city or county governing bodies, give coordinates based on the Idaho coordinate system;
8.12.3.5. the easements; basis of bearings, bearing and length of lines, graphic scale of plat and north arrow; subdivision name.
8.12.3.6. all final plats submitted shall be prepared in compliance with Chapter 13, Title 50 of the Idaho Code, as amended, and shall include, in addition to the requirements listed in 8.11, all information listed below.
8.12.3.6.1. A signed and dated owner's certificate which includes a complete legal description of the resultant properties, and in which the owners of record dedicate all public ways and other public spaces to public purpose use; and
Page 27 of 135
8.12.3.6.2. A public notary's acknowledgment of the owner's certificate; and
8.12.3.6.3. A public notary's acknowledgment of the certificate of consent; and
8.12.3.6.4. Certificates for final plat approval by the City Council; and
8.12.3.6.5. Lines and titles for official signatures; and
8.12.3.6.6. A statement of "sanitary restriction", as required by I.C. 50-1326; and
8.12.3.6.7. A certificate for use by the County Recorder in recording the plat after its approval; and
8.12.3.6.8. Any other information required for compliance with this code.
8.13. Public Rights-of-Way Dedication. The creation of all public rights-of-way, including streets and alleys, shall be dedicated to the public in accordance with Title 50 Chapter 50-1313 of the Idaho Code.
Page 28 of 135
Chapter 9- Planned Unit Development (PUD)
9.1. Purpose. A Planned Unit Development allows a measure of design flexibility by permitting variation of the distribution of land use density, variation of building placement standards, individual lot area, lot frontage requirements, access requirements, and variation of other performance standards required within a zoning district or combination of zoning districts when a development is planned in its entirety and when the variations can be demonstrated to benefit the development for those who will reside and conduct business affairs within the proposed development and for the community in general. The intent of the PUD process is to allow innovation in design that should prove superior to compliance with standard development requirements that are not the product of site-specific integrated design.
9.2. Authority. Pursuant to Idaho Code Title 67 Chapter 6515, A Planned Unit Development if approved will be permitted as a Special Use Permit.
9.3. General Criteria. A combination of residential, commercial, or industrial land uses may be permitted within a PUD. Any such mixed use planned unit development must follow the same procedures as those required for a change of zoning district boundaries.
9.3.1. Proposed uses and manner of implementation of such uses may be permitted within a PUD, upon finding that the proposal:
9.3.1.1. Provides internal or external benefits that would not be achievable through compliance with the normally required zoning standards & regulations.
9.3.1.2. Is and will be compatible with surrounding land uses, both existing and future.
9.3.1.3. Furthers compliance with the goals and policies found in the City of Salmon Comprehensive Plan.
9.3.2. A PUD that includes residential land use must provide open space of not less than ten percent (10%) of the gross land area designated for residential land use within project boundaries for the benefit of residents of the project or for the benefit of the community in general. The location and design of common space should be practically usable for outdoor activities. Open space with a slope in excess of twenty percent (20%) may be discounted from the required common open space required for a PUD project. Common open space provided in a PUD may be held and maintained privately for the use of owners or residents within the development, and/or may be designated as open for shared public use. The responsibility for and the method of maintaining common open space shall be identified by the applicant as a facet of approval of any final PUD development plan.
9.3.3. Planned Unit Developments that include a subdivision shall be considered concurrently as a subdivision and PUD.
9.3.4. A planned unit development must provide for integrated and harmonious design and arrangement of buildings, uses, public facilities and open space. PUD proposals must provide adequate and properly arranged facilities for internal traffic circulation, landscaping and such other features and facilities as may be necessary to
Page 29 of 135
make the project attractive and efficient. Buffering or screening commercial/industrial uses from residential uses within or adjacent to the development must be incorporated into the design.
9.4. Plan Review. The processing of a PUD shall require compliance with administrative processes required by the Administrator. The administrator submission necessary to complete an application for a PUD shall include;
9.4.1. A plan of the existing site of the proposed development showing the dimensions and bearings of the property lines, topography, existing features of the development site, including major wooded areas, structures, streets, easements, utility lines and land uses.
9.4.2. Engineered construction plans for water, sewer, storm drainage, street improvements, and the nature and extend of earth work required for site preparation and development;
9.4.2.1. Scalable plans showing buildings(s) and their placement, various functional use areas, common open space, circulation details, and landscaping.
9.4.2.2. Preliminary building plans including exterior elevations.
9.4.2.3. Phasing plans that depict the scope of each phase and a timetable for implementation
9.4.2.4. Landscape design, streetscapes, nonresidential layouts and general features must be included.
9.4.3. Project documents to be used to designate the use, development and maintenance of the land, and the improvements thereon, including those areas that are to be commonly owned and maintained. The intent of designating such responsibility shall not be included with the scope of the City of Salmon’s enforcement authority but rather to determine where responsibility lies for maintaining compliance with terms of approval of any planned unit development.
9.5. Recommendation. The Planning & Zoning Commission shall review a proposed Planned Unit Development and conduct a public hearing. The Planning & Zoning Commission shall determine if the proposed PUD complies with the requirements of this chapter and forward a recommendation to the governing board. The criteria to be applied to such review are:
9.5.1. Standards applicable to Special Use Permits and if applicable subdivision standards
9.5.2. General concepts of community design addressed by the Comprehensive Plan.
9.5.3. Achieving compatibility and buffering internally and with neighboring uses.
9.5.4. Demonstrate design techniques preferable to strict adherence to terms of this ordinance.
9.6. Decision by Governing Board. The Governing Board, upon receipt of a recommendation from the Planning & Zoning Commission, may review the record and determine whether to hold a subsequent public hearing or decide whether to approve, modify or disapprove the PUD. After the Governing Board action concerning the PUD
Page 30 of 135
the applicant and City of Salmon must complete a development agreement for the proposed PUD. Such development agreement shall outline the obligations of the developer to the extent that they represent a departure from typical ordinance requirements. Construction standards must comply with adopted standards unless expressly authorized by the terms of the PUD approval.
9.7. Approval Criteria. The Governing Board must approve any final PUD application before construction may begin. Each individual phase of the development, as well as the total development, must be capable of existing as an independent unit capable of creating an environment of desirable aesthetics or adequate assurance will be provided that such objective will be attained. Individual phases of any such development must conform to the overall density and use considerations required by the City of Salmon Zoning Ordinance and its Comprehensive Plan. Any exception from standard zoning district requirements must be justified by design and other amenities incorporated in the development plans.
9.8. Time Limitations. The approval of a final development plan for the first phase of a PUD shall be for a period not to exceed one (1) year, or as expressly authorized in a development agreement approved by the Governing Board. The time limit for a planned unit development construction may be extended once for no more than twelve (12) additional months by the Administrator or for a maximum of two (2) years by action of the Governing Board.
9.9. Modification. Any proposed modification of the approved development plan of a PUD must be submitted in writing by the applicant to the Administrator. The request shall specify what modifications are proposed and why the changes are necessary to the Governing Board. If the Governing Board determines the proposed change is a major modification a public hearing will be required in accordance with procedures specific in this chapter.
Page 31 of 135
Chapter 10 - Performance Standards Applicable To All Developments
10.1. Purpose. This chapter establishes performance standards for all development activity in the city.
10.2. Access to Streets, Improvements, Responsibility, Dedication, Agreement. All development and all lots or parcels within a development shall have safe direct primary access to a dedicated public street. Primary access from an alley to an existing lot is permitted when there is no physical access to an existing improved street. Secondary access to an alley or to streets fronting side yards is permitted.
10.3. Clear Vision Triangle.
10.3.1 At all street intersections, a clear vision triangle of twenty (20) feet shall be maintained.
10.3.2 At all driveway intersections, a clear vision triangle of fifteen (15) feet along the edge of a driveway and a street shall be maintained.
10.3.3 No solid fence or wall, planter, hedge, shrub, or other visual obstruction blocking more than 2/3 of the visual area and not over three (3) feet in height above grade shall be permitted within a clear vision triangle.
10.3.4 No parking area shall be permitted in a clear vision triangle.
10.3.5 Trees shall be permitted in clear vision triangles, but only if all branches are removed to a height of at least seven (7) feet above grade.
10.3.6 Clear vision triangles are determined as follow:
10.3.6.1 At street intersections, the clear vision triangle includes the area defined by extending a line between two points, one on each lot line paralleling the street or the interior boundary of a sidewalk, each of which is twenty (20) feet from the lot corner at the intersection; and
10.3.6.2 At other points of access, the clear vision triangle includes the area defined by extending a line between two points, one on the lot line paralleling the street, and one on the outer edge of the driveway, each of which is fifteen (15) feet from the point where the driveway crosses the lot line.
Page 32 of 135
10.4 Acquisition of Streets. Existing lots or portions thereof that extend into an improved street used by the general public may, upon initiation of due process and negotiation by the City, are subject to acquisition and dedication by the City on a case by case basis.
10.5 Utilities.
10.5.1 Pursuant to the City Code, all developments, and all lots or parcels within a development, shall have direct access to all utilities.
10.5.2 Extensions and improvements of all City water and sewer main lines to all new development shall designed and installed to City standards at the expense of the owner(s) or developer(s) of the property being developed.
10.5.3 Underground power and telephone lines shall be required as a condition of approval in all new subdivisions.
10.6 Utility Easements.
10.6.1 All public utility easements shall be shown on the plat, recorded and a copy be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.
10.6.2 No building or solid concrete wall or fence shall be placed in any utility easement, public or private. Only wire or rail fences, or solid wood fences with a separable section across the easement may be constructed across utility easements. Private utilities may impose even more restrictive requirements on fences crossing their easements.
10.7 Hazardous Areas.
10.7.1 When locating developments in areas of known natural hazards, as established by the comprehensive plan, the density or intensity of the development could be limited based upon the degree of the natural hazard.
10.7.2 No development shall channel storm or melt water runoff so as to adversely affect neighboring properties or public ways.
10.8 Slopes. No development shall be permitted on slopes of thirty (30) percent or more, or other slopes identified as unstable, unless a licensed engineer certifies that such development creates no significant hazard of slope failure or accelerated soil erosion.
Figure 10.1 Clear Vision Triangle
20 ft
20 ft
15ft
Courthouse Drive
Street
Lot Line
Sidewalk
Driveway
Lot Line
Page 33 of 135
10.9 Expansive Soils. No development shall be permitted on soils identified as soil types that may require engineering for such development, except where a licensed engineer certifies that the development has been properly designed to prevent damage from soil erosion.
10.10 Runoff and Erosion Control. A runoff and erosion control plan prepared and certified by a licensed professional engineer in accordance with EPA and DEQ regulations shall be submitted to the Public Works Superintendent for comment whenever any street or impervious commercial parking lot surface will be created. Any comments received shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission. The plan shall include the following:
10.10.1 On a detailed topographic map, identify the runoff and erosion hazard areas on the site, and those properties, areas and facilities, both on and downstream from the site, that are vulnerable to damage from accelerated runoff or erosion; and
10.10.2 Show how existing vegetation will be retained and land disturbance minimized; and
10.10.3 Show how existing trees that are to be retained will be protected from damage during construction; and
10.10.4 Show how the area disturbed by construction at any one time will be minimized; and
10.10.5 Show how disturbed areas will be stabilized during the construction period; and
10.10.6 Show how disturbed areas will be promptly, permanently stabilized by re-vegetation or structural techniques; and
10.10.6.1 Show how runoff velocities will be minimized and drainage ways will be prepared to handle any acceleration or increase of runoff; and\
10.10.6.2 Show how any additional runoff generated will be retained on-site and absorbed, evaporated, or released from the site at a rate not exceeding the pre-development rate of release; and
10.10.6.3 Show how sediment resulting from accelerated soil erosion will be retained on site; and
10.10.6.4 Show how water quality in adjoining or nearby streams and wetlands will be protected by retention of existing vegetation, installation of vegetative filter strips, and similar means.
10.11 Buffers for Special Uses. The performance standards for landscaped buffers appear in Chapter 14- Landscaping And Buffering of this code.
10.12 Fences. To assure that the construction of fencing does not create hazards caused by fences obstructing vision to a public rights-of-way contributing to traffic accidents, and to assure that the location of new fences does not project into a public right of way or onto neighboring private property.
Page 34 of 135
10.12.1 Any fences over 7 feet in height deemed to be necessary are allowed only by special use permit. Criteria to be considered for the issuance of such permit may be but not limited to;
10.12.1.1 The location of the fence is specific to the affected side or rear yard; and
10.12.1.2 Where neighboring multi-story residential, commercial or industrial uses creates unobstructed vision into property; or
10.12.1.3 Where neighboring residential, commercial or industrial uses or structures are located on a hill slope overlooking the residence; and
10.12.1.4 Where neighboring residential, commercial or industrial uses or structures are otherwise demonstrated to compromise the privacy of an existing residence.
10.12.2 No sight-obscuring fence shall conflict with the site distance requirements of section 10.3 of this chapter. The construction of fences that obstruct views at intersections or points of access to public roads is prohibited.
10.13 Hazardous Substances. Any use that is, or may reasonably be expected to be, subject to the reporting requirements of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know Act of 1986 (EPCRA) shall demonstrate continuing compliance with state and federal requirements for the storage and handling of hazardous substances.
10.14 Livestock. No livestock shall be kept or maintained within an area of less than six thousand (6,000) square feet.
10.14.1 One (1) large animal (one (1) horse, cow, llama, sheep, or goat, including offspring until weaned) may be kept for each six thousand (6,000) square feet of lot area. All areas in which livestock are kept shall be maintained so as not to create a nuisance impacting neighboring properties with noise, odors, insects, or dust. The six thousand (6,000) feet required per animal shall remain open to the sky, with additional area provided for stables, sheds, and the storage of feed.
10.14.2 Chickens, geese, rabbits, bee keeping, and other small domestic animals keeping are also permitted, but all areas in which any livestock, bees, or domestic animals are kept shall be maintained so as not to create a nuisance impacting neighboring properties with noise, odors, insects, or dust.
10.15 Nuisances.
10.15.1 No development shall create excessive levels of noise beyond its property line. Excessive noise, as measured at the property line, is any noise that exceeds the standards of Table 10.15 of this chapter.
Page 35 of 135
Table 10.15
Detailed Performance Standards for Noise
land use category
exterior design noise level - L10
Residences, motels, meeting rooms, schools, libraries, hospitals, parks, and similar uses
70 dBA
Other developed lands
75 dBa
Notes: L10 means the noise level may be exceeded 10% of the time each day from 7:00 Am. to 7:00 Pm. local time. DBA = decibels. Taken from standards of the Federal Highway Administration
10.15.2 No development shall direct light (in accordance with Chapter 15- Lighting Standards, glare, or heat beyond its property line. All lights must be downward directed. Welding equipment and other sources of intense light or glare shall be shielded from the view of neighboring properties or public ways by enclosure in a building, location on the property, or construction of a fence or wall.
10.15.3 No development shall generate dust, smoke, odors, or other airborne pollutants that travel beyond its property line, except as permitted by state and federal air quality standards.
10.15.4 Solid waste shall be stored in enclosures or containers and in such a manner as not to attract rodents or other vermin, be susceptible to spillage by dogs or cats, generate odors beyond the property line or liquid runoff; or permit blowing of paper and other lightweight waste. No solid waste, including construction or demolition debris shall be buried within the city, except where permitted by the Building Code as rubble fill for a construction site.
10.15.5 Commercial and industrial solid waste that is not stored in a secure container and commercial and industrial solid waste handling areas (i.e., a recycling center) shall be effectively screened from the public view by enclosure in a building, location on the property, or construction of a fence, wall, or landscaped buffer.
10.15.6 Outdoor materials storage that generates excessive unpleasant odors at the property line; harbors rats, flies, or other vermin; is stacked or piled so it could fall or roll onto an adjoining property; or places hazardous substances or other highly flammable materials at the property line.
10.16 Off-Street Parking and Loading. All uses shall provide the off-street parking and loading areas required by Chapter 18- Performance Standards For Off-Street Parking And Loading of this code. Parking spaces in all new commercial developments within any commercial zoning district shall be hard surfaced.
10.17 Outdoor Materials Storage.
10.17.1 There shall be no outdoor materials storage in front yards within the LDR or MDR, zoning districts, except the temporary storage of materials required for construction authorized by a building permit issued in accord with this code or the Building Code.
Page 36 of 135
10.17.2 Outdoor materials storage shall be permitted within side and rear yards in the LDR or MDR, zoning districts, provided that such storage does not constitute a fire hazard or create a nuisance, and that all materials except those required for construction authorized by a building permit issued in accord with this code or the Building Code.
10.18 Shipping Containers. Portable storage units/containers, metal or otherwise, designed for the shipment of cargo, shall not be permitted as buildings or as permanent or temporary storage units unless they are sited on a permanent perimeter foundation, comply with all requirements of the Building Code and meet all performance standards of the Salmon City Code.
10.19 Points of Access to Streets. The number of points of access to arterial and collector streets shall be minimized.
10.20 Connections. All developments shall be designed to maximize functional connections with adjoining developments, including shared access to streets, shared parking and service access, shared buffering and open space, and shared pedestrian circulation.
10.21 Landscaped Buffers and Minimum Landscaped Areas. Landscaped buffers and landscaped areas shall be provided as required by Chapter 14- Landscaping And Buffering of this code.
10.22 Pedestrian Circulation. New development shall provide any sidewalks needed to link between existing sidewalks on adjacent or abutting properties.
10.23 Performance Standards for Home Occupations.
10.23.1 Maximum Floor Area. A home occupation may be located within a dwelling or an accessory building, but no home occupation shall occupy a floor area larger than that of the dwelling to which it is accessory.
10.23.2 Nonresident Employees. No home occupation shall have more than one (1) employee who is not a member of the resident family.
10.23.3 Off-Street Parking. Home occupations shall provide off-street parking for all non-resident employees and customers and any other vehicles associated with the home occupation in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 18- Performance Standards For Off-Street Parking And Loading.
10.23.4 Outdoor Storage. The storage of any materials or solid waste associated with a home occupation shall be screened from public view.
10.23.5 Signs. Home occupations shall display only the following signs:
10.23.5.1 One non-illuminated wall sign of no more than six (6) square feet, and
10.23.5.2 One non-illuminated on-site directional sign of no more than four (4) square feet.
10.23.6 Additional standards. Additional standards shall be imposed such as, but not limited to:
10.23.6.1 Hours of operation.
10.23.6.2 Landscaping.
Page 37 of 135
10.23.6.3 Buffering.
10.23.6.4 Lighting.
10.23.6.5 Average Daily Trips (ADT)
10.23.6.6 All applicable federal and state applications and requirements.
10.24 Performance Standards for the Design and Construction of Streets. Performance standards for the design and construction of streets are found in Chapter 19- Detailed Performance Standards For The Design And Construction Of Streets.
Page 38 of 135
Chapter 11- Manufactured Home Standards, Manufactured Home Park And Recreational Vehicle Park Regulations
11.1. Purpose. This chapter provides regulations for the placement of manufactured homes, and development of manufactured home parks.
11.2. Placement Of Manufactured/Mobile Homes.
11.2.1. Manufactured and mobile homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved within all Special Flood Hazard Areas shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17- Flood Hazard Zones of this code.
11.2.2. Manufactured/mobile homes are allowed on individual lots zoned for single-family residential uses in addition to manufactured homes on lots within designated manufactured/mobile home parks or manufactured home subdivisions.
11.2.3. Pursuant to Appendix B of this code, manufactured home parks may be allowed only in the MDR zoning district upon approval of a Special Use Permit.
11.2.4. In zoning districts, outside manufactured home parks, only multi-sectional manufactured housing shall be allowed.
11.2.5. Pursuant to Appendix B of this code, single wide manufactured homes may be allowed in all zoning district upon approval of a Special Use Permit.
11.3. Manufactured Home and Mobile Home Placement Standards.
11.3.1. Placement of a manufactured home on a lot shall comply with the applicable zoning district standards; and
11.3.2. Pursuant to I.C.44-2201 the manufactured home and Mobile Home shall comply with the Idaho Manufactured Home Installation Standards and the Building Code; and
11.3.3. Have all hitches, wheels and other running gear removed; and
11.3.4. Shall be permanently attached to an enclosed permanent perimeter foundation (wood, masonry or poured concrete). The foundation fascia shall be similar in appearance and durability to the masonry foundation or other foundation systems comparable with site-built dwellings. It shall completely enclose the space between the siding and the finished grade; and
11.3.5. Shall have a pitched roof that complies with the snow load standards of the Building Code.
11.3.6. Mobile homes constructed prior to June 15, 1976 shall comply with the Idaho Division of Building Safety Idaho Mobile Home Rehabilitation Act and receive an approved building permit prior to being sited on a lot; and
11.4. Temporary placement. Temporary placement of a recreational vehicle, mobile or manufactured home on a residential lot for use of occupancy shall be allowed only in the case of a catastrophic event or if a building permits has been issued for the construction of a permanent structure and only for a period not to exceed one (1) year. Mobile,
Page 39 of 135
manufactured homes and recreational vehicles allowed as temporary use shall not be placed on a permanent foundation. No extensions shall be issued.
11.5. Recreational Vehicles.
11.5.1. Occupancy. Recreational vehicles, as defined by state law, may not be used as a permanent residence. Continuous occupancy in a recreational vehicle on the same property for more than thirty (30) days in a calendar year is prohibited except when located within an approved recreational vehicle park as defined by this code or in compliance with 11.4 above. Recreational vehicles may not be connected to city water or sewer unless within a recreational vehicle park, or if being used as allowed by section 11.4.
11.5.2. Special Flood Hazard Areas. Recreational Vehicles in all Special Flood Hazard Areas shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17- Flood Hazard Zones of this code and FEMA regulations.
11.6. Manufactured Home/Recreational Vehicle Parks. The following standards shall apply to all manufactured home (mobile home) and recreational vehicle parks:
11.6.1. Special Flood Hazard Areas. Pursuant to Chapter17 of this code, manufactured home (mobile home) parks are prohibited in all Special Flood Hazard Areas.
11.6.2. Site Selection:
11.6.2.1. Topography. The topography must be favorable to good site drainage, minimum grading, manufactured/mobile home/recreational vehicle placement, and ease of maintenance.
11.6.2.2. Utilities. The site must be readily accessible to public utilities, including water, sewerage, and electricity.
11.6.2.3. Land Area. The area of the manufactured home/recreational vehicle park must be sufficient in size to accommodate:
11.6.2.3.1. The number of manufactured home/recreational vehicle spaces desired; and
11.6.2.3.2. Roads and parking areas for motor vehicles; and
11.6.2.3.3. Service areas, buildings and playgrounds; and
11.6.2.3.4. On site utilities where public utilities are not available.
11.6.2.4. Site Improvements. The physical improvements of the site must be arranged to provide:
11.6.2.4.1. A convenient means of pedestrian and vehicular access to each manufactured/mobile home/recreational vehicle space, parking areas, and accessory buildings; and
11.6.2.4.2. An adequate supply of potable water; and
11.6.2.4.3. A safe method of sewage disposal; and
11.6.2.4.4. Electrical service for lighting and power; and
Page 40 of 135
11.6.2.4.5. Diversion of surface water away from buildings, manufactured/mobile home/recreational vehicle spaces, service and recreational areas, and its disposal from the site.
11.6.2.5. Site Planning. A plan of the proposed manufactured home park must be developed for approval of the City indicating the layout of manufactured/recreational vehicle spaces, roads, walks, service buildings, service areas, utilities, and necessary grading. Determination must be made in the initial planning stage on the number of manufactured/mobile homes/recreational vehicles to be accommodated.
11.6.2.5.1. Spacing.
11.6.2.5.1.1. Each manufactured/mobile home/recreational vehicle space must be not less than one thousand two hundred fifty (1250) square feet in area and should be at least twenty-five (25) feet wide.
11.6.2.5.1.2. The minimum spacing between manufactured/recreational vehicles and between manufactured/mobile homes and buildings shall be a minimum of 15 feet on all sides.
11.6.2.5.2. Roads, walks and parking areas.
11.6.2.5.2.1. General circulation. Safety and convenience must be a major consideration in the layout of roads, walks, and parking areas within the manufactured home park. All roads must be continuous and provide connectivity to a public rights-of-way street.
11.6.2.5.2.2. Service vehicle access. Suitable vehicular access for fire-fighting equipment, delivery of fuel, removal of garbage and refuse, and for other necessary services must be provided.
11.6.2.5.2.3. Width of roads and parking areas. Main access roads, excluding parking, must be two lane and at least twenty-four (24) feet wide and meet standards of the Salmon Fire Protection District and the City of Salmon road construction standard.
11.6.2.5.2.4. Parking area. The same number of motor vehicle parking spaces must be provided as the number of manufactured home recreational vehicle spaces. These must be provided in additional parking areas.
11.6.2.5.2.5. Walks. The manufactured home recreational vehicle park walk system must include a walk from the manufactured home to service facilities.
11.6.2.5.2.5.1. Width of Walks
11.6.2.5.2.5.1.1. Public Walks: Minimum four (4) feet.
11.6.2.5.2.5.1.2. Entrance Walks: Minimum three (3) feet from public walk to manufactured home/recreational vehicle.
Page 41 of 135
11.6.2.6. Service Buildings. Each manufactured home/recreational vehicle park that is planning on serving recreational vehicles must be provided with one (1) or more service buildings containing the requisite number of plumbing fixtures and other service equipment. The service buildings must conform in general to the following requirements:
11.6.2.6.1. Location. The building should be located not more than two hundred (200) feet from any recreational vehicle space.
11.6.2.6.2. Construction. The materials and methods used in the construction of service buildings must conform to the building code. It must have an interior finish which is moisture resistant and can be easily cleaned. All rooms of service buildings must be ventilated and all exterior openings provided with screens.
11.6.2.6.3. Facilities (Recreational Vehicle Park Only). Separate men’s and women’s restrooms shall be ADA compliant and distinctly marked. These facilities must be separated by a sound-resistant wall. A vestibule or screen wall must be provided to prevent direct view into the restrooms when exterior doors are open.
11.6.2.6.4. Plumbing fixtures. Every manufactured home/recreational vehicle park must provide adequate sanitation and laundry facilities. In no instance should there be less than one laundry unit (laundry or washing machine); one water closet, one lavatory and one shower for women; and one water closet, one lavatory and one shower for men. A water closet must be provided in each service building. The water closet should be in a separate room of the service building with a single direct opening to the outside.
11.6.2.6.4.1. The facilities listed above will accommodate the planned number of recreational vehicle spaces. One (1) water closet must be provided for each sex for every ten (10) additional recreational vehicles. (Urinals for men may be substituted for two-third (2/3) of these water closets).
11.6.2.6.4.2. One lavatory must be provided for each sex for every ten (10) additional recreational vehicles; and one (1) shower or bathtub for each sex for every twenty (20) additional recreational vehicles. A laundry unit must be provided for every twenty (2) additional spaces.
11.6.2.7. Fire Prevention. The court area shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the Salmon Fire District.
11.6.3. Regulations.
11.6.3.1. No permanent additions of any kind shall be built onto, nor become a part of, any manufactured/recreational vehicle and be set up in accordance with the Idaho Mobile/Manufacture Home set up guide as amended.
Page 42 of 135
11.6.3.2. Skirting of manufactured home is required. Such skirting shall not permanently attach the manufactured/mobile home or recreational vehicle to the ground, provide a harborage for rodents, or create a fire hazard.
11.6.3.3. The wheels of a recreational vehicle shall not be removed, except temporarily when necessary for repairs.
11.6.3.4. Jacks or stabilizers may be placed under the frame of the manufactured home or recreational vehicle to prevent movement on the springs while the manufactured home or recreational vehicle is parked and occupied.
11.6.4. Maintenance.
11.6.5. All land visible from the public rights-of-way including exterior premises and vacant land whether improved or unimproved and exterior areas under any roof, not enclosed by walls, doors, or windows of any building shall be maintained free of:
11.6.5.1. Any accumulation of garbage, debris, rubble, hazardous waste, litter, rubbish, refuse or waste material. Garbage services shall be provided.
11.6.5.2. Abandoned, discarded, broken or inoperable commercial or industrial equipment, appliances or other equipment that could a hazard to children, animal and the public.
11.6.5.3. Any unguarded and unprotected or abandoned pit, well, cellar, hole, trench or other excavation of more than two feet in depth on any unenclosed lot that may constitute a threat or public hazard.
11.6.6. All fences, screens, and retaining walls visible from a public rights-of-way shall be structurally sound and not constitute a hazard or condition of disrepair.
11.6.7. All premises shall be maintained to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water which otherwise may cause a hazardous or unhealthy condition, become a breeding area for insects; or allow the soil erosion or damage to foundations walls.
11.6.8. All swimming pools, spas, hot tubs and fountains shall be maintained so as to not create a health or safety hazard, harbor insect infestation or a deteriorated condition. Fencing required for swimming pools or spas shall be maintained in good condition.
11.6.9. Vacant and unsecured buildings, structures and premises shall be actively maintained and monitored including the removal of exterior trash, debris and graffiti. Steps shall be taken to prevent criminal activities in these areas.
Page 43 of 135
Chapter 12 - Required Improvements, Development Agreement, Phased Development
12.1. Purpose. This chapter defines the tools to require that an owner or developer make a written commitment concerning the use or development of a subject parcel and may include provisions governing the creation, form, recording, modification, enforcement and termination of conditional commitments.
12.2. Required Improvements. A required improvement is any public or private improvement that must be provided to comply with this code and the City Code.
12.3. Standards for Required Improvements. All required improvements shall be installed in compliance with this code including any design and engineering standards separately adopted by the City or other agencies responsible for providing service to the development.
12.4. Responsibility. Required improvements to all new development shall be designed and installed to City standards at the expense of the owner(s) or developer(s) of the property being developed. As provided by City Code, the City may, at its discretion, participate in the costs of adding capacity to required improvements in order to provide for anticipated future developments.
12.5. Cost Share. As provided by City Code, costs for required improvements installed at the expense of the owner or developer may be reimbursed to the owner or developer by the owners or developers of properties benefiting from said public improvements at the rate set by the City per lineal foot of each property frontage.
12.6. Inspection and Acceptance of Improvements.
12.6.1. All required public improvements shall be installed by the owner or developer to the City’s satisfaction before a final plat is recorded or the development is offered for lease or sale, leased, sold, or occupied. All required improvements shall be inspected by the City before acceptance.
12.6.2. Required improvements shall be inspected by the City before acceptance. Acceptance of required improvements shall be by action of the City Council following submission of the developer's written request for acceptance and receipt of the Public Works Superintendent’s report that all improvements have been inspected and are in compliance with all regulations.
12.7. Inspection Fees. Inspection fees for all required improvements shall be paid before any work on required improvements is permitted.
12.8. Development Agreement.
12.8.1. Effect of Development Agreement. The City Council may require or permit as a condition of approval that an owner or developer makes a written commitment concerning the approved use or development of the subject parcel. Development Agreements do not insulate developments from changes in state, local or federal regulations or changes in building and/or fire codes.
Page 44 of 135
12.8.2. Commitment. Such commitments shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder and shall take effect upon the adoption of the amendment to the zoning ordinance. Unless modified or terminated by the governing board after a public hearing, a commitment is binding on the owner of the parcel even if it is unrecorded; however, an unrecorded commitment is binding on a subsequent owner or other person acquiring an interest in the parcel only if that subsequent owner or other person has actual notice of the commitment.
12.8.3. Modifications. A commitment may be modified only by the permission of the governing board after complying with the notice and hearing provisions of section 67-6509, Idaho Code.
12.8.4. Termination. A commitment may be terminated, and the zoning designation upon which the use is based reversed, upon the failure of the requirements in the commitment after a reasonable time as determined by the governing board or upon the failure of the owner; each subsequent owner or each other person acquiring an interest in the parcel to comply with the conditions in the commitment and after complying with the notice and hearing provisions of section 67-6509, Idaho Code.
Page 45 of 135
Chapter 13 - Sign Regulations
13.1. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to support the use of signs to be maintained in a safe and attractive condition, to promote the public health, safety and welfare of the community, and to preserve, promote and enhance the City’s scenic and commercial environment.
13.2. Permits. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a permit is required for the placement of certain signage. A building permit may also be required for compliance with the building code.
13.3. Applications. Applications for a sign permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Administrator, and shall include the following:
13.3.1. In the case of an application for any off-premise signage, written permission obtained from the business owner within whose business frontage the sign is located.
13.3.2. Multiple Signs may be permitted on one (1) sign permit application, subject to one (1) sign permit fee, provided the application includes all information relevant to all signs being permitted at that time.
13.4. Exempt Signs. No sign permit shall be required for the following signage in all zoning districts, and building permits may be required:
13.4.1. One (1) on premise, non-illuminated sign for home occupations per 10.25.
13.4.2. Real estate signs not exceeding four (4) by eight (8) feet.
13.4.3. Temporary general information signs including but not limited to "For Sale" signs, "Sale” signs, etc., not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face.
13.4.4. Temporary signs may be displayed for up to forty-five (45) consecutive days and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face.
13.4.5. Banners, pennants, and festoons advertising special events may be displayed up to forty-five (45) consecutive days. Such signs shall not be strung between utility poles or overhang the rights-of-way without approval by the City Council.
13.4.6. Any changes of message, display or face of the sign that does not alter the exterior dimensions of the existing sign cabinet. Electrical permits shall be required for electrical hookups.
13.4.7. Any political signs as controlled by state law. Such signs will be removed within forty-eight (48) hours after the end of the election day for which the sign was installed.
13.5. Signs Prohibited in all Zoning Districts.
13.5.1. Signs attached to trees, telephone poles or streetlights may not be posted for more than five (5) days and must be removed by owner.
13.5.2. Signs which make use of words such as "Stop", "Look", "Danger", or any other words, phrases, symbols or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
Page 46 of 135
13.5.3. Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from door, window, fire escape, other exit way, or standpipe.
13.5.4. Any sign or other advertising structure containing any obscene, indecent or immoral matter.
13.5.5. Any sign or sign structure which is structurally unsafe, or constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment, or is capable of causing electrical shock to persons likely to come in contact with it.
13.5.6. Search and/or strobe lights.
13.6. Signs Permitted in all Zoning Districts.
13.6.1. Subdivision Identification Signs. Such signs may be erected for the purpose of identifying a residential development. Sight triangle regulations must be followed.
13.6.2. Real estate development project signs. Such signs shall be permitted when erected for the purpose of selling or promoting a residential project. Sight triangle regulations must be followed.
13.6.3. Non-illuminated home occupation signs as provided for by 10.25.25 of this code.
13.7. General Placement and Performance Standards in all Zoning Districts.
13.7.1. Maintenance. The owner of a sign and the owner of the premise on which such sign is located shall be jointly liable to maintain such signs in compliance with this chapter.
13.7.1.1. Unmaintained signage for abandoned or relocated business shall be removed from the site.
13.8. General Structural, Placement and Illumination Requirements.
13.8.1. Signs and sign structures shall meet the applicable requirements in the Building Code and this chapter.
13.8.2. Beams from lights illuminating a sign shall be directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.
13.8.3. Electronic message signs shall incorporate dimming capability.
13.8.4. All signage shall be subject to the site distance triangle requirements of 10.3 of this code.
13.8.5. No sign shall be constructed in such a manner as to block any other sign from street level.
13.9. Total Sign Area. The total sign area allowed per individual business site shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area in all commercial, industrial and agricultural zones unless otherwise provided for by this chapter.
13.10. Portable and Sandwich Board Signs.
13.10.1. Subject to the provisions of this sub-section, any business owner having a business located within a commercial or industrial zoning district may erect and maintain not more than two (2) portable sandwich board commercial signs within
Page 47 of 135
the business frontage of the business for which the advertisement or solicitation is made.
13.10.2. In addition to 13.7.5.1 above, the owner of any business located within the CC zoning district may also erect one additional portable sandwich board off-premise commercial sign upon Main Street, provided that written permission is obtained from the business owner within whose business frontage the sign is located.
13.10.3. All portable or sandwich board signs shall not obstruct the vision of vehicular traffic, the sign shall not exceed 2 ½ feet in width and 4 feet in total height per side, shall not impede American with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements, shall not exceed one-half (1/2) the width of the sidewalk or walkway on which such sign is placed, and shall be removed after the conclusion of business hours.
13.11. Wall Signs. A wall sign shall be attached flat against the wall and project no further than eighteen (18) inches from the building.
13.12. Projecting Signs. A projecting sign shall not extend beyond the top of the wall on which it is placed. A minimum eight (8) foot clearance from grade is required and may extend no more than four (4) feet over a public sidewalk.
13.13. Roof Signs.
13.13.1. Roof signs shall not project further than eighteen (18) inches from the building.
13.13.2. Roof-mounted signs shall not exceed the highest point of a roof or parapet unless granted an exception by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
13.14. Pole/Ground Signs.
13.14.1. The maximum height of a pole/ground sign shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
13.14.2. Any individual pole/ground sign structure shall not contain in excess of two hundred (200) square feet of signage when located within twenty-five (25) feet of any property line.
13.14.3. One pole/ground sign per site shall be permitted not exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in height from finished grade.
13.14.4. All wiring serving pole/ground signs shall be underground.
13.14.5. No pole/ground sign shall be located in a public street.
13.14.6. The base of the sign cabinet within a sight distance triangle shall be a maximum three (3) feet in total height from finished grade.
13.15. Suspended/Hanging Signs. Such signs may accessorize awning structures and shall have a minimum clearance of seven feet (7') to the sidewalk.
13.16. Displays. Requests for temporary displays should specify the location of the display, the typed, size, number, and location of devices in the display, and the intended starting and ending dates. All displays over forty-five (45) days, shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to issuance of a permit.
Page 48 of 135
13.17. Reader Boards (changeable copy panels). Reader boards, including changeable electronic message boards, are permitted in all commercial zones, but must be counted into the total sign area allowed on a lot.
13.18. Multi-use Malls, Shopping Centers, Commercial, Professional plazas. The following provisions shall apply to a complex containing two (2) or more businesses in all commercial zoning districts:
13.18.1. Individual Business. Each individual business within such a complex may have a total signage area of sixty-four (64) square feet
13.18.2. Common Signage. Such a complex may also share additional pole ground signage which collectively advertises the name of the complex and/or the names of the individual businesses. See also the definition of "common signage".
13.19. Nonconforming Signs.
13.19.1. Nonconforming signs may retain existing size and location, regardless of content. Any new signage for existing nonconforming uses shall be in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. Changes which reduce the degree of nonconformity (i.e., cabinet or copy size/overall height reductions, sight triangle corrections, or encroachments on the public rights-of-way) shall be permitted as long as the original structure has not become structurally unsound and the site has maintained continuous service to customers and/or clientele.
13.19.2. Existing nonconforming signs shall be counted toward the total signage allowed on property or business.
13.19.3. The continued use of a nonconforming sign shall be subject to applicable provisions of Chapter 3-Nonconforming Uses. Nonconforming signs and sign structures shall lose their nonconforming status if a sign cabinet, face, or structure is removed, refurbished, replaced, or relocated without a permit, or a sign has been improperly maintained or has become structurally unsound.
13.20. Compliance.
13.20.1. If the Zoning Administrator finds that any sign regulated in this chapter is unsafe or insecure, or has been constructed or erected in violation of the provisions of this chapter, he shall begin enforcement actions pursuant to Chapter 4 - Administrative Procedures of this code.
13.20.2. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken at law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure, or premise. These remedies shall be in addition to any other penalties described in this chapter.
13.21. Appeals. A decision of the Zoning Administrator or Planning and Zoning Commission may be appealed using the procedure of Chapter 4 - Administrative Procedures of this code.
Page 49 of 135
Chapter 14- Landscaping And Buffering
14.1. Purpose. Buffering requirements are an essential element in mitigating potential land use conflicts and enhancing the visual appeal of the City. The purpose of this Chapter is to assure that negative impact of special uses is mitigated through the use of buffering. The purpose of landscaping is to enhance the esthetic values and appearance of the properties within the city.
14.2. General Provisions: A landscaping and/or buffering plan shall be submitted with the application for a special use permit. That plan shall show:
14.2.1. The width of the buffer.
14.2.2. The number, size, and species of all proposed plant materials.
14.2.3. How the proposed buffer will be graded (i.e. level, berm, swale).
14.2.4. How irrigation will be provided.
14.2.5. The location of any fences, walls, sign poles or pedestals, or other structures that will be placed in the buffer.
14.2.6. Existing vegetation shall be retained to serve required buffering or screening functions wherever possible.
14.2.7. The developer of property shall provide the buffer.
14.2.8. In the event a lower intensity development is placed next to an existing high intensity property, the lower intensity developer would be required to provide the buffer.
14.2.9. No buffers are required on those sides of property adjoining agricultural zones.
14.2.10. Buffering shall be sufficient to mitigate all negative impacts on the surrounding area.
14.2.11. All buffers and/or landscaping are to be maintained and owners will be deemed in violation of the code if maintenance is not thorough and regular. Maintenance of landscaping and buffering shall be the responsibility of the owner. Natural vegetation and xeriscapes are encouraged.
14.3. Buffers adjoining roads. Areas of high intensity property that are used for ingress or egress or building frontage do not require buffers. Planting and landscaping are encouraged in the building frontage area. The maximum fence height is seven (7) feet and Clear Vision Triangles must be maintained.
Page 50 of 135
Chapter 15- Lighting Standards
15.1. Purpose. The general purpose of this Chapter is to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare of the public by establishing regulations and a process of review for exterior lighting. Exterior lighting is subject to the following standards:
15.1.1. To protect against direct glare of excessive lighting; and
15.1.2. To provide safe roadways for motorists, cyclists and pedestrians; and
15.1.3. To prevent light trespass in all areas of the City; and
15.1.4. To promote efficient and cost effective lighting; and
15.1.5. To ensure that sufficient lighting can be provided where needed to promote safety and security; and
15.1.6. To allow for flexibility in the style of lighting fixtures; and
15.1.7. To provide lighting guidelines.
15.2. Scope. All exterior lighting installed after the effective date of this code shall be in conformance with the requirements established by this Chapter and any other applicable code requirements. All existing lighting installed prior to the effective date of this Chapter shall not be required to change until such time the entire lighting unit is being replaced.
15.3. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this section it’s most reasonable application.
15.3.1. Area light - Area light includes, but is not limited to, street lights, parking lot lights and yard lights.
15.3.2. Eighty-five (85) degree full cut-off type fixtures - Fixtures that do not allow light to escape above an eighty-five (85) degree angle measured from a vertical line from the center of the lamp extended to the ground.
15.3.3. Existing lighting - Any and all lighting installed prior to the effective date of this code.
15.3.4. Exterior lighting - Temporary or permanent lighting that is installed, located or used in such a manner to cause light rays to shine outside. Fixtures that are installed indoors that are intended to light something outside are considered exterior lighting for the intent of this code.
15.3.5. Flood lights - Lights that are designed to flood a well-defined area with light.
15.3.6. Full cut-off fixtures - Fixtures, as installed, that are designed or shielded in such a manner that all light rays emitted by the fixture and downward directed either directly from the lamps or indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted.
Page 51 of 135
15.3.7. Glare - Intense light that results in discomfort and/or a reduction of visual performance and visibility.
15.3.8. Holiday lighting - Festoon type lights, limited to small individual bulbs on a string.
15.3.9. Light – A form of radiant energy acting on the retina of the eye to make sight possible; brightness, illumination, a lamp, as defined above.
15.3.10. Light pollution - Any adverse effect of manmade light including, but not limited to, light trespass, lighting directed upwards (up lighting), the uncomfortable distraction to the eye, or any manmade light that diminishes the ability to view the night sky; often used to denote urban sky glow.
15.3.10.1. Light Reflection- Light reflected off buildings or structures
15.3.10.2. Indirect Lighting- Reflected or diffused lighted used to avoid glare or shadows
15.3.10.3. Area lighting- A light used to illuminate an area but not go beyond that area
15.3.11. Light trespass - Light falling where it is not wanted or needed, generally caused by a light on a property of others.
15.3.12. Luminaries - The complete lighting unit, including the lamp, the fixture, and other parts.
15.3.13. Recessed - A light that is built into a structure or portion of a structure such that the light is fully cut-off and no part of the light extends or protrudes beyond the underside of a structure or portion of a structure.
15.3.14. Shielded - Light emitted from the fixture is projected below a horizontal plane running through the lowest point of the fixture where light is emitted. The bulb is not visible with a shielded light fixture, and no light is emitted from the sides of the fixture. Also considered a full cut-off fixture.
15.3.15. Temporary lighting - Lighting that is intended to be used for a special event for seven days or less.
15.4. Criteria.
15.4.1. Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting shall be full cut-off fixtures with the light source fully shielded.
15.4.2. Flood lights. Flood lights are to be directional shielded. Flood lights with external shielding shall be angled providing that no light escapes above a twenty-five (25) degree angle measured from the vertical line from the center of the light extended to the ground, and so light cannot cause glare or light to shine on adjacent property or public rights-of-way. Photocells with timers that allow a flood light to go on at dusk and off by eleven (11) p.m. are encouraged.
15.4.3. Sensor activated lighting. Sensor activated lighting may be unshielded provided it is located in such a manner as to prevent direct glare and lighting into properties of others or into a public rights-of-way, and provided the light is set to only go on
Page 52 of 135
when activated and to go off within five (5) minutes after activation has ceased, and the light shall not be triggered by activity off the property.
15.4.4. Vehicular and temporary emergency lighting. Vehicular lights and all temporary emergency lighting needed by emergency services shall be exempt from the requirements of this Chapter.
15.4.5. Flag Poles. Upward flagpole lighting is permitted.
15.4.6. Area Lights. All area lights, including street lights and parking area lighting, shall be full cut-off fixtures and are encouraged to be eighty-five (85) degree full cut-off type fixtures.
15.4.7. Luminaries Mounting Height. Freestanding luminaries shall be no higher than twenty-five (25) feet above the stand/pole base, except that luminaries used for playing fields shall be exempt from the height restriction provided all other provisions of this code are met and the light is used only while the field is in use, and except that street lights used on major roads may exceed this standard if necessary as determined by the City, as advised by a lighting engineer. Building mounted luminaries shall be attached only to walls, and the top of the fixture shall not exceed the height of the parapet or roof, whichever is greater.
15.4.8. Up lighting. Up lighting is prohibited in all zoning districts, except in cases where the fixture is shielded by a roof overhang or similar structural shield from the sky and will not cause light to extend beyond the structural shield, and except as specifically permitted in this code.
15.4.9. Canopy Lights. All lighting shall be recessed sufficiently so as to ensure that no light source is visible from or causes glare on public rights-of-way or adjacent property.
15.4.10. Towers. All radio, communication and navigation towers that require lights shall have dual lighting capabilities pursuant to the requirements of state and federal laws.
15.4.11. Temporary Lighting. Temporary lighting that conforms to the requirements of this code shall be allowed.
Page 53 of 135
Chapter 16- Annexations
16.1. Purpose. To provide for the orderly allocation of land into the city limits, to provide assurances to the governing bodies that the annexation of land into the city limits will not have an adverse effect on the City’s ability to provide and maintain a high level of municipal service within the existing city limits, will not have an adverse effect on the existing municipal infrastructure, will not have an adverse fiscal impact to the city, and will provide and maintain a high level of municipal service to lands being annexed.
16.2. General Criteria to Qualify for Annexation. All annexation requests must comply with I.C 50-222
16.3. De-Annexations - Qualifications and Criteria. Pursuant to I.C. 50-225 - Exclusion of Territory, the City Council has the authority to enact ordinances for the purpose of de-annexation. At a regular meeting, the City Council may deliberate as to whether or not they are interested in the petition of de-annexing the property. If not, the City Council shall take formal action to deny the petition. If the City Council decides to consider the request, a completed application shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator pursuant to this chapter.
16.4. General Qualifications for Application Completeness.
16.4.1. All applications shall follow procedures set forth in Idaho Code 55-222.
16.4.2. A completed application, supporting materials, and fee shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator by the owner of the real property or representative. Incomplete applications will not be accepted, and will cause delay in the processing and scheduling of the public hearing.
16.5. Zoning Designation, Future Land Use Plan Map, and Jurisdiction. The City shall, concurrently with the application for annexation or de-annexation, consider the Comprehensive Plan, the Future Land Use Plan Map, and a zoning designation consistent with the requirements of Idaho Code 67-6509 and the Salmon Development Code. The City may consider, but not approve any other application for development on the subject property under the City’s zoning or subdivision ordinance until the application for annexation has been approved and an annexation ordinance has been adopted and published in accordance with state law.
16.6. Requirements for Submittal.
16.6.1. The applicant will be required to pay any fees for such application as set by the City.
16.6.2. A legal description of the annexation area, by electronic and hard paper copy
16.6.3. A statement of the existing and proposed use of the land.
16.6.4. The application and signed affidavit of ownership shall include the owner(s) and agent(s) of the owner, and all holders of title interest within the proposed area to be annexed.
16.6.5. A title report and/or warranty deed demonstrating legal ownership(s) of the property(s) to be annexed.
Page 54 of 135
16.6.6. Existing or proposed deed restrictions on the property(s) to be annexed, if any.
16.6.7. A description and map(s) of the proposed area, including:
16.6.8. A vicinity map drawn to scale identifying the area to be annexed and existing city limits.
16.6.9. The size of the area to be annexed in square footage or acres.
16.6.10. Contour map depicting slope lines.
16.6.11. FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) (FIRM) showing delineation of floodplain boundaries and elevations. In the event that base flood elevations are not delineated; it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide such information upon submittal of an application for subdivision or development.
16.6.12. All rivers, streams, drainages, canals, drains, ditches, and other watercourses within the area to be annexed.
16.6.13. Identification of irrigation districts and provisions for delivering irrigation water to the proposed development, if any.
16.6.14. Identification of all rivers, streams, drainages, canals, drains, ditches, culverts, wells and other watercourses used in the transportation and/or conveyance of water to any holders of water rights identified within the area to be annexed or downstream users affected by the annexation.
16.6.15. Approximate direction of surface water drainage.
16.6.16. If applicable, a wetlands delineation map.
16.6.17. Location of existing domestic and irrigation wells.
16.6.18. Evidence that the applicant has contacted Eastern Idaho Public Health District regarding locations of existing septic systems and groundwater levels.
16.6.19. A soils map and narrative describing the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) soils classification(s) or a report describing soil classification from a licensed geologist or Idaho State licensed soil engineer of the area to be annexed.
16.6.20. If applicable, a Level I environmental study showing the presence of any hazardous waste.
16.6.21. If part of a phased development, a phasing plan of the area to be annexed including proposed dates all other development.
16.7. Development Agreement. Pursuant to Chapter 16- Annexations of this code, annexed property shall be required to connect to city water and sewer and other necessary city services as a condition of a signed and executed Development Agreement. In addition to any other conditions of approval, said Agreement shall stipulate specifically that:
16.7.1. All development shall comply with applicable criteria enumerated in Chapter 12 - Required Improvements, Development Agreement, Phased Development of this code.
Page 55 of 135
16.7.2. Unless otherwise stipulated in the terms of agreement, an annexation ordinance may be repealed and the property de-annexed by action of the City Council if the terms and conditions of the Development Agreement have not been met.
16.7.3. Said Development Agreement shall be signed and executed by the parties prior to the third and final reading of the Annexation Ordinance at a regularly scheduled City Council Meeting.
16.8. Consent to Annex.
16.8.1. Prior to the third and final reading of an annexation ordinance, all consenting property owners within the proposed annexation area must sign their consent to be annexed as required by Idaho Code 50-222. Such evidence shall be recorded by the City at the County Recorder’s office with official notary seal signatures prior to publication of the Ordinance pursuant to state law.
16.8.2. Consent to annex shall follow requirements of Idaho Code 50-222.
16.9. Annexation Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance and Future Land Use Plan Map.
16.9.1. The implementation of any annexation proposal wherein the City Council determines that annexation is appropriate shall be concluded with the passage of an ordinance of annexation. (I.C. 50-902).
16.9.2. Concurrently or immediately following the adoption of an annexation ordinance, the City Council shall by resolution, amend the Comprehensive Plan and Future Land Use Plan Map (I.C. 67-6525).
16.9.3. After the Plan has been amended or adopted, the zoning ordinance may then be considered (I.C. 67-6511(b)).
16.9.4. The Annexation Ordinance and Zoning Ordinance shall be recorded by the City with official notary seal and signatures prior to publication of the Annexation Ordinance pursuant to state law.
16.10. Notice of Ordinance. The City Clerk shall send a certified copy of the annexation ordinance to the Lemhi County auditor, assessor and treasurer, and Idaho State Tax Commission within ten (10) days following the effective date of annexation ordinance.
16.11. Appeals. Pursuant to Chapter 4 - Administrative Procedures and Idaho Code 50-222 of this code, a notice of appeal may be filed with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days after the Record of Decision has been published. The decision of the City Council to annex and zone lands as a category B or category C annexation shall be subject to judicial review in accordance with the procedures provided in Chapter 52, title 67, Idaho Code, and pursuant to the standards set forth in section 67-5279, Idaho Code. Any such appeal shall be filed by an affected person in the appropriate district court no later than twenty-eight (28) days after the date of publication of the annexation ordinance.
Page 56 of 135
Chapter 17- Flood Hazard Zones
17.1. Statutory Authority. The Legislature of the State of Idaho, pursuant to Idaho Code §§ 46-1020 through 46-1024, authorizes local governments to adopt floodplain management ordinances that identify floodplains and minimum floodplain development standards to minimize flood hazards and protect human life, health, and property. Therefore, the Salmon City Council of the City of Salmon, Idaho does hereby ordain as follows:
17.2. Findings of Fact
17.2.1. The flood hazard areas of the City of Salmon are subject to periodic inundation that results in:
17.2.1.1. loss of life and property;
17.2.1.2. health and safety hazards;
17.2.1.3. disruption of commerce and governmental services;
17.2.1.4. extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection; and
17.2.1.5. impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
17.2.2. These flood losses are caused by structures in flood hazard areas, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
17.2.3. Local government units have the primary responsibility for planning, adopting, and enforcing land use regulations to accomplish proper floodplain management.
17.3. Statement of Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to promote public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
17.3.1. Protect human life, health, and property;
17.3.2. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in floodplains;
17.3.3. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas;
17.3.4. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
17.3.5. Minimize the need for rescue and emergency services associated with flooding, generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
17.3.6. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
17.3.7. Ensure potential buyers are notified the property is in an area of special flood hazard; and
Page 57 of 135
17.3.8. Ensure those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.
17.4. Objectives and Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purpose, this ordinance includes methods and provisions to:
17.4.1. Require that development which is vulnerable to floods, including structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety, and welfare of citizens, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
17.4.2. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion;
17.4.3. Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion;
17.4.4. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert flood waters or that may increase flood hazards to other lands;
17.4.5. Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which carry and store flood waters.
17.5. DEFINITIONS. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted according to the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
Accessory Structure (appurtenant structure): a structure on the same lot or parcel as a principal structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate to the principal structure.
Addition (to an existing building): an extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or structure.
Appeal: a request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of provisions of this ordinance or request for a variance.
Area of Shallow Flooding: a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, or AR/AH zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1 percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of Special Flood Hazard: see Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
Base Flood: the flood having a one (1) percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base Flood Elevation (BFE): a determination by the Federal Insurance Administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. When the BFE has not been provided in a Special Flood Hazard Area, it may be obtained from engineering studies
Page 58 of 135
available from a Federal, State, or other source using FEMA-approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when combined with the Freeboard, establishes the Flood Protection Elevation.
Basement: any area of the building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building: see Structure.
Critical Facilities: facilities that are vital to flood response activities or critical to the health and safety of the public before, during, and after a flood, such as a hospital, emergency operations center, electric substation, police station, fire station, nursing home, school, vehicle and equipment storage facility, or shelter; and facilities that, if flooded, would make the flood problem and its impacts much worse, such as a hazardous materials facility, power generation facility, water utility, or wastewater treatment plant.
Datum: the vertical datum is a base measurement point (or set of points) from which all elevations are determined. Historically, that common set of points was the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD29). The vertical datum currently adopted by the federal government as a basis for measuring heights is the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
Development: any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
Development Activity: any activity defined as Development which will necessitate a Floodplain Development Permit; such as: the construction of buildings, structures, or accessory structures; additions or substantial improvements to existing structures; bulkheads, retaining walls, piers, and pools; the placement of mobile homes; or the deposition or extraction of materials; the construction or elevation of dikes, berms and levees.
Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM): the digital official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the Special Flood Hazard Areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated.
Elevated Building: for insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Elevation Certificate: The Elevation Certificate is an important administrative tool of the NFIP. It is used to determine the proper flood insurance premium rate; it is used to document elevation information necessary to ensure compliance with community floodplain management regulations; and it may be used to support a request for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) or Letter of Map Revision based on fill (LOMR-F).
Page 59 of 135
Enclosure: an area enclosed by solid walls below the BFE/FPE or an area formed when any space below the BFE/FPE is enclosed on all sides by walls or partitions. Insect screening or open wood lattice used to surround space below the BFE/RFPE is not considered an enclosure.
Encroachment: the advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, structures, or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
Existing Construction: for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. “Existing construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Manufactured Home Subdivision: a manufactured home park or subdivision where the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the original floodplain management regulations adopted by the community, May 14, 1984
Existing Structures: see existing construction.
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood or Flooding:
a. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
3. Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in paragraph a.2. of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.
b. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph a.1. of this definition.
Page 60 of 135
Flood Elevation Determination: See Base Flood Elevation (BFE)
Flood Elevation Study: See Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
Flood Fringe: Per Idaho Code §46-1021: "Flood fringe" is that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway covered by floodwaters during the regulatory flood.
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM): an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administrator, where the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as Zones A, M, and/or E.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): an official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
Flood Insurance Study (FIS): an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations; or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood Zone: a geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
Floodplain or Flood-Prone Area: any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of “flooding”).
Floodplain Administrator: the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Development Permit: any type of permit that is required in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance, prior to the commencement of any development activity.
Floodplain Management: the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and flood plain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations: zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a flood plain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance), and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
Page 61 of 135
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing: any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
Flood Protection Elevation (FPE): the Base Flood Elevation plus the Freeboard.
a. In “Special Flood Hazard Areas” where Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus 1.5 feet of freeboard; and
b. In “Special Flood Hazard Areas” where no BFE has been established, this elevation shall be at least 1.5 feet above the highest adjacent grade. .
Flood Protection System: those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes dams, reservoirs, levees, or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodway: the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation.
Freeboard: a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the hydrologic effects of urbanization in a watershed. The Base Flood Elevation (BFE) plus the freeboard establishes the Flood Protection Elevation (FPE). Freeboard shall be 1.5 feet.
Functionally Dependent Use: a facility that cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
Highest Adjacent Grade (HAG): the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. Refer to the FEMA Elevation Certificate for HAG related to building elevation information.
Historic Structure: a structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the
Page 62 of 135
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or to a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
1. by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
2. directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Letter of Map Change (LOMC): a general term used to refer to the several types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be accomplished by letter. They include Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA), Letter of Map Revision (LOMR), and Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F)
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA): an official amendment, by letter, to an effective National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) map. A LOMA establishes a property’s location in relation to the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). LOMAs are usually issued because a property has been inadvertently mapped as being in the floodplain but is actually on natural high ground above the base flood elevation.
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR): FEMA's modification to an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or a Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective Base Flood Elevations (BFEs), or the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). The LOMR officially revises the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM), and sometimes the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report, and when appropriate, includes a description of the modifications. The LOMR is generally accompanied by an annotated copy of the affected portions of the FIRM, FBFM, or FIS report.
Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F): FEMA's modification of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. The LOMR-F does not change the FIRM, FBFM, or FIS report.
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Insurance Study (FIS). Upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. Building Permits and/or Flood Development Permits cannot be issued based on a CLOMR, because a CLOMR does not change the NFIP map.
Page 63 of 135
Levee: a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed according to sound engineering practices, to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
Levee System: a flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
Local Government: Per Idaho Code § 46-1021: "Local government," in the context of this chapter, means any county or city having planning and zoning authority to regulate land use within its jurisdiction.
Lowest Adjacent Grade (LAG): the lowest point of the ground level next to the structure. Refer to the FEMA Elevation Certificate for LAG related to building elevation information.
Lowest Floor: the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; Provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR § 60.3 and this ordinance.
Manufactured Home: a structure, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term “Manufactured Home” does not include a “Recreational Vehicle.”
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Market Value: the building value, not including the land value and that of any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value may be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated for age of building and quality of construction (Actual Cash Value); or adjusted tax assessed values.
Mean Sea Level: for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum (such as North America Vertical Datum of 1988 - NAVD88) to which Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) shown on a community’s FIRM are referenced.
Mitigation: Per Idaho Code § 46-1021: "Mitigation" means any action taken which will reduce the impact, damage, or cost of the next flood that occurs.
Mudslide (i.e., mudflow): describes a condition where there is a river, flow, or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of
Page 64 of 135
brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. A mudslide (i.e., mudflow) may occur as a distinct phenomenon while a landslide is in progress, and will be recognized as such by the Administrator only if the mudflow, and not the landslide, is the proximate cause of damage that occurs.
Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) Area Management: the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing mudslide (i.e., mudflow) damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, mudslide control works, and flood plain management regulations.
Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) Prone Area: an area with land surfaces and slopes of unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate indicate a potential for mudflow.
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP): The NFIP is a Federal program created by Congress to mitigate future flood losses nationwide through sound, community-enforced building and zoning ordinances and to provide access to affordable, federally backed flood insurance protection for property owners.
New Construction: for floodplain management purposes, a structure for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
Any construction started after May 14, 1984 and before the effective start date of this floodplain management ordinance is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: a place where the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community December 4, 1984.
Person: Per Idaho Code § 46-1021: "Person" means any individual, group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, political subdivision, public or private agency, or entity.
Post-FIRM: construction or other development for which the “start of construction” occurred on or after the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
Pre-FIRM: construction or other development for which the “start of construction” occurred before May 14, 1984, the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
Page 65 of 135
Recreational Vehicle: a vehicle that is:
a. Built on a single chassis, and
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, and
c. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty truck, and
d. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory Flood:
Per Idaho Code § 46-1021:"Regulatory flood" is a flood determined to be representative of large floods known to have occurred in Idaho and which may be expected to occur on a particular stream because of like physical characteristics. The regulatory flood is based upon a statistical analysis of stream flow records available for the watershed or an analysis of rainfall and runoff characteristics in the watershed. In inland areas, the flood frequency of the regulatory flood is once in every one hundred (100) years. This means that in any given year there is a one percent (1%) chance that a regulatory flood may occur or be exceeded.
Regulatory Floodway: See Floodway
Remedy a Violation: to bring the structure or other development into compliance with State or local flood plain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its non-compliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing Federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
Repetitive Loss Structure: An NFIP-insured structure that has had at least two paid flood losses of more than $1,000 each in any 10-year period since 1978.
Riverine: relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA): the land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. For purposes of these regulations, the term “special flood hazard area” is synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area of special flood hazard”.
Start of Construction: includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
Page 66 of 135
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure: a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial Damage: damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent (50%) of its market value before the damage occurred. See definition of “substantial improvement”. Substantial damage also means flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement: any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
2. Any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a “historic structure” and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant to this ordinance.
Technical Bulletins and Technical Fact Sheets: FEMA publications that provide guidance concerning the building performance standards of the NFIP, which are contained in Title 44 of the U S Code of Federal Regulations § 60.3. The bulletins and fact sheets are intended for use primarily by State and local officials responsible for interpreting and enforcing NFIP regulations and by members of the development community, such as design professionals and builders. New bulletins, as well as updates of existing bulletins, are issued periodically as needed. The bulletins do not create regulations. Rather they provide specific guidance for complying with the minimum requirements of existing NFIP regulations.
It should be noted that Technical Bulletins and Technical Fact Sheets provide guidance on the minimum requirements of the NFIP regulations. State or community requirements that exceed those of the NFIP take precedence. Design professionals should contact the community officials to determine whether more restrictive State or local
Page 67 of 135
regulations apply to the building or site in question. All applicable standards of the State or local building code must also be met for any building in a flood hazard area.
Temperature Controlled: having the temperature regulated by a heating and/or cooling system, built-in or appliance.
Variance: a grant of relief by the governing body from a requirement of this ordinance.
Violation: the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations. A structure or other development without the Finished Construction Elevation Certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Water Surface Elevation: the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other specified datum), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the flood plains of coastal or riverine areas.
Watercourse: a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.
17.6. General Provisions.
17.6.1. Lands to Which This Ordinance Applies. This Ordinance shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Salmon. Nothing in this ordinance is intended to allow uses or structures that are otherwise prohibited by the zoning ordinance.
17.6.2. Basis for Special Flood Hazard Areas. The Special Flood Hazard Areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for The City of Salmon, dated December 4, 1984, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) or Digital Flood Insurance Rate Maps (DFIRM), and other supporting data, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this ordinance. The FIS and the FIRM are on file at the office of the City clerk at 200 Main Street Salmon, Idaho 83467.
17.6.3. Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit. A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activities within Special Flood Hazard Areas determined in accordance with the provisions of 17.7.2.
17.6.4. Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
17.6.5. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This ordinance shall not in any way repeal, abrogate, impair, or remove the necessity of compliance with any other laws,
Page 68 of 135
ordinances, regulations, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions, etcetera. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes more stringent or greater restrictions shall control.
17.6.6. Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this ordinance all provisions shall be:
17.6.6.1. Considered as minimum requirements;
17.6.6.2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
17.6.6.3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
17.6.7. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the Special Flood Hazard Areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of The City of Salmon or by any officer or employee thereof for flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or an administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
17.6.8. Penalties for Violation. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or altered unless in full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Salmon from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
17.7. Administration.
17.7.1. Designation of Floodplain Ordinance Administrator. The City Planning & Zoning Administrator hereinafter referred to as the “Floodplain Administrator”, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance.
17.7.2. Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the following duties:
17.7.2.1. Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for all proposed development within Special Flood Hazard Areas to assure that the requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied.
17.7.2.2. Review all proposed development within Special Flood Hazard Areas to assure that all necessary Local, State, and Federal permits have been received, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.
Page 69 of 135
17.7.2.3. Notify adjacent communities and the Idaho Department of Water Resources State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
17.7.2.4. Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained.
17.7.2.5. Prevent encroachments into floodways and flood fringe areas unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of 17.15 are met.
17.7.2.6. Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of 17.8.3.
17.7.2.7. Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed, in accordance with the provisions of 17.8.3.
17.7.2.8. Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public utilities in accordance with the provisions of 17.8.3.
17.7.2.9. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with the provisions of 17.8.3. and 17.12.2.
17.7.2.10. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Areas, floodways, or flood fringe areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter.
17.7.2.11. When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in accordance with the provisions of 17.6.2, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with floodway data or flood fringe area data available from a Federal, State, or other source, including data developed pursuant to 17.13.2.2., in order to administer the provisions of this ordinance.
17.7.2.12. When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway or flood fringe area data has been provided in accordance with the provisions of 17.6.2, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or flood fringe area data available from a Federal, State, or other source in order to administer the provisions of this ordinance.
17.7.2.13. When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure or the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) is above the Base Flood Elevation (BFE), advise the property owner of the option to apply for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) from FEMA.
17.7.2.14. Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of this ordinance and make these records available for public inspection, recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended.
Page 70 of 135
17.7.2.15. Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
17.7.2.16. Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this ordinance, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor.
17.7.2.17. Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of State or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable State or local law may also be revoked.
17.7.2.18. Make periodic inspections throughout the Special Flood Hazard Areas within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
17.7.2.19. Follow through with corrective procedures of 17.9.
17.7.2.20. Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests.
17.7.2.21. Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the FIS Report, FIRM and other official flood maps, and studies adopted in accordance with the provisions of 17.6.2 of this ordinance, including any revisions thereto including Letters of Map Change, issued by FEMA. Notify the NFIP State Coordinator and FEMA of your community’s mapping needs.
17.7.2.22. Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including Letters of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-Fs) and Letters of Map Revision (LOMRs).
17.8. Floodplain Development Application, Permit, and Certification Requirements.
17.8.1. Application Requirements. Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development activities
Page 71 of 135
located within Special Flood Hazard Areas. The following items shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain development permit:
17.8.1.1. A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain development:
17.8.1.1.1. the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems, grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and other development;
17.8.1.1.2. the boundary of the Special Flood Hazard Area as delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in 17.6.2, or a statement that the entire lot is within the Special Flood Hazard Area;
17.8.1.1.3. the flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in 17.6.2;
17.8.1.1.4. the boundary of the floodway(s) or flood fringe area(s) as determined in 17.6.2;
17.8.1.1.5. the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in 17.6.2; 17.6.3; or 17.13;
17.8.1.1.6. the old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
17.8.1.2. Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a Special Flood Hazard Area including but not limited to:
17.8.1.2.1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed reference level (including basement) of all structures;
17.8.1.2.2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure in Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30 will be floodproofed; and
17.8.1.2.3. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
17.8.1.3. If floodproofing, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33) with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise, and maintenance of floodproofing measures.
17.8.1.4. A Foundation Plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this ordinance are met. These details include but are not limited to:
17.8.1.4.1. The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation, or on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
17.8.1.4.2. Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on walls in accordance with 17.11.1.8 when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-30.
Page 72 of 135
17.8.1.5. Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
17.8.1.6. Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
17.8.1.7. Certification that all other Local, State, and Federal permits required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
17.8.1.8. Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of 17.12.6 and 17.12.7 of this chapter are met.
17.8.1.9. A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation, when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and
17.8.1.9.1. A map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation.
17.8.2. Permit Requirements. The Floodplain Development Permit shall include, but not be limited to:
17.8.2.1. A complete description of all the development to be permitted under the floodplain development permit (i.e. house, garage, pool, septic, bulkhead, cabana, pole barn, chicken coop, pier, bridge, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials, etcetera).
17.8.2.2. The Special Flood Hazard Area determination for the proposed development in accordance with available data specified in 17.6.2.
17.8.2.3. The Flood Protection Elevation required for the reference level and all attendant utilities.
17.8.2.4. The Flood Protection Elevation required for the protection of all public utilities.
17.8.2.5. All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
17.8.2.6. A statement that no fill material or other development shall encroach into the floodway or flood fringe area of any watercourse, as applicable.
17.8.2.7. The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30.
17.8.2.8. A statement of the limitations of below BFE enclosure uses, if applicable. (i.e., parking, building access and limited storage only).
17.8.2.9. A statement that all materials below BFE/FPE must be flood resistant materials.
17.8.3. Certification Requirements.
17.8.3.1. Elevation Certificates
Page 73 of 135
17.8.3.1.1. A final as-built Finished Construction Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 86-0-33) is required after construction is completed and prior to Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.
17.8.3.2. Floodproofing Certificate. If non-residential floodproofing is used to meet the Flood Protection Elevation requirements, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level. Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a Floodplain Development Permit. Failure to construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.
17.8.3.3. If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance with the provisions of 17.12.3.2.
17.8.3.4. If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, the following shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit:
17.8.3.4.1. a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; and
17.8.3.4.2. a professional engineer’s certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and
17.8.3.4.3. a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation; and
17.8.3.4.4. an Idaho Stream Channel Alteration Permit approval shall be provided by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.
Page 74 of 135
17.8.3.5. Certification Exemptions. The following structures, if located within Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing certification requirements specified in this subsection:
17.8.3.5.1. Recreational Vehicles meeting requirements of 17.12.5;
17.8.3.5.2. Temporary Structures meeting requirements of 17.12.5.1; and
17.8.3.5.3. Accessory Structures less than 200 square feet meeting requirements of 17.12.7.8.
17.8.4. Determinations for Existing Buildings and Structures. For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the Building Official, shall:
17.8.4.1. Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work. In the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made;
17.8.4.2. Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure;
17.8.4.3. Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
17.8.4.4. Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the adopted Idaho Building Code and this ordinance is required.
17.9. Corrective Procedures.
17.9.1. Violations to be Corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator finds violations of applicable State and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such notification.
17.9.2. Actions in Event of Failure to Take Corrective Action. If the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by personal service, stating:
17.9.2.1. that the building or property is in violation of the floodplain management regulations;
17.9.2.2. that a hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten (10) days after the date of the
Page 75 of 135
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
17.9.2.3. that following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as applicable.
17.9.3. Order to Take Corrective Action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the building or development is in violation of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, he or she shall issue an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period, not less than sixty (60) calendar days, nor more than 180 calendar days. Where the Floodplain Administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he or she may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible.
17.9.4. Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the clerk within ten (10) days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order.
17.9.5. Failure to Comply with Order. If the owner of a building or property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished at the discretion of the court.
17.10. Variance Procedures.
17.10.1. The City/County Building Board of Appeals as established by Lemhi County, hereinafter referred to as the “appeal board”, shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance.
17.10.2. Variances may be issued for:
17.10.2.1. the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure;
17.10.2.2. functionally dependent facilities, if determined to meet the definition as stated in 17.6 of this ordinance, provided provisions of 17.10.9.2-17.10.9.4, have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety; or
17.10.2.3. any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements of this Section.
17.10.3. In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and:
Page 76 of 135
17.10.3.1. the danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
17.10.3.2. the danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
17.10.3.3. the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
17.10.3.4. the importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
17.10.3.5. the necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined under 17.6 of this ordinance as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
17.10.3.6. the availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
17.10.3.7. the compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
17.10.3.8. the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
17.10.3.9. the safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
17.10.3.10. the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
17.10.3.11. the costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
17.10.4. The applicant shall include a written report addressing each of the above factors in 17.10.3 with their application for a variance.
17.10.5. Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this ordinance.
17.10.6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction below the BFE increases risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance.
17.10.7. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the State of Idaho upon request.
17.10.8. Conditions for Variances:
Page 77 of 135
17.10.8.1. Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the structure in violation of other Federal, State, or local laws, regulations, or ordinances.
17.10.8.2. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or flood fringe area if the variance would result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge.
17.10.8.3. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
17.10.8.4. Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit approval.
17.10.8.5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
17.10.8.5.1. a showing of good and sufficient cause;
17.10.8.5.2. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and
17.10.8.5.3. a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
17.10.9. A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities that are located in Special Flood Hazard Areas provided that all of the following conditions are met:
17.10.9.1. The use serves a critical need in the community.
17.10.9.2. No feasible location exists for the use outside the Special Flood Hazard Area.
17.10.9.3. The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to at least the Flood Protection Elevation.
17.10.9.4. The use complies with all other applicable Federal, State and local laws.
17.10.10. The City of Salmon will notify the State NFIP Coordinator of the Idaho Department of Water Resources of its intention to grant a variance at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to granting the variance.
17.10.11. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision to the Court, as provided in Idaho Code 67-6535.
17.11. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
17.11.1. General Standards. In all Special Flood Hazard Areas the following provisions are required:
17.11.1.1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure.
Page 78 of 135
17.11.1.2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in accordance with the Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
17.11.1.3. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
17.11.1.4. All new and replacement electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding to the Flood Protection Elevation. These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.
17.11.1.5. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
17.11.1.6. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
17.11.1.7. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
17.11.1.8. A fully enclosed area, of new construction and substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor shall:
17.11.1.8.1. be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least to the Flood Protection Elevation; and
17.11.1.8.2. include, in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-30, flood openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum design criteria:
17.11.1.8.2.1. A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding;
17.11.1.8.2.2. The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one (1) square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
17.11.1.8.2.3. If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit;
17.11.1.8.2.4. The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the interior or exterior adjacent grade;
Page 79 of 135
17.11.1.8.2.5. Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; and
17.11.1.8.2.6. Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
17.11.1.9. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, shall meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this ordinance.
17.11.1.10. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this ordinance and located totally or partially within the floodway, flood fringe area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the Flood Protection Elevation in the floodway, flood fringe area, or stream setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this ordinance.
17.11.1.11. New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not be permitted, except by variance as specified in 17.10.10. A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment facility may be located in a Special Flood Hazard Area only if the structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the Flood Protection Elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of 17.8.3.
17.11.1.12. All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and determined to be reasonably safe from flooding.
17.11.1.13. All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
17.11.1.14. All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
17.11.1.15. All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.
17.11.1.16. When a structure is partially located in a Special Flood Hazard Area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and substantial improvements.
Page 80 of 135
17.11.1.17. When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest Base Flood Elevation (BFE) shall apply
17.12. Specific Standards In all Special Flood Hazard Areas where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in 17.6.2, or 17.14, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of 17.11, are required:
17.12.1. Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the Flood Protection Elevation, as defined in 17.6 of this ordinance.
17.12.2. Non-Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the Flood Protection Elevation, as defined in 17.6 of this ordinance. Structures located in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 may be floodproofed to the Flood Protection Elevation in lieu of elevation provided that all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the Flood Protection Elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AH and AO Zones, the floodproofing elevation shall be in accordance with 17.16.2. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the floodproofing standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in 17.8.3, along with the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance plan.
17.12.3. Manufactured Homes.
17.12.3.1. New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the Flood Protection Elevation, as defined in 17.6 of this ordinance.
17.12.3.2. Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most current edition of the Idaho Division of Building Safety’s “Idaho Manufactured Home Installation Standard” in accordance with Idaho Code § 44-2201(2). Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis thirty-six (36) inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above thirty-six (36) inches in height, an engineering certification is required.
17.12.3.3. All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the requirements of 17.11.1.8.
17.12.3.4. An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents of all new, substantially improved, or substantially damaged manufactured home
Page 81 of 135
parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the local Emergency Management Coordinator
17.12.4. Additions/Improvements.
17.12.4.1. Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to the existing structure are:
17.12.4.1.1. not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more non-conforming than the existing structure; or
17.12.4.1.2. a substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new construction
17.12.4.2. Additions to post-FIRM structures that are a substantial improvement with no modifications to the existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.
17.12.4.3. Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to the existing structure are:
17.12.4.3.1. not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction; or
17.12.4.3.2. a substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new construction.
17.12.4.4. Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a 5 year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started, must comply with the standards for new construction. For each building or structure, the 5 year period begins on the date of the first improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The requirement does not, however, include either:
17.12.4.4.1. any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assume safe living conditions; or
17.12.4.4.2. any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.
Page 82 of 135
17.12.5. Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall be either:
17.12.5.1. Temporary Placement.
17.12.5.1.1. be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached additions); or
17.12.5.2. Permanent Placement.
17.12.5.2.1. Recreational vehicles that do not meet the limitations of Temporary Placement shall meet all the requirements for new construction, as set forth in 17.11.1.
17.12.6. Temporary Non-Residential Structures. Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure(s) in the event of a flash flood or other type of flood warning notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
17.12.6.1. a specified time period for which the temporary use will be permitted. Time specified may not exceed six (6) months, renewable up to one (1) year;
17.12.6.2. the name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;
17.12.6.3. the time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be removed (i.e., immediately upon flood warning notification);
17.12.6.4. a copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
17.12.6.5. designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside the Special Flood Hazard Area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
17.12.7. Accessory Structures. When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, etc.) are to be placed within a Special Flood Hazard Area, elevation or floodproofing certifications are required for all accessory structures in accordance with 17.8.3, and the following criteria shall be met:
17.12.7.1. Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation (including working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas);
17.12.7.2. Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
17.12.7.3. Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential;
17.12.7.4. Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
17.12.7.5. Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with the provisions of 17.11.1.1;
Page 83 of 135
17.12.7.6. All service facilities, such as electrical, shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of 17.11.1.4; and
17.12.7.7. Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below Flood Protection Elevation in conformance with the provisions of 17.11.1.8.2.
17.12.7.8. An accessory structure with a footprint less than 200 square feet and satisfies the criteria outlined 17.12.7 is not required to meet the elevation or floodproofing standards of 17.11.1.8.
17.12.8. Tanks. When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within a Special Flood Hazard Area, the following criteria shall be met:
17.12.8.1. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the base flood, including the effects of buoyancy (assuming the tank is empty);
17.12.8.2. Elevated above-ground tanks, in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement during conditions of the base flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area;
17.12.8.3. Not elevated above-ground tanks, that do not meet the elevation requirements of 17.11.1.8 of this ordinance shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris.
17.12.8.4. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be:
17.12.8.4.1. at or above the flood protection elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the base flood; and
17.12.8.4.2. anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood.
17.12.9. Construction of Below-Grade Crawlspace.
17.12.9.1. The interior grade of a crawlspace must not be below the BFE and must not be more than two (2) feet below the exterior lowest adjacent grade (LAG).
17.12.9.2. The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall, must not exceed four (4) feet at any point.
Page 84 of 135
17.12.9.3. There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should be drained within a reasonable time after a flood event.
17.12.9.4. The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five (5) feet per second for any crawlspace.
17.12.10. Other Development in regulated floodways and flood fringe.
17.12.10.1. Fences that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, in regulated floodways and flood fringe shall meet the limitations of 17.15 of this chapter.
17.12.10.2. Retaining walls, bulkheads, sidewalks, and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways and flood fringe shall meet the limitations of 17.5 of this chapter.
17.12.10.3. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings, and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, which encroach into regulated floodways and flood fringe, shall meet the limitations of 17.15 of this chapter.
17.12.10.4. Drilling water, oil, and/or gas wells including fuel storage tanks, apparatus, and any equipment at the site that encroach into regulated floodways and flood fringe shall meet the limitations of 17.15 of this chapter.
17.12.10.5. Docks, piers, boat ramps, marinas, moorings, decks, docking facilities, port facilities, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities that encroach into regulated floodways and flood fringe shall meet the limitations of 17.15 of this chapter.
17.13. Standards for Floodplains without Established Base Flood Elevations. Within the Special Flood Hazard Areas designated as Zone A (also known as Unnumbered A Zones) and established in 17.6.2, where no Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of 17.11, shall apply:
17.13.1. No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or new development shall be permitted, unless a determination of the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) is provided.
17.13.2. The BFE used in determining the Flood Protection Elevation (FPE) shall be determined based on the following criteria:
17.13.2.1. When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is available from other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this ordinance and shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in 17.11 & 17.12
17.13.2.2. When floodway or flood fringe data is available from a Federal, State, or other source, all new construction and substantial improvements within floodway and flood fringe areas shall also comply with the requirements of 17.12 & 17.15.
Page 85 of 135
17.13.2.3. All subdivision, manufactured home park, and other development proposals shall provide Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data if development is greater than five (5) acres or has more than fifty (50) lots/manufactured home sites. Such Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in accordance with 17.6.2 and utilized in implementing this ordinance. The applicant/developer shall submit an application for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) prior to Preliminary Plat approval and have obtained a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) prior to any building permits for structures being issued. See FEMA 480 and/or FEMA 265 for further information
17.13.2.4. When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is not available from a Federal, State, or other source as outlined above, the reference level shall be elevated or floodproofed (non-residential) to or above the Flood Protection Elevation, as defined in 17.6. All other applicable provisions of 17.12 shall also apply.
17.14. Standards for Riverine Floodplains with Base Flood Elevations but without Established Floodways or Flood Fringe Areas. Along rivers and streams where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided by FEMA or is available from another source but neither floodway nor flood fringe areas are identified for a Special Flood Hazard Area on the FIRM or in the FIS report, the following requirements shall apply to all development within such areas:
17.14.1. Standards of 17.11 &17.12; and
17.14.1.1. Until a regulatory floodway or flood fringe area is designated, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood at any point within the community.
17.15. Standards for Floodways and Flood Fringe Areas. Areas designated as floodways or flood fringe areas are located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in 17.6.2. The floodways and flood fringe areas are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and potential projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in 17.11 &17.12, shall apply to all development within such areas:
17.15.1. No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other developments shall be permitted unless:
17.15.1.1. it is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain Administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or
17.15.1.2. a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) has been approved by FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) must also be obtained within six months of completion of the proposed encroachment.
Page 86 of 135
17.15.2. If 17.15.1 is satisfied, all development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this ordinance.
17.15.3. Manufactured homes may be permitted provided the following provisions are met:
17.15.3.1. the anchoring and the elevation standards of 17.11; and
17.15.3.2. the encroachment standards of 17.15.1.
17.16. Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (Zone AO, AH, AR/AO, or AR/AH). Located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in 17.6.2, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. In addition to 17.11 & 17.12, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the following requirements:
17.16.1. The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet, plus a freeboard of 2 feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least 2 feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
17.16.2. Non-residential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be floodproofed to the same level as required in 17.16.1 so that the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below that level shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required in accordance with 17.8.3, and 17.12.2.
17.16.3. Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
17.17. Legal Status Provisions.
17.17.1. Effect on Rights and Liabilities under the Existing Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance. This ordinance, in part, comes forward by re-enactment of some of the provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted May 14, 1984 as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this ordinance shall not affect any action, suit, or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance of the City of Salmon enacted on May 14, 1984, as amended, which are not reenacted herein are repealed.
17.17.2. Effect upon Outstanding Floodplain Development Permits. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof for which a Floodplain Development Permit has been granted by the Floodplain Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of this ordinance. Provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding permit within a period of 180 days
Page 87 of 135
subsequent to the date of issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
17.17.3. Severability. The ordinance is hereby declared to be severable. Should any portion of this ordinance be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect and shall be read to carry out the purpose(s) of the ordinance before the declaration of partial invalidity.
17.17.4. Effective Date
This ordinance shall become effective {insert date; based upon adoption, or a specific date; or passage and publication as provided by law}.
Enacted by the {Board, Council, etc.} as an ordinance of the {insert name of community} on the ____ day of ___________, 201_.
Approved by {insert name and title of chief elected official} on the _____ day of ____________, 201__.
{INSERT NAME OF COMMUNITY}
{insert name and title of chief elected official}
ATTEST:
Mary Benton, CityClerk
Page 88 of 135
Chapter 18- Performance Standards For Off-Street Parking And Loading
18.1. These performance standards are intended to prevent traffic congestion on public streets by requiring provision of adequate off-street parking and loading areas.
18.2. Off-Street Parking Required. All buildings and uses shall provide the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by Table 18.1 of this chapter. All parking spaces shall have graded and drained gravel or paved surfaces.
18.3. Off-Street Parking Requirements for Uses Not Listed. The classification of uses and the off-street parking requirements for uses not listed in Table 18.1 shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator. Any person who disputes a decision of the Zoning Administrator may request a review of that decision using the appeals procedure of Chapter 4 - Administrative Procedures of this code.
18.4. Location of Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided on the same lot and under the same ownership as the use it serves, except that two or more uses may share a parking area where:
18.4.1. The total number of spaces provided is not less than the sum of the parking spaces required for all buildings or uses served.
18.4.2. The contract providing for shared parking is executed before approval of a permit and recorded before the issuance of certificate of compliance.
18.4.3. Required off-street parking spaces shall be within six hundred (1,000) feet of a main entrance of the building or use being served, except for spaces serving a dwelling, which shall be within one hundred (500) feet of the dwelling unit served.
18.5. Passenger Loading Areas. Day care centers, pre-schools, public schools, and places for public assembly located on arterial or collector roads shall provide at least one safe off-street passenger loading area. Such areas shall be located where there is adequate visibility for their safe use and shall:
18.5.1. Be divided from the street by a curbed barrier of at least four (4) feet in width;
18.5.2. Be at least sixty (60) feet in length and twelve (12) feet wide;
18.5.3. Accommodate one way traffic only;
18.5.4. Include a depressed curb section for handicapped access; and
18.5.5. Be marked by pedestrian crossing signs facing both traffic lanes.
18.6. Off-Street Loading Areas. All commercial and industrial buildings and uses shall provide one safe, properly signed off-street loading area for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area. Off street loading areas shall be on the same lot and under the same ownership as the building or use they serve, and have the following dimensions:
18.6.1. Vertical clearance: Fourteen (14) feet.
18.6.2. Width: Twelve (12) feet.
Page 89 of 135
18.6.3. Depth (length): Sixty (60) feet or shall be designed to accommodate the largest vehicle that may reasonably be anticipated for use on the site.
18.6.4. No vehicle parked in a required off-street loading space shall extend into a public rights-of-way.
18.7. Access to Off-Street Parking and Loading Area. Graded and drained gravel or paved access driveways shall be provided for safe access to all off-street parking and loading areas.
18.7.1. No parking area, except those serving single family dwellings, shall be designed or constructed to create a situation in which vehicles are required to back onto a public street.
18.7.2. Parking and loading areas shall be sited and designed to minimize the number of access points to arterial roads. Continuous curb cuts are not permitted.
18.7.3. No access driveway to a local road shall be within twenty (20) feet of any intersection or alley or ten (10) feet of another access point. The distance from an access driveway to an intersection is measured from the junction of the corner lot lines at the intersection, to the nearest side of the driveway.
18.7.4. No access driveway to an arterial road shall be within 40 feet of its intersection with any local street, or sixty (60) feet of its intersection with another arterial.
18.7.5. Clear vision triangles shall be provided for all access driveways per 10.3.
18.7.6. Access driveways for single family dwellings shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet wide for 1- way circulation and twenty four (24) feet for 2- way circulation with a curb radius of five (5) feet. Access driveways for other uses shall be designed to accommodate the reasonably anticipated level of use.
18.7.7. Where required for drainage, access driveways shall be sized accordingly.
Page 90 of 135
TABLE 18.1
OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Land Use
Parking Spaces
Land Use
Parking Spaces Per 1000 Feet Of Floor
Dwellings (SLUC 11, 14)
2 Per Unit
Retail Automotive, Marine (SLUC 55)
5
Lodging Places (SLUC 15)
1 Per Unit Plus 1
Eating And Drinking Places (SLUC 58)
15
Theaters And Similar Places Of Assembly (Including SLUC 72)
.33 Per Seat
Financial, Real Estate, And Insurance Services (SLUC 61)
3
Elementary And Junior High Schools
1 Per Classroom Plus 1, (Auditoriums Used For Public Events Are Places Of Assembly)
Beauty And Barber Services (SLUC 623)
6
Hospitals And Similar Uses (SLUC 6513, 6516)
2 Per Bed
Other Personal Services. Misc. Services (SLUC 62, 69)
3
Rest Homes
.50 per unit
Land Use
Parking Spaces Per 1000 Feet Of Gross Floor Area
Health Services, Except Hospitals (SLUC 51)
5
Building Materials, Farm Equipment, And Furniture (SLUC 5211-5240, 5252, 57)
1
Professional Services (SLUC 65)
3
Hardware, Apparel, And Misc. Retail Uses (SLUC 5251, 56, 59)
3
Shopping Centers
4
General Merchandise, Groceries, Bakeries (SLUC 53, 54)
4
Mixed Office Uses
3
Notes: Other uses (Transportation, Communications, And Utilities; Wholesale Trade; And Industrial) shall provide one parking space for each anticipated employee plus one. And one parking space for each anticipated company vehicle, plus one. Where a place of assembly does not have fixed seating, one space shall be provided for each 25 square feet of assembly area. Off-street parking requirements for different uses in the same building shall be calculated separately.
18.8. Circulation and Parking within Off-Street Parking Areas. The pattern of circulation within parking areas shall be designed to provide safe and efficient access to individual parking spaces, protect pedestrians moving through the parking area, and facilitate safe access to public streets.
18.8.1. Minimum aisle widths shall be:
18.8.1.1. One or two-way circulation and/or ninety (90) degree parking: twenty four (24) feet;
18.8.1.2. One-way circulation and sixty (60) degree angle parking: eighteen (18) feet;
18.8.1.3. One-way circulation and forty five (45) degree angle parking: fifteen (15) feet;
18.8.1.4. One-way circulation and thirty (30) degree angle parking: thirteen (13) feet.
18.8.2. Where one-way circulation is used, directional signs shall be installed at all access points to the parking area.
18.8.3. No parking area shall be designed so that circulation from one portion of the area to another relies on a public street.
Page 91 of 135
18.9. Parking spaces.
18.9.1. Minimum width: Nine (9) feet
18.9.2. Minimum length: Twenty one (21) feet
18.10. Protecting Pedestrians in Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas. There shall be safe pedestrian access around or through all parking and loading areas.
Page 92 of 135
Chapter 19- Detailed Performance Standards For The Design And Construction Of Streets
19.1. Purpose. The purpose of this appendix is to provide standards for the construction or reconstruction of roads. These standards are for streets in low to medium density residential and light commercial areas. A large scale development study will be required for any development that generates sufficient traffic to necessitate additional construction requirements.
19.2. Street Classification. Streets shall be classified as arterials, collectors, and local streets, as shown in the City Master Transportation Plan and Functional Classification Map. All arterials in the city are state or federal highways. Rights-of-way and surface width standards for new public or private streets or street extensions:
19.2.1. Collectors: a rights-of-way of 75 feet and a surface of 40 feet (two 12 foot travel lanes, two eight foot parking lanes);
19.2.2. Local streets: a rights-of-way of 60 feet and a surface of 36 feet (two 10 foot travel lanes, two eight foot parking lanes). For loops or cul-de-sacs serving 24 or fewer homes the local street standard may be reduced to a rights-of-way of 50 feet and a surface of 32 feet.
19.3. Street Surface.
19.3.1. Construction of new public or private streets shall be the responsibility of the developer and meet the Idaho Standards for Public Works Construction. New street surfaces shall be laid over a properly compacted sub-grade consisting of:
19.3.1.1. Sub-base: minimum six inches of coarse aggregate; and
19.3.1.2. Base: minimum two inches of crushed coarse aggregate.
19.3.1.3. Surface:
19.3.1.3.1. A minimum two inches of asphalt; or
19.3.1.3.2. A minimum of four inches of concrete; or
19.3.1.3.3. Oil and chip seal to City specifications in coordination with the Public Works Superintendent.
19.3.1.3.4. Surface shall be sealed within one (1) year or to engineer's specifications.
19.3.1.4. Existing unimproved streets or alleys shall be surfaced at the direction and discretion of the City Public Works Superintendent subject to approval by the City Council.
19.3.1.5. A development agreement may be executed between the City and the developer to provide for improvements of an existing rights-of-way fronting development.
19.4. Drainage. Street surfaces may be crowned so as to slope away from the centerline at a grade of two percent. Shallow, parabolic drainage and snow storage areas shall be provided along all streets. These drainage ways shall be reseeded after construction.
Page 93 of 135
19.5. Maximum Grade. The maximum grade of any street shall be eight percent, except at intersections, as provided by 19.21.
19.6. Cul-De-Sacs. The maximum cul-de-sac length shall be 440 feet and the minimum cul-de-sac radius shall be 60 feet.
19.7. Dead-End Streets. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except where temporarily permitted by a subdivision phasing plan or where required for compliance with 10.21. A temporary cul-de-sac shall be provided wherever a temporary dead-end street serves four or more lots.
19.8. Minimum Centerline Radius of Curves. The minimum centerline radius of curves shall be 250 feet.
19.9. Minimum Tangent Between Reverse Curves. The minimum tangent between reverse curves shall be 50 feet.
19.10. Clear Sight Distance. A minimum clear sight distance of 90 feet shall be maintained along each approach leg at all intersections.
19.11. Grade at Intersection. The maximum grade at, and within 50 feet along both approaches to, any intersection shall be two percent.
19.12. Alignment of Intersection. All intersections shall be at a 90 degree angle, with both approaches running at 90 degrees for at least 50 feet before the intersection.
19.13. Curb Radius. Curb radius (the radius at the intersection of the graded streets) at all intersections shall be 20 feet, except at intersections with arterials, where it shall be 25 feet.
19.14. Minimum Centerline Offset of Intersections. The minimum centerline offset of intersections shall be 125 feet, except for intersections with arterials, where it shall be 200 feet.
19.15. Signs. The developer shall install stop signs at all intersections with arterial streets. The developer shall also install all other signs required for safe traffic and pedestrian movement in the subdivision.
19.16. Culverts and Bridges. All culverts and bridges shall be designed by a professional engineer.
19.16.1. All bridges and culverts on natural watercourses shall be designed to pass a 100 year flood without damage to the bridge or its approaches and without diverting floodwaters onto neighboring properties.
19.16.2. Culverts not included above, shall be designed to pass the runoff from the 10 year, 6 hour storm.
19.16.3. The minimum gross vehicle load supported by any bridge or culvert shall be 40,000 pounds.
19.16.4. There shall be a minimum 50 foot, 90 degree approach to all bridges.
19.17. Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters.
Page 94 of 135
19.17.1. At the direction and discretion of the City Public Works Superintendent subject to approval by the City Council, sidewalks, curbs, and gutters may be required along streets when needed to connect or maximize functional pedestrian access to adjoining public rights-of-way, or to connect to existing adjacent or abutting sidewalks.
19.17.2. Sidewalks shall be located within the street rights-of-way, six inches from and parallel to the outer edge of that rights-of-way. Sidewalks shall be at least five feet in width.
19.17.3. Construction of new sidewalks shall meet the Idaho Standards for Public Works Construction and consist of:
19.17.3.1. Base: a minimum four inches of crushed coarse aggregate; and
19.17.3.2. Surface: a minimum four inches of concrete.
19.18. Street Lights. The developer shall install one sodium vapor street light at each new intersection created in all subdivisions.
Page 95 of 135
Chapter 20- Area Of Impact
20.1. Purpose. These performance standards are designed to control the development within the area of City impact. These rules shall be controlled by a joint city and county planning and zoning commission.
20.2. Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be comprised of three members from the City Planning and Zoning Commission and three (3) members from the County Planning and Zoning Commission. They shall elect offices such as Chairman, Vice Chairman, and Secretary to a one (1) year term. One member shall be acquired from the jurisdiction the chairman is from, to make the board a total of seven (7) members.
20.2.1. All members shall be appointed by their respective governing board (i.e. meaning Mayor and City Council or County Commissioners). Within the area of City impact both the Salmon Development Code and the Lemhi County Development Code shall apply. If a conflict occurs, the more restrictive code shall apply.
Page 96 of 135
Appendix A- Model Hearing Notices
A.1 Purpose. The purpose of this appendix is to provide models for the hearing notices required by this ordinance.
A.1.1 Notice for Subdivision Permit Application Hearing.
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE - SUBDIVISION
(Name, address) proposes to subdivide 40 acres to create 230 lots averaging 6,500 sqft in size each in a Medium Density Residential (MDR) zoning district. The property is generally located on the west side of (location). The Salmon Planning and Zoning Commission will conduct a hearing on this proposal at 7:05 P.M., Tuesday, November 11, 2014 at the City Council Chambers, 200 Main, in Salmon. A copy of the application is available for public review at City Hall. Public comment is encouraged.
A.1.2 Notice for Special Use Permit Application Hearing.
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE - SPECIAL USE PERMIT
(Name, address)) has applied for a Special Use Permit in order to construct a 50,000 square foot large box club store on 5 acres in the Commercial (C) zoning district, generally located northeast at the intersection of (location). The Salmon Planning and Zoning Commission will conduct a hearing on this proposal at 7:35 P.M., Tuesday, November 11, 2014 at the City Council chambers, 200 Main, in Salmon. A copy of the application is available for public review at City Hall. Public comment is encouraged.
A.1.3 Notice of Variance Hearing.
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE - VARIANCE
(Name, address) has applied for a variance of the Salmon Development Code to permit an encroachment of a structure into the required side yard setback. The property is located at (address) Street, Lots 1, 2, 3, Block 1 of the (subdivision name) to the City of Salmon. The Salmon Planning and Zoning Commission will conduct a hearing on this proposal at 7:45 P.M., Tuesday, November 11, 2014 at the City Council Chambers, 200 Main, in Salmon. A copy of the application is available for public review at City Hall. Public comment is encouraged.
A.1.4 Notice for Zoning Map Change Hearing.
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE - ZONING MAP AMENDMENT
(Name, address) has requested that the zoning of Lots 1,2,3, Block 1 of the (subdivision name) be changed from Low Density Residential (LDR) to Commercial (C). The purpose of the change is to allow a commercial distillery operation. The property is generally located southeast of the intersection of (Street and Street). The Salmon Planning and Zoning Commission will conduct a hearing on this proposal at 7:55 P.M., Tuesday, November 11, 2014 at the City Council Chambers, 200 Main, in Salmon. A copy of the application is available for public review at the City Hall. Public comment is encouraged.
Page 97 of 135
Appendix B- Uses For Zoning Districts
Uses not identified but similar in nature to those specified herein may be cross referenced using the NAICS manual or website when necessary to resolve any ambiguity in defining a use classification as per this appendix.
Page 98 of 135
Table B.1 LDR Permitted Uses
Attached or detached garages, carports, accessory buildings or uses
Manufactured Home or mobile home, multi-sectional
Single Family Dwelling
Boarding/Lodging/Guest House (1-3 guest rooms, owner occupied) with Home Occupation permit
Minor Public Utility Installation
Temporary Contractor Office
Home Occupations
One attached accessory apartment for a single family dwelling on a lot
Utility Distribution System
Keeping of livestock; 1 large animal per 6,000 sq ft of vacant land
RV, accessory structure, manufacture or mobile home as a temporary dwelling until primary dwelling is constructed. Permitted & Exempt From Development Permits (Building Permits May Be Required)
Community Services Facilities (Parks, Recreation, etc.)
Public Transit, Pedestrian, or Bicycle Facilities
Facilities for Public Purposes (except fire stations and jail houses)
Wireless Communication Support Structures and Towers on Public Lane (PP zone) For Emergency Response, Law Enforcement Purposes, or Critical Infrastructure Special Uses
Bed & Breakfast Inn
Guest House (4 or more guest rooms)
Mobile or Manufactured Home on a leased or rented lot
Facilities for commercial outdoor recreation outfitters (whitewater, hunting guides, etc.)
Institutional Uses (Schools, Churches, Libraries)
Fire Stations & Jail Houses
Manufactured Home or Mobile Home; Singlewide Prohibited Use
3-Plex multiple family dwellings and other higher density dwelling units up to 4-multiple family dwelling units per acre
Manufactured Home Park
Shipping Containers
Duplexes
Recreational Vehicle Park
Higher density dwelling units; up to 8- multiple family dwelling units per acre
Retirement or Congregate Living Facility Additional Standards Single Family Dwellings
Maximum Density Single Family Dwelling Units per acre = 43,560 sqft/acre/minimum lot size
5.8
Minimum lot frontage width
60 ft
Minimum lot size
7,500 square feet
Flag Lot- minimum street frontage lot width
30 ft
Maximum Lot Coverage
35%
Maximum building height excluding chimney, vents, towers and antennae
35 ft
Page 99 of 135
LDR ADDITIONAL STANDARDS- CONTINUED Setbacks
Front Yard
Collector & Arterial & Local
Corner Lot & Side Lot
Intersecting Streets
Side Yard
Rear Yard
25
15
5 feet for the first 10 feet of wall height. 1:1 for heights greater than 10 feet
5 feet for the first 10 feet of wall height. 1:1 for heights greater than 10 feet
Page 100 of 135
Table B.2 MDR Permitted Uses
3-Plex multiple family dwellings and other higher density dwelling unites up to 4-multiple family dwelling units per acre
Keeping of livestock; 1 large animal per 6,000 sqft of vacant land
RV, accessory structure, manufacture or mobile home as a temporary dwelling until primary dwelling is constructed.
Attached or detached garages, carports, accessory buildings or uses
Manufactured Home or Mobile Home; Multi-Sectional
Single Family Dwelling
Boarding/Lodging/Guest House (1-3 guest rooms, owner occupied) with Home Occupation Permit
Manufactured Home or Mobile Home; Singlewide
Temporary Contractor Office
Duplexes
Minor Public Utility Installations
Utility Distribution Systems
Home Occupations
One attached accessory apartment for a single family dwelling on a lot Permitted & Exempt From Development Permits (Building Permits May Be Required)
Community Services Facilities (Parks, Recreation, etc.)
Public Transit, Pedestrian, or Bicycle Facilities
Facilities for Public Purposes (except fire stations and jail houses)
Wireless Communication Support Structures and Towers on Public Lane (PP zone) For Emergency Response, Law Enforcement Purposes, or Critical Infrastructure Special Uses
Bed & Breakfast Inn
Higher density dwelling units; up to 8- multiple family dwelling units per acre
Recreational Vehicle Park
Facilities for commercial outdoor recreation outfitters (whitewater, hunting guides, etc.)
Institutional Uses (Schools, Churches, Libraries)
Retirement or Congregate Living Facility
Fire Stations and Jail Houses
Manufactured Home Park
Guest House (4 or more guest rooms)
Mobile or Manufactured Home on a leased or rented lot Prohibited Use
Shipping Containers Additional Standards Single Family Dwellings
Minimum lot frontage width
50 ft
Minimum lot size
6,500 square feet Duplexes
Minimum lot size per duplex
8,000 sq ft
Minimum lot frontage width
70ft/duplex 35 ft- zero lot line/dwelling Higher density dwelling units
Minimum lot size
9,000 sqft
Minimum lot frontage width
100 ft
Flag Lot- minimum street frontage lot width
30 ft
Maximum Lot Coverage
35%
Page 101 of 135
MDR ADDITIONAL STANDARDS- CONTINUED
Maximum building height excluding chimney, vents, towers and antennae
35 ft Setbacks
Front Yard
Collector & Arterial & Local
Corner Lot & Side Lot
Intersecting Streets
Side Yard
Rear Yard
25
15
5 feet for the first 10 feet of wall height. 1:1 for heights greater than 10 feet
5 feet for the first 10 feet of wall height. 1:1 for heights greater than 10 feet
Page 102 of 135
Table B.3 Core Commercial Permitted Uses
3-Plex multiple family dwellings & other higher density dwelling units up to 4-multiple family dwelling units per acre
Fish and Seafood Markets
One attached accessory apartment for a single family dwelling on a lot
Accounting, Tax Preparation, Bookkeeping, and Payroll Services
Fishing guide services
Other Direct Selling Establishments
Advertising and Related Services
Fitness and Recreational Sports Centers
Other Food Manufacturing
Ambulatory Health Care Services
Food Services And Drinking Places (unless otherwise restricted)
Other Information Services
Amusement Arcades
Footwear Manufacturing (any material)
Other Leather and Allied Product Manufacturing
Apparel Accessories and Other Apparel Manufacturing (the industry group as a whole)
Fruit Stores and Vegetable Markets (except outdoor roadside stands)
Other Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services
Apparel Knitting Mills Manufacturing (the industry group as a whole)
Furniture and Home Furnishing Store
Other Schools and Instruction
Architectural, Engineering, and Related Services
General Merchandise Stores, except grocery and carry out
Performing Arts, Spectator Sports, and Related Industries
Attached or detached garages, carports, accessory buildings or uses
General Rental Centers
Personal and Household Goods Repair and Maintenance.
Automotive Equipment Rental and Leasing
Greenhouse, Nursery, Floriculture Production, and Other Food Crops Grown Under Cover
Personal and Laundry Services (unless otherwise restricted)
Automotive Parts and Accessories Stores
Guest House (4 or more guest rooms)
Pool halls
Bakeries and Bakery Product Manufacturing
Guide services, hunting
Postal Service
Bed & Breakfast Inn
Health and Personal Care Service
Preserved Fruits and Vegetables Manufacturing
Bee Honey Manufacturing
Heavy Construction
Printing and other Related Support Activities
Beer, Wine and Liquor Stores
Heavy Construction, Except Highway
Public Outdoor Recreation Facilities
Bingo Halls and Parlors
Higher density dwelling units; up to 8- multiple family dwelling units per acre
Publishing Industries (except Internet)
Boarding/Lodging/Guest House (1-3 guest rooms, owner occupied) with Home Occupation Permit
Highway and Street Construction
Real Estate
Botanical Gardens
Home Occupations
Recreational Vehicle Park
Bowling Centers
Inland Water Transportation
Religious, Grant making, Civic, Professional, and Similar Organizations
Broadcasting (except Internet)
Institutional Uses (Schools, Churches, Libraries)
Retirement or Congregate Living Facility
Page 103 of 135
CORE COMMERCIAL PERMITTED USES- CONTINUED
Building Materials and Garden Supplies (unless otherwise restricted)
Insurance Carriers and Related Activities
RV, accessory structure, manufacture or mobile home as a temporary dwelling until primary dwelling is constructed.
Business Schools and Computer and Management Training
Internet Publishing and Broadcasting
Scenic and Sightseeing Transportation, Land
Business Support Services
Internet Service Providers, Web Search Portals, and Data Processing Services
Scenic and Sightseeing Transportation, Water
Clothing and Clothing Accessory Stores
Investigation and Security Services
Services to Buildings and Dwellings
Computer Systems Design and Related Services
Justice, Public Order, and Safety Activities (unless otherwise restricted)
Single Family Dwelling
Confectionary Products Manufacturing
Keeping of livestock; 1 large animal per 6,000 sqft of vacant land
Social Assistance
Consumer Goods Rental
Legal Services (Offices of Lawyers, Notaries)
Special Trade Contractors
Convenience Stores (except gasoline service stations, (see 447)
Management, Scientific, and Technical Consulting Services
Specialized Design Services
Crop Production
Manufactured Home or Mobile Home; Multi-Sectional
Sporting Goods, Hobby, Book, And Music Stores
Cut and Sew Manufacturing (the industry group as a whole)
Manufactured Home or Mobile Home; Singlewide
Support Activities for Transportation
Department Stores
Manufactured Home Park
Taxi and Limousine Service
Distilleries Manufacturing
Meat Markets and Freezer Provisionary
Technical and Trade Schools
Duplexes
Micro-Breweries Manufacturing
Telecommunications
Educational Support Services
Minor Public Utility Installations
Temporary Contractor Office
Electric Power Generation, Transmission and Distribution
Miscellaneous Retail
Temporary workers' camps or critical facilities for emergency and/or essential services
Electronic and Precision Equipment Repair and Maintenance
Mobile or Manufactured Home on a leased or rented lot
Travel Arrangement and Reservation Services
Electronic Shopping and Mail Order Houses
Motion Picture and Sound Recording Industries
Utility Distribution Systems
Electronics and Appliance Stores
Municipal Water, Sewage, and Other Systems
Vending Machine Operators
Employment Services
Museums, Historical Sites, and Similar Institutions
Wholesale Electronic Markets and Agents and Brokers (the industry as a whole)
Executive, Legislative, and Other General Government Support
Natural Gas/Propane Sales w/o Storage
Wineries Manufacturing
Facilities for commercial outdoor recreation outfitters (whitewater, hunting guides, etc.)
Nursery, Floriculture Crop, Tree Production
Page 104 of 135
CORE COMMERCIAL PERMITTED USES- CONTINUED
Finance, Banking, Investments
Office Administrative Services
Fire Stations and Jail Houses
Office Machinery and Equipment Rental and Leasing
Permitted & Exempt From Development Permits (Building Permits May Be Required)
Community Services Facilities (Parks, Recreation, etc.)
Municipal Water, Sewage and Other Systems
Public Transit, Pedestrian, or Bicycle Facilities
Facilities for Public Purposes (except fire stations and jail houses)
Natural Gas Distribution
Wireless Communication Support Structures & Towers on Public Land For Emergency Response, Law Enforcement Purposes, or Critical Infrastructure Special Uses
Automotive Repair and Maintenance
Home Centers - greater than 25,000 sq.ft. of gross floor area
Recreational Vehicles, New or Used Motor Homes, Campers, & Utility Trailer Dealers
Bottled Water Manufacturing
Home Centers - less than or equal to 25,000 sq.ft. of gross floor area
School and Employee Bus Transportation
Breweries (non-micro) Manufacturing
Hospitals
Soft Drink Manufacturing
Charter Bus Industry
Ice Manufacturing
Textile Mills (The industry group as a whole)
Correctional Institutions, Jails, Prisons
Limited Service (fast food)Restaurants w/Drive Thru Window Service
Textile Products (The Industry)
Cutlery and Hand Tool Manufacturing
Mobile Food Venders and Services with or without Outdoor Eating Areas at a Fixed Specific Location.
Tire Dealers
Dairy Products- Manufacturing
Motorcycle, ATV, Boat, and Other Motor Vehicle Dealers
Traveler Accommodation, Hotels and Motels w/wo Horse Boarding Accommodations
Electrical and Electronic Goods (The industry group as a whole)
New Car Dealers and Used Car Dealers
Truck Stops with or w/o Convenience Stores
Fire Protection
Other Transit and Ground Passenger Transportation
Warehouse Club and Superstores less than or equal to 25,000 sq.ft. of gross floor area
Grocery Stores (except convenience) - less than or equal to 25,000 sq.ft. of gross floor area
Outdoor Amusement and Theme Parks
Warehousing and Storage Prohibited Use
Agricultural Production, Crops, Livestock (unless otherwise allowed)
Gasoline Stations with or without convenience store
Nursing and Residential Care Facilities
All Other General Merchandise Stores greater than 25,000 sq.ft. of gross floor area
Golf Courses and Country Clubs
Other Fuel Dealers
Grocery Stores (except convenience) – greater than 25,000 sq.ft. of gross floor area
Plastics and Rubber and Products Manufacturing
Colleges, Universities, and Professional Schools
Heating Oil Dealers
Primary Metal Manufacturing
Page 105 of 135
CORE COMMERCIAL PROHIBITED USES- CONTINUED
Commercial and Industrial Machinery and Equipment (except Automotive and Electronic) Repair and Maintenance
Jail operation on a contract or fee basis
Shipping Containers
Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing
Jails, privately operated
Small Animal Services, Except Veterinary (Boarding, Training, Sitting) over 4 animals
Construction of buildings
Junior Colleges
Tent Camping and Recreational Vehicle Parks
Construction, Mining, and Forestry Machinery and Equipment Rental and Leasing
Leather and Hide Tanning Manufacturing
Transportation Equipment Manufacturing
Correctional facility operation on a contract or fee basis
LP Gas Dealers
Truck Transportation
Electrical Equipment, Appliance and Component Manufacturing
Machinery Manufacturing
Veterinary Services, Except Livestock
Elementary and Secondary Schools
Manufactured Home Dealers
Veterinary Services, Livestock
Fabricated Metal Product Manufacturing (unless otherwise allowed)
Merchant Wholesalers, Durable Goods (unless otherwise allowed)
Warehouse Club and Superstores greater than 25,000 sq.ft. of gross floor area
Farm Tractors and Farm Machinery Dealers
Merchant Wholesalers, Non-Durable Goods
Waste Management and Remediation Services
Food Manufacturing (unless otherwise allowed)
Mining (unless otherwise allowed)
Wood Product Manufacturing
Fuel Dealers
Miscellaneous Manufacturing
Workers' camps
Furniture and Related Product Manufacturing
Natural Gas /Propane Sales and Storage
Zoo
Galleries, shooting
Non-Metallic Mineral Product Manufacturing
Additional Standards
Flag Lot- minimum street frontage lot width
30 ft
Maximum Lot Coverage
100%
Maximum building height excluding chimney, vents, towers and antennae
65 ft Setbacks
Front Yard
Collector & Arterial& Local
Corner Lot & Side Lot
Intersecting Streets
Side Yard
Rear Yard
0
0
0
0
Page 106 of 135
Table B.4 Commercial Permitted Uses
3-Plex Multiple Family Dwellings And Other Higher Density Dwelling Unites Up To 4-Multiple Family Dwelling Units Per Acre
Food Services And Drinking Places (Unless Otherwise Restricted)
Other Information Services
Administrative And Support Services (Unless Otherwise Restricted)
Footwear Manufacturing (Any Material)
Other Leather And Allied Product Manufacturing
Ambulatory Health Care Services
Furniture And Related Product Manufacturing
Performing Arts, Spectator Sports, And Related Industries
Amusement And Recreation Industries (Unless Otherwise Restricted)
Furniture, Home Furnishing, Stores
Personal And Household Goods Repair And Maintenance
Apparel Mills And Manufacturing
Gasoline Stations (Unless Otherwise Restricted)
Personal And Laundry Services (Unless Otherwise Restricted)
Attached Or Detached Garages, Carports, Accessory Buildings Or Uses
General Merchandise Stores, Except Grocery And Carry Out
Postal Service
Automotive Repair And Maintenance
Greenhouse, Nursery, Floriculture Production, And Other Food Crops Grown Under Cover
Preserved Fruits And Vegetables- Manufacturing
Bakeries And Bakery Product Manufacturing
Health And Personal Care Services
Printing And Related Support Activities
Bee Honey Manufacturing
Heavy Construction Contractors
Professional, Scientific, And Technical Services
Bee Production, Packaging Of Beeswax, Honey, Not To Exceed 5 Hives
Home Occupations
Publishing Industries (Except Internet)
Beverage Product Manufacturing
Hotels And Other Lodging Places (Unless Otherwise Restricted)
Real Estate
Boarding/Lodging/Guest House (1-3 Guest Rooms, Owner Occupied) With Home Occupation Permit
Insurance Carriers And Related Activities
Religious, Grant Making, Civic, Professional, And Similar Organizations
Broadcasting (Except Internet)
Internet Publishing And Broadcasting
Rental And Leasing Services
Building Materials & Garden Supplies (Unless Otherwise Restricted)
Internet Service Providers, Web Search Portals, And Data Processing Services
Rv, Accessory Structure, Manufacture Or Mobile Home As A Temporary Dwelling Until Primary Dwelling Is Constructed.
Clothing And Clothing Accessory Stores
Justice, Public Order, And Safety Activities (Unless Otherwise Restricted)
Scenic And Sightseeing Transportation
Commercial And Industrial Machinery And Equipment (Except Automotive And Electronic) Repair And Maintenance
Keeping Of Livestock; 1 Large Animal Per 6,000 Sqft Of Vacant Land
Single Family Dwelling
Computer And Electronic Product Manufacturing
Manufactured Home Or Mobile Home; Multi-Sectional
Small Arms Manufacturing
Page 107 of 135
COMMERCIAL PERMITTED USES- CONTINUED
Construction Of Buildings
Manufactured Home Or Mobile Home; Singlewide
Social Assistance
Crop Production
Merchant Wholesalers, Durable Goods
Special Trade Contractors
Department Stores
Merchant Wholesalers, Nondurable Goods (Unless Otherwise Restricted)
Sporting Goods, Hobby, Book, And Music Stores
Duplexes
Minor Public Utility Installations
Support Activities For Transportation
Educational Services (Unless Otherwise Restricted)
Miscellaneous Manufacturing
Telecommunications
Electric Power Generation, Transmission And Distribution
Miscellaneous Retail
Transit And Ground Passenger Transportation
Electrical Equipment, Appliance, And Component Manufacturing (Unless Otherwise Restricted)
Motion Picture And Sound Recording Industries
Vending Machine Operators
Electronic And Precision Equipment Repair And Maintenance
Motor Vehicle And Parts Dealers (Unless Otherwise Restricted)
Warehouse Club And Superstores Less Than Or Equal To 25,000 Sq.Ft. Of Gross Floor Area
Electronic Shopping And Mail Order Houses
Museums, Historical Sites, And Similar Institutions (Unless Otherwise Restricted)
Warehousing And Storage
Electronics And Appliance Stores
Nursery, Floriculture Crop, Tree Production
Water Transportation
Executive, Legislative, And Other General Government Support
One Attached Accessory Apartment For A Single Family Dwelling On A Lot
Wholesale Electronic Markets And Agents And Brokers
Finance, Banking, Investments
Other Direct Selling Establishments
Food And Beverage Stores (Unless Otherwise Restricted)
Other Food Manufacturing
Permitted & Exempt From Development Permits (Building Permits May Be Required)
Community Services Facilities (Parks, Recreation, etc.)
Municipal Water, Sewage and Other Systems
Public Transit, Pedestrian, or Bicycle Facilities
Facilities for Public Purposes (except fire stations and jail houses)
Natural Gas Distribution
Wireless Communication Support Structures and Towers on Public Lane (PP zone) For Emergency Response, Law Enforcement Purposes, or Critical Infrastructure Special Uses
All Other General Merchandise Stores Greater Than 25,000 Sq.Ft. Of Gross Floor Area
Home Centers - Greater Than 25,000 Sq.Ft. Of Gross Floor Area
Primary Metal Manufacturing
Animal Food Manufacturing
Jails, Privately Operated
Tent Camping And Recreational Vehicle Parks
Animal Processing- Manufacturing
Junior Colleges
Textile Mills
Colleges, Universities, And Professional Schools
Limited Service (Fast Food)Restaurants W/Drive Thru Window Service
Textile Product Mills
Confectionary Products- Manufacturing
Lp Gas Dealers
Tire Dealers
Page 108 of 135
COMMERCIAL SPECIAL USES- CONTINUED
Correctional Facility Operation On A Contract Or Fee Basis
Machinery Manufacturing
Travel Trailer And Camper Manufacturing
Dairy Products- Manufacturing
Meat Products- Manufacturing
Truck Stops With/W/O Convenience Stores
Fabricated Metal Product Manufacturing (Unless Otherwise Permitted)
Mobile Food Vendors And Services with or without Outdoor Eating Areas At A Fixed Specific Location.
Truck Trailer Manufacturing
Farm-Product Raw Materials
Motor Home Manufacturing
Truck Transportation
Fats And Oils- Manufacturing
Natural Gas /Propane Sales And Storage
Warehouse Club And Superstores Greater Than 25,000 Sq.Ft. Of Gross Floor Area
Fire Protection
Nonmetallic Mineral Product Manufacturing
Waste Management And Remediation Services (Unless Otherwise Restricted)
Fuel Dealers
Nursing And Residential Care Facilities
Wood Product Manufacturing
Galleries, Shooting
Petroleum And Petroleum Products
Zoo
Grain Mill Products- Manufacturing
Petroleum Bulk Stations And Terminals
Grocery Stores (Except Convenience) – Greater Than 25,000 Sq.Ft. Of Gross Floor Area
Plastics And Rubber And Products Manufacturing
Prohibited Use
Agricultural Production, Crops, Livestock (unless otherwise allowed)
Hazardous Waste Collection and Disposal
Mining
Leather and Hide Tanning
Solid Waste Combustors and Incinerators Additional Standards
Flag Lot- minimum street frontage lot width
30 ft
Maximum Lot Coverage
80%
Maximum building height excluding chimney, vents, towers and antennae
65 ft Setbacks
Front Yard
Collector & Arterial & Local
Corner Lot & Side Lot
Intersecting Streets
Side Yard
Rear Yard
0
0
0
0
Page 109 of 135
Table B.5 Industrial Permitted Uses
3-Plex Multiple Family Dwellings And Other Higher Density Dwelling Unites Up To 4-Multiple Family Dwelling Units Per Acre
Greenhouse, Nursery, Floriculture Production, And Other Food Crops Grown Under Cover
Primary Metal Manufacturing
Apparel Mills And Manufacturing
Heavy Construction Contractors
Printing And Related Support Activities
Attached Or Detached Garages, Carports, Accessory Buildings Or Uses
Home Occupations
Rv, Accessory Structure, Manufacture Or Mobile Home As A Temporary Dwelling Until Primary Dwelling Is Constructed.
Bakeries And Bakery Product Manufacturing
Keeping Of Livestock; 1 Large Animal Per 6,000 Sqft Of Vacant Land
Scenic And Sightseeing Transportation
Bee Honey Manufacturing
Leather And Allied Product Manufacturing (Unless Otherwise Restricted)
Single Family Dwelling
Bee Production, Packaging Of Beeswax, Honey, Not To Exceed 5 Hives
Manufactured Home Or Mobile Home; Multi-Sectional
Special Trade Contractors
Beverage Product Manufacturing
Manufactured Home Or Mobile Home; Singlewide
Support Activities For Transportation
Boarding/Lodging/Guest House (1-3 Guest Rooms, Owner Occupied) With Home Occupation Permit
Merchant Wholesalers, Durable Goods
Temporary Workers' Camps Or Critical Facilities For Emergency And/or Essential Services
Commercial And Industrial Machinery And Equipment (Except Automotive And Electronic) Repair And Maintenance
Merchant Wholesalers, Nondurable Goods (Unless Otherwise Restricted)
Textile Mills
Computer And Electronic Product Manufacturing
Minor Public Utility Installations
Textile Product Mills
Confectionary Products- Manufacturing
Miscellaneous Manufacturing
Transit And Ground Passenger Transportation
Construction Of Buildings
Motor Vehicle And Parts Dealers (Unless Otherwise Restricted)
Truck Transportation
Construction, Mining, And Forestry Machinery And Equipment Rental And Leasing
Natural Gas/Propane Sales W/O Storage
Warehousing And Storage
Crop Production
Nursery, Floriculture Crop, Tree Production
Waste Management And Remediation Services (Unless Otherwise Restricted)
Page 110 of 135
INDUSTRIAL PERMITTED USES- CONTINUED
Duplexes
One Attached Accessory Apartment For A Single Family Dwelling On A Lot
Water Transportation
Electric Power Generation, Transmission And Distribution
Other Food Manufacturing
Wholesale Electronic Markets And Agents And Brokers
Electrical Equipment, Appliance, And Component Manufacturing
Performing Arts, Spectator Sports, And Related Industries
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities And Towers For Emergency Response Or Law Enforcement
Furniture And Related Product Manufacturing
Preserved Fruits And Vegetables- Manufacturing
Wood Product Manufacturing Permitted & Exempt From Development Permits (Building Permits May Be Required)
Community Services Facilities (Parks, Recreation, etc.)
Municipal Water, Sewage and Other Systems
Public Transit, Pedestrian, or Bicycle Facilities
Facilities for Public Purposes (except fire stations and jail houses)
Natural Gas Distribution
Wireless Communication Support Structures and Towers on Public Lane (PP zone) For Emergency Response, Law Enforcement Purposes, or Critical Infrastructure Special Uses
Animal Food Manufacturing
Hazardous Waste Collection And Disposal
Other Fuel Dealers
Animal Processing- Manufacturing
Heating Oil Dealers
Petroleum And Petroleum Products
Chemicals And Allied Products
LP Gas Dealers
Petroleum Bulk Stations And Terminals
Dairy Products- Manufacturing
Meat Products- Manufacturing
Plastics And Rubber And Products Manufacturing
Farm-Product Raw Materials
Miscellaneous Nondurable Goods
Solid Waste Combustors And Incinerators
Fats And Oils- Manufacturing
Mobile Food Venders And Services with or without Outdoor Eating Areas At A Fixed Specific Location.
Tire Dealers
Fuel Dealers
Natural Gas /Propane Sales And Storage
Grain Mill Products- Manufacturing
Nonmetallic Mineral Product Manufacturing
Prohibited Use
Administrative And Support Services
Food Services And Drinking Places (Unless Otherwise Permitted)
Museums, Historical Sites, And Similar Institutions
Agricultural Production, Crops, Livestock (Unless Otherwise Allowed)
Furniture, Home Furnishing, Stores
Nursing And Residential Care Facilities
Ambulatory Health Care Services
Gasoline Stations
Other Direct Selling Establishments
Amusement And Recreation Industries
General Merchandise Stores
Other Information Services
Automotive Repair And Maintenance
Health And Personal Care Services
Personal And Household Goods Repair And Maintenance
Broadcasting (Except Internet)
Hospitals
Personal And Laundry Services
Building Materials & Garden Supplies
Hotels And Other Lodging Places (Unless Otherwise Permitted)
Postal Service
Page 111 of 135
INDUSTRIAL PROHIBITED USES- CONTINUED
Clothing And Clothing Accessory Stores
Insurance Carriers And Related Activities
Professional, Scientific, And Technical Services
Educational Services
Internet Publishing And Broadcasting
Publishing Industries (Except Internet)
Electronic And Precision Equipment Repair And Maintenance
Internet Service Providers, Web Search Portals, And Data Processing Services
Real Estate
Electronic Shopping And Mail Order Houses
Justice, Public Order, And Safety Activities
Religious, Grant Making, Civic, Professional, And Similar Organizations
Electronics And Appliance Stores
Leather And Hide Tanning
Rental And Leasing Services (Unless Otherwise Allowed)
Executive, Legislative, And Other General Government Support.
Machinery Manufacturing
Social Assistance
Fabricated Metal Product Manufacturing
Mining
Sporting Goods, Hobby, Book, And Music Stores
Finance, Banking, Investments
Miscellaneous Retail
Telecommunications (Unless Otherwise Allowed)
Food And Beverage Stores
Motion Picture And Sound Recording Industries
Vending Machine Operators Additional Standards
Flag Lot- minimum street frontage lot width
30 ft
Maximum Lot Coverage
80%
Maximum building height excluding chimney, vents, towers and antennae
65 ft
Setbacks
Front Yard
Collector & Arterial & Local
Corner Lot & Side Lot
Intersecting Streets
Side Yard
Rear Yard
0
0
0
0
Page 112 of 135
Table B.6 Agricultural Permitted Uses
Attached or detached garages, carports, accessory buildings or uses
Heavy Construction
Preserved Fruits and Vegetables
Bakeries and Bakery Product Manufacturing
Heavy Construction, Except Highway
Promoters of Performing Arts, Sports, and Similar Events with Facilities
Bee Production, Packaging of Beeswax, Honey, Not to Exceed 5 Hives
Highway and Street Construction
Public Outdoor Recreation Facilities
Botanical Gardens
Home Occupations
RV, accessory structure, manufacture or mobile home as a temporary dwelling until primary dwelling is constructed.
Bottled Water Manufacturing
Keeping of livestock; 1 large animal per 6,000 sqft of vacant land
Single Family Dwelling
Breweries (non-micro)
Manufactured Home or Mobile Home; Multi-Sectional
Temporary Contractor Office
Cattle Ranching and Farming
Manufactured Home or Mobile Home; Singlewide
Temporary workers' camps or critical facilities for emergency and/or essential services
Confectionary Products
Micro-Breweries
Theater Companies and Dinner Theaters
Crop Production
Minor Public Utility Installations
Utility Distribution Systems
Distilleries
Mobile or Manufactured Home on a leased or rented lot
Wineries
Electric Power Generation, Transmission and Distribution
Nursery, Floriculture Crop, Tree Production
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities and Towers for Emergency Response or Law Enforcement
Greenhouse, Nursery, Floriculture Production, and Other Food Crops Grown Under Cover
Permitted & Exempt From Development Permits (Building Permits May Be Required)
Community Services Facilities (Parks, Recreation, etc.)
Wireless Communication Support Structures and Towers on Public Lane (PP zone) For Emergency Response, Law Enforcement Purposes, or Critical Infrastructure
Facilities for Public Purposes (except fire stations and jail houses)
Public Transit, Pedestrian, or Bicycle Facilities Special Uses
Animal Food Manufacturing
Cattle Feedlots
Grain Mill Products
Animal Processing
Dairy Products
Guest House (4 or more guest rooms)
Bed & Breakfast Inn
Facilities for commercial outdoor recreation outfitters (whitewater, hunting guides, etc.)
Institutional Uses (Schools, Churches, Libraries)
Bed and Breakfast Inns, Guest Houses
Farm-Product Raw Materials
Meat Products
Page 113 of 135
AGRICULTURAL SPECIAL USES- CONTINUED
Bee Honey Manufacturing
Fats and Oils
Mobile Food Venders and Services with or without Outdoor Eating Areas at a Fixed Specific Location
Boarding/Lodging/Guest House (1-3 guest rooms, owner occupied) with Home Occupation Permit
Fire Stations and Jail Houses
Other Food Manufacturing Prohibited Use
3-Plex multiple family dwellings and other higher density dwelling units up to 4-multiple family dwelling units per acre - df = 32 DU/gross acre
Health and Personal Care Services
Postal Service
Administrative and Support Services
Higher density dwelling units; up to 8- multiple family dwelling units per acre. df = 54.0 DU/gross acre.
Primary Metal Manufacturing
Agricultural Production, Crops and Livestock (unless otherwise allowed)
Hospitals
Printing & Related Support Activities
Ambulatory Health care Services
Hotels and other Lodging Places (unless otherwise allowed)
Professional, Scientific and Technical Services
Amusement and Recreation Industries (unless otherwise allowed)
Insurance Carriers and Related Activities
Publishing Industries (except internet)
Apparel Milles & Manufacturing
Internet Publishing and Broadcasting
Real Estate
Automotive Repair and Maintenance
Internet Service providers, Web Search Portals, and Data Processing
Recreational Vehicle Park
Beverage Product Manufacturing (unless otherwise allowed)
Justice, Public Order and Safety Activities
Religious, Grant making, Civic, Professional and Similar Organizations
Broadcasting (except internet)
Leather and Allied Product Manufacturing
Rental and Leasing Services
Building Materials & Garden Supplies
Machinery Manufacturing
Retirement or Congregate Living Facility
Clothing and Clothing Accessory Stores
Manufactured Home Park
Scenic and Sightseeing Transportation
Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing
Merchant Wholesalers, Durable Goods
Shipping Containers
Construction of Buildings
Merchant Wholesalers, Non Durable Goods (unless otherwise allowed)
Social Assistance
Duplexes
Mining
Special Trade Contractors
Educational Services
Miscellaneous Manufacturing
Sporting goods, hobby, book and music stores
Page 114 of 135
AGRICULTURAL PROHIBITED USES- CONTINUED
Electrical Equipment, Appliance and component Manufacturing
Miscellaneous Retail
Support Activities for Transportation
Electronic and Precision Equipment Repair and Maintenance
Motion Picture and Sound Recording Industries
Telecommunications (unless otherwise allowed)
Electronics and Appliance Stores
Motor Vehicle and Parts Dealers
Textile Mills
Executive, Legislative and Other General Government Support
Museums, Historical Sites and Similar Institutions (unless otherwise allowed)
Transit and Ground Passenger Transportation
Fabricated metal Product Manufacturing
Non-store Retailers
Truck Transportation
Finance, Banking Investments
Nursing and residential care Facilities
Utilities (unless otherwise allowed)
Food and Beverage Stores
One attached accessory apartment for a single family dwelling on a lot
Warehousing and Storage
Food Services and Drinking Places (unless otherwise allowed)
Other Information Services
Waste Management and Remediation Services
Furniture and Related Product Manufacturing
Personal and household goods Repair and Maintenance
Water Transportation
Furniture, home Furnishing, Stores
Personal and Laundry Services
Wholesale Electronic Markets and Agents and Brokers
Gasoline Station
Plastic & Rubber & Product Manufacturing
Wood Product Manufacturing
General Merchandise Stores
Additional Standards
Maximum Density Single Family Dwelling Units per acre = 43,560 sqft/acre/minimum lot size
5.8
Single Family Dwellings
Minimum lot frontage width
60 ft
Minimum lot size
7,500 square feet
Flag Lot- minimum street frontage lot width
30 ft
Maximum Lot Coverage
35%
Maximum building height excluding chimney, vents, towers and antennae
35 ft
Page 115 of 135
AGRICULTURAL ADDITIONAL STANDARDS- CONTINUED Setbacks
Front Yard
Collector & Arterial & Local
Corner Lot Side Yard
Intersecting Streets
Side Yard
Rear Yard
25
15
5 feet for the first 10 feet of wall height. 1:1 for heights greater than 10 feet
5 feet for the first 10 feet of wall height. 1:1 for heights greater than 10 feet
Page 116 of 135
APPENDIX C- DEFINITIONS
C.1. Purpose. This chapter provides definitions for important terms used in this code. Any dispute about the meaning of a term used in this ordinance shall be resolved using the appeals procedure in Chapter 4 - Administrative Procedures of this code.
C.2. Definitional Rules. Terms include both singular and plural forms; i.e. building includes buildings, and, except where otherwise indicated, terms include their derivatives; i.e. adjacent includes adjoining.
Abutting – Adjoining, contiguous, touching.
Access - A means of ingress and egress to a property or use.
Accessory Use - An accessory use is one which: (1) is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or a principal use; (2) is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal structure or use served; (3) is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served except as otherwise expressly authorized by provisions of this code; (4) is customarily incidental to the principal structure or use.
ADA – The federal American with Disabilities Act
Adjacent - All lots or parcels that directly border a lot and all parcels separated from the lot by a public or private easement or rights-of-way, including roads, streams, rivers and irrigation canals.
Alley – A space or thoroughfare at least 20 feet wide which has been dedicated to the public for public purpose use which affords a means of vehicular access to property. (See public rights-of-way)
Amended Subdivision - Change in the metes and bounds of lots or parcels within a lawfully created subdivision,
Annexation – Inclusion of unincorporated lands into the municipal boundaries of the City of Salmon. Appeals- An appeal where the City Council reviews only the facts and testimony presented during a previous hearing or decision.
Area of City Impact – An unincorporated area outside the City’s legal boundaries that defines an area that may be impacted by future city growth. A boundary defining such an area is established by negotiation and recorded agreement between the City and County.
Area of City Impact Agreement – An agreement between the City of Salmon and Lemhi County on administration of the area of impact per Idaho Code 67-6526.
Area of City Impact Map – A map showing the boundary of the Area of City Impact and containing generalized future land use designations outside of the City Limits.
Page 117 of 135
Base of Building, – Contact between the lowest foundation or wall of a building and the finished grade at the contact point.
Bed and Breakfast Inn – A dwelling unit where three or more rental rooms provide overnight lodging with breakfast only on a transient basis for monetary compensation.
Buffers – An area designed to separate two uses through the use of landscaping, berms, fences, and other methods.
Buildable lot – A unit of land that is of sufficient size and shape to accommodate the development of a building or structure that meets all applicable setback, lot coverage, building height, building size and other performance standards of the Salmon Development Code, the Salmon Municipal Code, Building Code and Fire Code.
Building - Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy (Also see structure).
a. Accessory Building - A building which: (1) is subordinate to a principal structure or a principal use; (2) is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served, and (3) Any portion of a principal structure devoted or intended to be devoted to an accessory use is not an accessory structure.
b. Principal Building - A building in which is conducted, or in which is intended to be conducted, the main or primary use of the lot on which it is located.
Building Bulk - Building bulk may be measured and compared in terms of floor area ratio (the total square footage of all floors as a percent of lot size) or similar measures.
Building Code - Refers to the current building codes as adopted by the State of Idaho and the City Council.
Building Height - The vertical distance measured mean natural grade to the highest point on a building. Building height excludes chimneys, vents and antennae. See Finished Grade.
Carport - A structure supported by posts for sheltering vehicles, trailers, campers etc., either attached or unattached to the side of a building.
Clear Vision Triangle - The area that provides the visibility required for safe access to streets. See Chapter 10 - Performance Standards Applicable To All Developments.
Commercial – Business activities and establishments that involve retail sales and service, professional office, tourism, community shopping centers, commercial centers, heavier commercial and service commercial uses that may be compatible with retail shopping and general office activities, and commercial establishments that serve the needs of the general public and people passing through the area. Commercial may include those establishments that provide retail or wholesale goods and services, some light processing, warehousing, distribution, and
Page 118 of 135
manufacturing. The uses are based upon the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS),
Compatibility - Land uses need not be identical to be compatible, but must be sited, designed, constructed, and used in such a way that the normal functions and operation of neighboring uses do not seriously conflict, and so that their appearance is harmonious.
Comprehensive Plan - The Comprehensive Plan of the City of Salmon containing elements of the Idaho Local Land Use Planning Act (LLUPA), adopted by the City Council, and all updates thereto shall be amended by resolution, along with all accompanying maps, tables, and plan elements that provides for the long range land use planning goals and policies of the City.
Condominium unit - A part of the property consisting of a building or one or more rooms occupying one or more floors of a building or a part or parts thereof, intended for any type of independent ownership, and with direct exit to a public street or to a common area or areas leading to a public street. Also see Townhouse/Rowhouse dwelling.
Contiguous – To have contact with, touching along a boundary or at a point.
Court - A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade level on a lot and bounded on three (3) or more sides by walls of a building.
Cul-de-sac – A short local street terminating in a vehicular turn-around.
Dedication - The transfer of property interests from private to public ownership for a public purpose.
Density - The number of dwelling units per gross acre. Gross acreage includes the entire development (adjoining roads to the centerline, internal roads, common open spaces, etc.).
Development - Any man-made change or new activity regulated by this code that causes the improvement of land; including the division of any improved or unimproved real property for any use, purpose, and by any person, association, or other entity. (See improvement and use).
Development Agreement – A tool to require that an owner or developer make a written commitment concerning the use or development of a subject parcel and may include provisions governing the creation, form, recording, modification, enforcement and termination of conditional commitments.
Developer - A person, firm, corporation, partnership, syndicate, local agency, city, county, state, or federal government or any district of or division thereof, who or which causes the development of real property and is the owner of record or contract purchaser of the real property to be developed or improved.
Page 119 of 135
Drainage - The removal of surface water or ground water from land by drains, grading, or other means. Drainage includes the control of runoff to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after development and includes the means necessary for the prevention or alleviation of flooding.
Duplex - Two (2) dwelling units attached by a common wall that form one (1) structure, either on an individual lot or with each unit on a separate lot.
Dwelling - Any building or portion thereof designed as a residence for human habitation. "Dwelling house" and "mobile home" include manufactured housing. (I.C. 55-1001)
a. Attached Dwelling - A dwelling unit which is one of two (2) or more adjoining dwelling units, each of which is separated from the others by one (1) or more unpierced walls or floor from ground to roof.
b. Detached Dwelling - A single dwelling unit having no roof, wall, or floor in common with any other dwelling unit.
c. Dwelling unit - Any building or portion thereof which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation for not more than one family.
Easement - Authorization by a property owner established in a deed and/or recorded plat granting to another person, party, utility or public agency the right to use any designated part of his property for a certain stated specific use or purpose.
Emergency Services - Facilities and services which are devoted to public health and safety, including but not limited to fire houses and police stations.
Eminent Domain – Pursuant to Idaho Statutes Title 7 - Special Proceedings, Chapter 7; The power of the City of Salmon under the constitution and the laws of the state of Idaho to take private property for public uses. Otherwise referred to as “condemnation”. Idaho Statutes §7-711A(1).
EPCRA - The Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know Act of 1986. Refers to 42 USC 1101-11050, as amended. The act refers to the labeling system for hazardous materials.
Essential Services - Facilities and services which are necessary and accessory to the principal land use or development, and involve infrastructure such as pipelines, power lines and poles, distribution feeders, meter boxes and pump houses. Essential services may also include water, sewer, natural gas, cable, communication, and electric power service, and certain transportation improvements.
Fence - A vertical structure providing separation between yard spaces.
a. Security fence – A fence constructed in conjunction with commercial or industrial uses for the safe storage of materials and equipment, or sight vision buffering from neighboring uses.
Page 120 of 135
b. Sight obscuring fence – A fence that consists of solid walls, slats, boards, lattice, or material of any kind that obstructs a clear field of vision to the opposite side of the fence. Hurricane fences, wire fences or similar structures are considered non-sight obscuring.
Fire Code - Refers to the current fire codes as adopted by the City Council.
Flag Lot - A flag lot is a unit of land whose main body is connected to a street, road or easement with access to a street or road by a strip of land not less than 30 feet in width. The side yard definition may apply for three sides of the flag portion of the lot.
Flood Zone Administrator - The flood zone administrator for the City of Salmon.
Floodplain - Land that has been or may be covered by floodwaters, or is surrounded by floodwater and inaccessible, during the occurrence of the regulatory flood. The riverine floodplain includes the floodway and the flood fringe. (I.C. 46-1021)
Frontage - A linear distance equal to the horizontal length of any side of a lot.
a. Building frontage - The linear distance which equals the horizontal length of any side of a building which faces and is parallel to the street frontage.
b. Open space frontage - The linear distance of any parcel along a single street derived by subtracting the building frontage from the street frontage of the property.
c. Street frontage - The linear distance along a single street measured between property lines of any parcel which abuts that street.
d. Business frontage - That portion of the total building frontage which is occupied by any individual business.
Future Land Use Map – A map that appears in the Comprehensive Plan showing generalized future land use designations within the City. Not to be confused with zoning district map.
Garage – An attached or detached building designed and used for indoor vehicle parking or storage, other than living space, and is clearly subordinate and accessory to the principle structure or residence.
Government offices – A building or place for government administration, record keeping and public hearings.
Grade - The plane or slope of undisturbed ground surface between the highest and lowest points of elevation on a lot.
a. Finished Grade – The finished level of soil where it meets the foundation wall of the structure. For purpose of evaluation in meeting drainage criteria, the definition of finished grade shall apply to every point on the perimeter of a structure’s foundation and/or site.
Page 121 of 135
Gross area - The total area of all lots within a project`s boundaries. If the project is adjacent to an existing public street, then the boundaries of the project shall be extended to the center line of the rights-of-way, and that area within the rights-of-way included in the gross area calculation.
Gross floor area – The total square footage of a building measured along outside enclosing walls including all floors or a multi-story building whether finished or unfinished.
Group Residence – Dormitory, lodging, and/or boarding house where three or more individual rooms are used on a non-transient basis.
Guest House - Dormitory, lodging, and/or boarding house where three or more individual rooms are provided with or without meals on a non-transient basis.
Hazardous Area – An area of natural disasters and hazards are areas that are subject to natural events known to result in death or endanger the works of man, such as flooding, groundwater, erosion and deposition, landslides, earthquakes, weak foundation soils, and other hazards unique to local or regional areas.
Hazardous Substances - Any material regulated by EPCRA.
Higher Density Residential Use - Any residential use having at least three or more dwelling units per structure. Includes apartments, condominiums, and townhouses.
High Water Mark – The ordinary high water level or bank of a stream, river, lake or impoundment which, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, shall be presumed to be the edge of the vegetation growing along the shore.
Home occupation - A vocational or commercial use or activity conducted entirely within a dwelling, or a building accessory to the dwelling, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
Impervious surface - Impervious surfaces are those which do not absorb water. They consist of all buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and any other areas of chip seal, concrete or asphalt.
Improvement - Any man-made change to real property including but not limited to buildings or other structures, filling, grading, sedimentation control facilities, paving, excavation, drilling operations, or any other regulations of this code or conditions of approval.
Industrial - industrial uses classified as business activities and establishments that primarily involve manufacturing and processing of raw materials, warehousing, storage, distribution, and wholesale sales of durable and non-durable goods, where such activities involve a degree of noise, vibration, air pollution, glare, and fire and explosive hazards. Those uses include heavy warehousing and distribution, manufacturing plants, processing plants and other heavier industrial uses. manufacturing warehouse, office, storage, distribution, and wholesale sales of durable and
Page 122 of 135
non-durable goods. Those uses include hardware, print shops and paper products, custom manufacturing, and establishments and uses primarily engaged in on-site production of goods involving hand tools and minor mechanical means, with indirect sales of products produced on-site to the general public which involve the lowest level of noise, vibration, air pollution, radiation, glare, or fire and explosive hazards. The uses classified are based upon the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS).
Institutional Uses and Facilities – Such as but not limited to Schools, churches, public libraries, museums.
Junk – On private or public property, an unsightly accumulation of garbage, discharged or salvaged materials, scrap lumber, metal, waste bottles, cans, food, dead animals, abandoned and inoperable vehicles or parts, machinery, or other debris that result in obnoxious odors, the potential for a habitat of pests and rodents, a threat to public health and safety, and contribute to an overall degradation of the neighborhood.
Junk, salvage or wrecking yard - A place where waste, discharged or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including auto wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards, and places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment; but not including such places where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building; and not including pawn shops and establishments for the sale, purchase, or storage of used furniture and household equipment, used cars in operative condition, or salvaged materials incidental to manufacturing operations.
Jurisdictional wetlands delineation – A delineation approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers of the wetland boundary.
Land division - The act of dividing land or an area or tract of land when such an area exists as a unit, or abutting units of land. (See lot split and subdivision)
Land locked – A tract, lot or parcel of land without legal access of record to a private or public rights-of-way.
Land Use – The way in which land is being used. Specific land uses are permitted, conditionally permitted or prohibited in each zone as specified by this code.
Legal Description - The identification of real property by metes and bounds and/or lot and block description.
Level of service - A qualitative measure describing operational conditions within a traffic stream; generally described in terms of such factors as speed and travel time, freedom to maneuver, traffic interruptions, comfort and convenience, delay, and safety.
Legislative Action – The making of law, as opposed to the application of existing law. Examples are a change in the material text of the Salmon Comprehensive Plan or Salmon Development Code. The Legislative review procedure is generally an “open ended” action that involves matters
Page 123 of 135
of general concern that may not impact a specific piece of property (non-site specific), but may have an overall general impact on the community. Such actions include amendments to the material text of the code or the Comprehensive Plan, as opposed to the application of an existing site specific code requirement. See also quasi-judicial.
Livestock – Such as but not limited to cattle, pigs, goats, horses, llamas, or sheep kept for personal pleasure or consumption.
Loading space – An off-street portion of a parcel for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading materials for use or sale.
Local Land Use Planning Act (LLUPA), Title 67, Chapter 65, Idaho Code - An act of the 1975 Idaho Legislature that requires cities and counties to enact comprehensive plans, zoning and subdivision ordinances, defines powers and responsibilities of the planning and zoning commission and governing board with respect to land use issues and sets standards for public notice and hearings.
Local Street – A street or road used to provide through access to residential neighborhoods, not designed for semi-tractor trailer or multi-axle heavy vehicle traffic.
Lot - A unit of land created by the division of real property, such as a lot split or subdivision.
a. Lot area - The area contained within the property lines of a lot.
b. Lot coverage - The proportion or ratio of a (parcel or lot) land area covered by structures.
c. Lot, corner – A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersections.
e. Lot depth – The horizontal distance between the front and rear property lines of a lot measured along a line midway between the side property lines.
f. Flag lot – A flag lot is a unit of land whose main body is connected to a street, road or easement with access to a street or road by a strip of land not less than 30 feet in width. The side yard definition may apply for three sides of the flag portion of the lot.
g. Lot frontage – The width of the lot fronting along a street line.
h. Lot line - A line bounding a lot of record which divides one lot from another lot or from a street or any other public or private space (same as property line).
i. Lot line adjustment – Also a property line adjustment. A relocation of a common boundary line between abutting units of land or lots of record under separate ownership, where an additional unit of land is not created and where the existing unit of land reduced in size by the adjustment complies with any applicable site development requirements of this code.
Page 124 of 135
j. Rear lot line – That lot line which is most nearly parallel to and most distant from the front lot line. In the case where a lot fronts more than one road or street, the rear lot line shall be opposite the lot line which takes access to the road or street. See through lot.
k. Side lot line – Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
l. Zero Lot line - See zero lot line development.
m. Lot of record – Any lot or parcel which has been recorded in the county recorder’s office prior to the adoption of this code.
n. Lot split – Division of a single lot or parcel of land resulting in the creation of not more than (4) lots.
o. Through lot – An interior lot with its rear yard abutting a street rights-of-way.
p. Lot width – The perpendicular bisect of the lot depth measurement.
Manufactured home I.C. 39-4105(8) - A structure constructed for human habitation, after June 15, 1976, in accordance with the federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (HUD) and is transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or is forty (40) body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, but which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site, and which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles. and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein, except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this subsection except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under 42 U.S.C. section 5401 et seq.
Note: A manufactured home does not include a mobile home, or a mobile home or house trailer constructed before the federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards went into effect on June 15, 1976. (also see Mobile Home)
Manufactured Home Park/Community or Mobile Home Park/Community - Any real property that is rented or held out for rent to others for the placement of two (2) or more homes for the primary purpose of production of income.
Manufactured home or Mobile home dwelling space - A plot of ground within a mobile home park or manufactured dwelling park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home or one manufactured dwelling not placed on or attached to a permanent foundation.
Page 125 of 135
Minimize - For the purposes of this ordinance, "to minimize" the number of access points means to show that no alternative site plan for a proposed development will result in a smaller number of access points.
Minor Utility Installations - Includes wireless communication facilities (excluding towers) cable television, electric power, and telephone cables and transmission lines, and natural gas pipelines that serve the area through which they are routed. Also includes transformer boxes and other minor appurtenances to those transmission lines or pipelines.
Mobile Food Service Unit – Any moveable food service unit, trailer, vehicle, wagon, motorized or non-motorized vehicle or other similar device, which is designed specifically for food preparation, processing or converting food for immediate consumption as a drive-in, drive-through, curb, or walk-up service and sales that is mobile or remains in or on any one site, and whose exterior length and width dimensions shall not exceed one hundred ninety-two (192) square feet.
Mobile food vendor - Food preparation and sales associated with a mobile food unit.
Mobile home I.C. 39-4105(9) (also see Manufactured Home) - A factory-assembled structure or structures constructed prior to June 15, 1976, and equipped with the necessary service connections and made so as to be readily movable as a unit or units on their own running gear and designed to be used as a dwelling unit or units with or without a permanent foundation.
Note: The term "mobile home" means forms of housing known as "trailers", "house trailers", or "trailer coaches" exceeding 8 feet in width or 45 feet in length, designed to be moved from one place to another by an independent power connected to them, or any trailer, house trailer, or trailer coach up to 8 feet in width or 45 feet in length used as a principal residence.
Mobile home, rehabilitated – A factory-assembled structure constructed prior to June 15, 1976, the effective date of the Manufactured Housing and Safety Standard Act (HUD code), that are currently sited in Idaho or that may be brought into the state after July 1, 1998, which have been upgraded to comply with Title 44 Chapter 25 of the Idaho Statutes and received a “Certificate of Compliance” from the Division of Building Safety of the State of Idaho.
Modular Building – Any building or building component, other than a manufactured home or mobile home, which is of closed construction and is entirely or substantially prefabricated or assembled at a place other than the building site, designed for use as residential dwellings, portable classrooms, offices or telecommunication buildings, that can also be assembled in multiple sections to create larger multi-story residential or commercial structures.
Multiple-family, multiplex, or apartment dwelling - Three or more attached dwelling units that form one structure.
Natural hazard – A geologic, flood, or wildfire event.
Nonconforming:
Page 126 of 135
a. Nonconforming - Any nonconforming activity or use existing on the effective date of this code which does not comply with the standards of this code and/or the Building Code.
b. Nonconforming building or structure - Any building or structure established prior to the effective date of this code which does not fully comply with the standards of this code and/or the Building Code.
c. Nonconforming development - Any activity which was established prior to the effective date of this code which does not comply with the standards of this code that involved the improvement of land; including the division of any improved or unimproved real property for any use, purpose, and by any person, association, or other entity.
d. Nonconforming lot - A lot as defined by this chapter whose area, width and/or depth is less than that required by the zone in which it is located that existed prior to the effective date of this code which does not fully comply with the standards of this code.
e. Nonconforming use – Any activity that existed prior to the effective date of this code which does not fully comply with the standards of this code.
f. Nonconforming sign - Any sign as defined by this chapter that existed prior to the effective date of this code which does not fully comply with the standards of this code.
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) - A reference for classifying land uses. (Replaces the 1977 Standard Land Use Code (SLUC).
Occupancy - The internal use of a building or lot.
Outdoor Material Handling or Storage – Stockpiling, storage, processing, or packaging of materials for any reason (it need not be for commercial use), including the long term storage of construction materials and inoperative machinery or vehicles, that is not enclosed in a building and that is visible from a public street.
Overlay Zone or District - Within an overlay zoning district, the governing board shall establish clear and objective standards for the overlay zoning district while ensuring that application of such standards does not constitute a regulatory taking pursuant to Idaho or federal law.
Owner – The proprietor of land (having legal title). Includes, but is not limited to, a purchaser under a deed of trust, mortgage, or contract, or a person who takes the subject property under a life estate. (I.C. 55-1001)
Ordinance – A law enacted by the city council that may require public notice and hearing, and take effect upon publication in the official newspaper.
Parcel - A unit of land held in common ownership and defined by a recorded legal description.
Page 127 of 135
Park – A privately or publically owned space designated for recreational purposes and utilized by the public.
Park model trailers – A vehicular type unit that has a floor area of four hundred (400) square feet or less, meets the American national standards institute (ANSI) recreational standard A119.5, is primarily designed for permanent or semi-permanent installation and is used as a residence.
Parking space - A permanently surfaced and marked area for the parking of a motor vehicle, excluding the area necessary for access.
Planned Development - A pattern of ownership of real property and all the buildings, improvements and rights located on or belonging to the real property, in which: (1) There is an association of unit owners responsible for the maintenance, operation, insurance and property taxes relating to any common property of the planned community or for the exterior maintenance of any property that is individually owned; and (2) Owners of individual lots, by virtue of their ownership, automatically are members of the association of unit owners and assume liability for membership fees.
Planned Unit Development (PUD) – An area of land in which a mixed variety of residential, commercial, industrial, and other land uses are identified as a comprehensive development strategy. Such an area may be approved as an overlay on the existing zoning district.
Planning and Zoning Commission - The planning and zoning commission of the City of Salmon.
Plat – A map of a tract of land containing all the descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications, provisions and information concerning the location or creation of lot lines, lots or parcels, which is an instrument for the legal recordation of real property.
a. Final plat – An accurate map showing bearings and distances which is part of an instrument for the legal recordation of real property, established by the survey of a tract of land and containing all the descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications, easements, provisions, information and approvals concerning the location or creation of lot lines, lots or parcels as required by Salmon Development Code and Title 50 Chapter 13 of the Idaho Code.
b. Preliminary plat – An approximate drawing showing the proposed location or creation of lot lines, lots or parcels in a tract of land, including all provisions and information as required by the Salmon Development Code.
c. Plat Vacation – A process that turns discrete lots or parcels back into a metes and bounds unit of land.
Principal Use – Also called primary use. The specific primary purpose for which land is used.
Private Road – A road within a subdivision or on private property that is not dedicated to the public and not a part of a public highway system.
Page 128 of 135
Public Improvement - Any improvement, facility, or service, together with customary improvements and appurtenances thereto, necessary to provide for public needs such as: vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, storm sewers, flood control improvements, water supply and distribution facilities, sanitary sewage disposal and treatment, public utility services, and parks and recreation.
Public Property – Anything owned or operated by a governmental agency or tax assessing district.
Public Rights-of-Way – Any road, thoroughfare, alley, highway or bridge or other special purpose way or utility installation owned, dedicated and open to the public and under the jurisdiction of a public agency.
Public Service Facilities – Government offices, fire and police stations, public parks, prisons, fairgrounds, telephone switching facilities or similar facilities.
Public Street – A road, thoroughfare, alley, highway or bridge under the jurisdiction of the City of Salmon.
Public Uses or Purposes – A use which is owned by and operated for the public by a legal public entity, such as government offices, government owned community or public services facilities (parks, recreation, etc.), public transit, pedestrian, or bicycle facilities.
Quasi–judicial Action – A legal action that involves the application of general polices or existing law to specific persons or properties. Examples are a request for a special use permit, a zone change, subdivision or variance. Also see legislative action.
Residence –The living space area used for cooking, dining, sleeping, shelter and habitation. Also see dwelling.
Recorded – A document(s) of record being placed in the coded files and books of the County Clerk’s and Recorder’s office.
Record of survey – A survey of any lot, parcel or lot line which has been legally recorded in the County Recorder’s office.
Recreational Vehicle:
a. A motor home, travel trailer, truck camper or camping trailer, with or without motive power, designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy. Does not include pick-up hoods, shells, or canopies designed, created or modified for occupational usage. School buses or van type vehicles which are converted to recreational use are defined as recreational vehicles. (I.C 49-119(6)).
b. A vehicle with or without motive power designed for human occupancy used temporarily for recreational, seasonal or emergency purposes.
Page 129 of 135
Recreational Vehicle (RV) park - A place where the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which more than one recreational vehicle may be placed for a temporary time period.
Regulatory takings – The confiscation of private property by a government.
Resolution – A binding decision by the City Council typically used for internal administrative matters. Adoption of a resolution does not have any formal reading or publication requirements.
Retirement or Congregate Living Facility - Residential shelter care facilities for mentally handicapped, physically handicapped and elderly citizens. Group homes for eight (8) or fewer residents are considered single-family dwellings for purposes of land use regulations.
Rights-of-Way – The right to pass over or though the property of another.
Salmon Development Code – A document containing specific zoning districts, land use regulations, performance standards and laws adopted by the Salmon City Council to assure orderly development within the City of Salmon.
Setback - The distance between the property line and the outer wall of the building on the same lot.
Shipping Containers – Portable storage units/containers, metal or otherwise, designed for the shipment of cargo.
Site Plan - A site plan illustrates all those details of a proposed development needed to demonstrate compliance with this ordinance, including the location of existing and proposed property lines, easements, buildings, parking areas and points of access to streets, streets, sidewalks, buffers and other measures designed to mitigate potential nuisances, signs, and other features of the site.
Single Family Dwelling - A detached building designed for occupancy by one family. Pursuant to I.C. 67-6531, “Single Family Dwelling" shall include any group residence in which eight (8) or fewer unrelated persons with disabilities or elderly persons reside and who are supervised at the group residence in connection with their disability or age related infirmity. Resident staff, if employed, need not be related to each other or to any of the persons with disabilities or elderly persons residing in the group residence. No more than two (2) of such staff shall reside in the dwelling at any one time.
Sketch Plan - A sketch plan (plot plan) is a general or conceptual site plan of a development. It must include the approximate location of all lot lines and streets, the approximate location and exterior dimensions all structures, the approximate location, size, and circulation pattern of all parking areas, and the approximate location and dimensions of all landscaped buffers.
Slope - An inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of vertical distance (rise) to horizontal distance (run). Percent slope is calculated by multiplying the ratio (rise/run) by one hundred (100).
Page 130 of 135
Solid Waste - Material being stored, packaged, or processed for ultimate disposal or recycling. For the purposes of this code, the waste normally generated by a farming operation (crop stubble and residue, manure, etc.) is not solid waste.
Special Use - A use and/or development as specified by this code that requires intensive public review and may be allowed if it is demonstrated to meet the performance standards of this code and conditions prescribed by decision of the Planning Commission.
Special Use Permit (SUP) - A permit for a specific use and/or development granted with conditions prescribed by the Planning and Zoning Commission. A SUP and conditions of approval is not transferable to other property. A SUP is binding on the specific use and development, location of the use, the owner of the property, and is transferable to each subsequent owner or person acquiring ownership interest in the property. Discontinuation or removal of the use renders the SUP null and void. A SUP shall not be considered as establishing a binding precedent to grant other special use permits.
Street - The improved section of any rights-of-way for motor vehicle travel which affords the principal means of access to abutting property, including public and private rights-of-way and easements for ingress and egress purposes, together with bicycle pathways or other ways for travel by other than motor vehicle.
a. Arterial street - A public street or highway designated as an arterial street in the City Master Transportation Plan which, because of its design and location with respect to other streets and sources of traffic, may be used to carry a volume of traffic in excess of 10,000 average daily trips.
b. Collector street - A street designated in the City Master Transportation Plan with more controlled access with speeds ranging between 25 and 45 mph, which, because of its design and location with respect to other streets and sources of traffic, is used primarily to carry traffic from local streets to other collector and arterial streets.
c. Commercial street - A public street or highway designated as commercial street in the City Master Transportation Plan classified for its entire length between intersections. A commercial street is a street other than an arterial or collector street which lies within a commercial zoning district and is intended to provide frontage and direct access to commercial uses. Such streets typically benefit shopping and service commercial areas. Standard design requirements for commercial streets shall include two (2) travel lanes and two (2) on-street parking lanes.
d. Improved street - A street having an improved paved section, and may include curb, gutter, drainage swales and sidewalk.
e. Industrial street - A public street or highway designated as an industrial street in the City Master Transportation Plan. An industrial street is a street other than an arterial or collector street which lies within an industrial zoning district and is intended to provide frontage and direct access to industrial uses.
Page 131 of 135
f. Local street - A local road with speeds generally 25 mph or lower, which provides access to immediately adjacent residential land and which also provides connections to collector and arterial streets.
Structure - An edifice or building of any kind, constructed or installed or portable, which requires a fixed location on the ground, or is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner which is intended to support or shelter any use or occupancy. (See building)
Structural alteration - Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, beams, or girders, or any change in the dimension or configuration of the roof or exterior walls.
Subdivision - The act of dividing land or an area or tract of land into five or more lots.
Substantial – Considerable in quantity, significantly large.
Survey – (1) To accurately determine and measure the boundaries, shape, location, and extent of a tract of land. (2) The act of determining and measuring the boundaries, shape, location, and extent of a tract of land. (3) The diagram, map or description that results from such an operation.
Takings – Otherwise referred to as a regulatory taking. The appropriation by government of private land for which compensation must be paid.
Temporary Use – The establishment of a use at a specific site on a temporary basis.
Tower - A freestanding structure, tower, pole or mast erected to support antennas and connecting appurtenances. Also see Wireless Communication Transmission Towers
Townhouse/Rowhouse dwelling - Attached dwelling units in one or more structures, but having at least three or more dwelling units per structure. A townhouse dwelling can be distinguished from an apartment or multiplex dwelling because each townhouse dwelling occupies an individual lot, consists of interior space from ground to roof, and has direct access to individual private outdoor space. (Also see condominium unit)
Tract – One (1) or more adjacent or contiguous lots under same ownership.
Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) – Identification and analysis of the potential traffic impacts, problems and hazards which may be generated by a proposed use, and to identify all required improvements to assure safe vehicular access to and from a proposed development.
Transportation – The movement of people and goods.
Unstable or potentially unstable slope – Area susceptible to a landslide, mudflow, rock fall, or accelerated creep of slope forming materials.
Page 132 of 135
Use – The purpose or activity for which land or any development thereon is designed, arranged, or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained.
Variance - A modification of the requirements of this code as to lot size, lot coverage, width, depth, front yard, side yard, rear yard, setbacks, parking space, height of buildings, or any other provision of this code affecting the size or shape of structure or the placement of the structure upon lots, or the size of lots. Variances are intended to provide relief for landowners who, due to some unique physical characteristic of their property that is beyond their control, would not be able to benefit from the use of the property if this code were strictly enforced.
Vehicle trip - A single or one directional vehicle movement with either the origin or destination inside a study area.
Vehicle Trips per Day (TPD) – A term used to define the average round trips a vehicle makes to and from a residence in a twenty four (24) hour day.
Vested right – A use or development of property that has become absolute and fixed and cannot be defeated or denied by subsequent conditions or change in regulations. Similar to non-conformity.
Wall:
a. An exterior wall is any wall or element of a wall, or any member or group of members, which defines the exterior boundaries or courts of a building and which has a slope of 60 degrees or greater with the horizontal plane.
b. Parapet wall is that part of any wall entirely above the roof line.
c. Retaining wall is a wall designed to resist the lateral displacement of soil or other materials.
Wetland - An area inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and which, under normal circumstances, does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
Wildland Urban Interface (WUI) - The areas where structures and development at the rural/urban interface and urban development in rural areas may be susceptible to catastrophic events due to unstable ecosystem conditions highly vulnerable to wildland fire.
WUI analysis – An assessment of the city’s emergency preparedness and ability to respond to catastrophic events within the Wildland Urban Interface. Key components of this analysis include; Hazardous Fuel Reduction; Transportation System and Access; Preparedness; Education/Prevention; Communication; Enforcement (Aspect consulting December 2006).
Yard – An open unoccupied space, other than a court, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, between a lot line and building line.
Page 133 of 135
a. Front yard – A yard extending the full width of the front of a lot between the front (street) rights-of-way line and the front building line.
b. Rear yard – A yard extending the full width of the lot in the area between the rear lot line and the rear building line.
c. Side yard – A yard extending the full length of the lot in the area between a side lot line and a side building line.
Xeriscape - Xeriscaping and xerigardening refers to landscaping and gardening in ways that reduce or eliminate the need for supplemental water from irrigation..
Zero Lot line development – A development in which a building with a common wall is sited on one or both of its side lot lines with no yard. (See townhouse, rowhouse, condominium).
Zone change – A change in the zoning district designation boundaries in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan and Future Comprehensive Land Use Plan map.
Zoning Administrator – The Zoning Administrator for the City of Salmon.
Zoning map - A map that defines the zoning district boundaries applicable to each zoning designation in the City.
Page 134 of 135
City of Salmon Zoning