6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 1/548
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed,
but have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if
there are any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of
any discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
THE VILLAGE OF BLOOMINGDALE
DUPAGE COUNTY, ILLINOIS
ORDINANCE
NUMBER 2018-40
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING
TITLE 2 OF
THE VILLAGE OF BLOOMINGDALE
CODE OF ORDINANCES
FRANCO A. COLADIPIETRO, Mayor
JANE E. MICHELOTTI, Village Clerk
VINCE ACKERMAN
WILLIAM BELMONTE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 2/548
BILL BOLEN
FRANK BUCARO
PATRICK SHANNON
JUDI VON HUBEN
Village Board
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the
President and the Board of Trustees of the Village of Bloomingdale
on this the 26th day of November, 2018
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 3/548
ORDINANCE NO. 2018-40
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING
TITLE 2 OF
THE VILLAGE OF BLOOMINGDALE
CODE OF ORDINANCES
WHEREAS, the Village of Bloomingdale (hereinafter referred to as “Village”) is a home rule unit of local government with authority granted pursuant to the
Illinois Constitution of 1970, to exercise certain powers and perform certain functions pertaining to its local government and affairs;
WHEREAS, the Illinois Constitution of 1970 provides that a Home Rule Unit may exercise any power and perform any function pertaining to its government
and affairs, including but not limited to the power to regulate for the protection of the public health, safety, morals and welfare; to license, to tax; and to incur
debt;
WHEREAS, the Village has in full force and effect a codified set of those ordinances of the Village which are of a general and permanent nature, which said
codified set is known and designated as the Village Code of the Village of Bloomingdale, as amended;
WHEREAS, Title 2 provides for the boards, commissions and committees;
WHEREAS, the Corporate Authorities are of the opinion that an advisory committee is necessary to provide input related to various community events
including but not limited to the organization and implementation of community events in the Village’s Old Town District; and
WHEREAS, the Village Board finds it necessary and proper pursuant to its Home Rule Powers to amend said Code, Chapter and Section providing for the
creation of a Community Events Committee; and
WHEREAS, the Corporate Authorities of the Village of Bloomingdale are of the opinion that the aforementioned amendment to the Village’s Code of
Ordinances is in the best interest of the public safety, health and welfare of the residents of the Village of Bloomingdale.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, in open meeting assembled, by the Village President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Bloomingdale, DuPage
County, Illinois, pursuant to the Village’s Home Rule Powers, as follows:
Section One - Recitals
The Corporate Authorities hereby find that all of the recitals hereinbefore stated as contained in the preamble to the Ordinance are full, true and correct and
do hereby, by reference, incorporate and make them part of this Ordinance as legislative findings.
Section Two – Amendment Title 2
Title 2 (Boards, Commissions and Committees) shall be amended by adding Chapter 6 Community Event Committee, as follows:
Chapter 6 COMMUNITY EVENTS COMMITTEE
2-6-1: CREATED; PURPOSE:
There is hereby created a community events committee, the purpose of which shall be to provide input relating to the scheduling, planning, organizing, and
overseeing of community events that are open to the enjoyment of all village residents and the general public.
2-6-2: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT, TERM AND VACANCIES; LIASON:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 4/548
A. The Committee shall consist of eighteen (18) Village resident volunteers one of which shall be appointed chairperson by the Village President with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, the term shall be for staggered three (3) year appointments and vacancies shall be filled by appointment
in the same manner.
B. The Village Administrator shall serve as the Village liaison.
C. Any number of Village Trustees, chosen by the village president and the Board of Trustees, may also appointed to serve as liaisons to the Committee
provided that the meeting is duly noticed according to the requirements of the Illinois Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1, et seq.).
2-6-3: MEETINGS:
The Committee shall meet, as necessary, at the Village Hall, or at another location within the Village.
2-6-4: EXPENDITURES
The Committee shall require the approval of the Board of Trustees through the fiscal year budget process for all expenditures of funds.
Section Three – Codification
The title, chapter(s) and section(s) adopted by this Ordinance shall be numbered and placed in an appropriate title, chapter(s), and sections(s) sections when
and during the codification of the Bloomingdale Municipal Code.
Section Four – Home Rule Preemption
This Ordinance represents an exercise of the home rule powers conferred upon the Village of Bloomingdale by the Constitution of the State of Illinois. This
Ordinance is specifically intended to preempt state law pertaining to the extent permitted under the Constitution of the State of Illinois.
Section Five – Effective Date:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
Section Six - Publication
This Ordinance shall be published in book or pamphlet form as provided by the Illinois Municipal Code.
Section Seven - Conflict Clause
That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the terms of this Ordinance shall be repealed to the extent of said conflict.
Section Eight – Saving Clause
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this Ordinance is declared by a court of law to be invalid or unconstitutional, the invalidity or
unconstitutionality thereof shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of the Village’s Municipal Code, which are hereby declared to be separable.
Section Nine - Recording
This Ordinance shall be entered into the minutes and upon the journals of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Bloomingdale.
DECIDED pursuant to a roll call vote as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 5/548
YES NO
NO VOTE ABSENT PRESENT
Vince Ackerman
X X
William Belmonte
X X
Bill Bolen
X
Frank Bucaro
X X
Patrick Shannon
X X
Judi Von Huben
X X
Franco A. Coladipietro
(only if necessary)
X
TOTAL
4 0 1 1 6
PASSED AND APPROVED by the Village of Bloomingdale Board of Trustees on the 26th day of November, 2018.
____________________________________
Franco A. Coladipietro
Village President
ATTEST:
_____________________________________
Jane E. Michelotti
Village Clerk
Disclaimer:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 6/548
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of
any discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
THE VILLAGE OF BLOOMINGDALE
DUPAGE COUNTY, ILLINOIS
ORDINANCE
NUMBER 2018 - 41
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING
TITLE 11 CHAPTER 14 SECTION 11-14-11
AS IT RELATES TO SIGNAGE IN CERTAIN
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
FRANCO A. COLADIPIETRO, Mayor
JANE E. MICHELOTTI, Village Clerk
VINCE ACKERMAN
WILLIAM BELMONTE
BILL BOLEN
FRANK BUCARO
PATRICK SHANNON
JUDI VON HUBEN
Village Board
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 7/548
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the
President and the Board of Trustees of the Village of Bloomingdale
on this the 10th day of December, 2018
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 8/548
ORDINANCE 2018 - 41
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING
TITLE 11 CHAPTER 14 SECTION 11-14-11
AS IT RELATES TO SIGNAGE IN CERTAIN
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
WHEREAS, the Village of Bloomingdale, DuPage County, Illinois (the “Village”) is a home rule unit of local government under Article VII, Section
6 of the 1970 Illinois Constitution and, except as limited by such Section, it may exercise any power and perform any function pertaining to its
government and affairs;
WHEREAS, the Village conducts an ongoing review of the text of its zoning regulations and other provisions regarding land use and
development in the Village to identify amendments that will improve clarity in interpretation, increase flexibility for the commercial and retail
business community and expedite development, and maintaining the high-quality appearance of its commercial streetscape;
WHEREAS, a public hearing was held before the Village Planning and Zoning Commission, to consider certain proposed text amendments to Chapter 14
Signs as it relates to signage in certain Business Districts, on November 7, 2018 public notice of which was duly advertised in the Daily Herald on October
17, 2018;
WHEREAS,the Planning and Zoning Commission determined that such proposed text amendments comply with the standards set forth by the
Village Code, will allow the Village to remain current with best land use management practices, and will facilitate business development in the
Village;
WHEREAS, the Planning and Zoning Commission filed its Findings of Fact and Recommendations with the Village Board regarding such
proposed text amendments in a report dated October 29, 2018 (hereinafter referred to as “Findings and Recommendations”); and
WHEREAS, the Board of Trustees of the Village reviewed the Findings and Recommendations and determined it appropriate to approve certain
amendments to the Village Code, as amended, by the adoption of an ordinance further amending the Village Code;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, in open meeting assembled by the Village President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Bloomingdale, DuPage County, Illinois pursuant to its home rule powers as follows:
Section One - Recitals
The Board of Trustees hereby find that all of the recitals hereinbefore stated as contained in the preamble to this Ordinance are full, true and
correct and do hereby, by reference, incorporate and make them part of this Ordinance as legislative findings.
Section Two - Adoption of Findings and Recommendations
The Board of Trustees hereby adopts the Findings and Recommendations of the Commission as if fully set forth herein, as Exhibit “A”, which is
attached hereto and made a part hereof.
Section Three - Amendment to Village Code
Title 11 Chapter 14 Section 11-14-11A7 shall be amended and restated as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 9/548
7. Logos And Accent Elements: Wall mounted signs may contain elements that consist of a corporate or store logo that is similar in size to
a letter character of the principal sign copy, or another graphic accent containing sign copy that is constructed in a manner that is similar
to a box sign. Such elements may be combined with the independent channel letters as part of a single sign, so long as they are
subordinate to that portion of the sign containing channel letters. The area of the sign shall be calculated as the area of a rectangle that
encompasses the outer limits of all sign elements.
Section Four - Codification
The title, chapter(s) and section(s) adopted by this Ordinance shall be numbered and placed in an appropriate title, chapter(s), and sections(s)
sections when and during the codification of the Bloomingdale Municipal Code.
Section Five – Home Rule Power
This ordinance represents an exercise of the home rule powers conferred upon the Village of Bloomingdale by the Constitution of the State of
Illinois. This ordinance is intended to preempt any ordinance, statute, law, requirement and/or regulation contrary to the regulations and
requirements contained herein to the extent permitted under the Constitution of the State of Illinois.
Section Six – Publication
This ordinance shall be published in book or pamphlet form as provided by the Illinois Municipal Code.
Section Seven - Effective Date
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval and publication in a manner provided by law.
Section Eight - Conflict Clause
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of the conflict.
Section Nine - Recording
The Village Clerk of the Village of Bloomingdale shall be, and is hereby, directed to publish this Ordinance in pamphlet form pursuant to the
Statutes of the State of Illinois.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 10/548
DECIDED pursuant to a roll call vote as follows:
YES NO ABSENT PRESENT
Vince Ackerman
X X
William Belmonte
X X
Bill Bolen
X X
Frank Bucaro
X X
Patrick Shannon
X X
Judi Von Huben
X X
Franco A. Coladipietro
(only if necessary)
X
TOTAL
6 0 0 7
PASSED AND APPROVED by the Village of Bloomingdale Board of Trustees on the 10th day of December, 2018.
____________________________________
Franco A. Coladipietro
Village President
ATTEST:
____________________________________
Jane E. Michelotti
Village Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of
any discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 11/548
THE VILLAGE OF BLOOMINGDALE
DUPAGE COUNTY, ILLINOIS
ORDINANCE
NUMBER 2019 - 07
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING
TITLE 1 CHAPTER 4 SECTION 1-4-1
AS IT RELATES TO THE VILLAGE FINE STRUCTURE
FRANCO A. COLADIPIETRO, Mayor
JANE E. MICHELOTTI, Village Clerk
VINCE ACKERMAN
WILLIAM BELMONTE
BILL BOLEN
FRANK BUCARO
PATRICK SHANNON
JUDI VON HUBEN
Village Board
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 12/548
President and the Board of Trustees of the Village of Bloomingdale
on this the 11th day of February, 2019
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 13/548
ORDINANCE 2019 - 07
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING
TITLE 1 CHAPTER 4 SECTION 1-4-1
AS IT RELATES TO THE VILLAGE
FINE STRUCTURE
WHEREAS, the Village of Bloomingdale, DuPage County, Illinois (the “Village”) is a home rule unit of local government under Article VII, Section
6 of the 1970 Illinois Constitution and, except as limited by such Section, it may exercise any power and perform any function pertaining to its
government and affairs, including but not limited to the power to regulate for the protection of the public health, safety, morals and welfare; to
license; to tax; and to incur debt; and;
WHEREAS, the Village has in full force and effect a codified set of those ordinances of the Village which are of a general and permanent
nature, which said codified set is known and designated as the Village Code of the Village of Bloomingdale, as amended; and
WHEREAS, Chapter 4 of Title I provides for a general penalty imposed for a violation of said Code;
WHEREAS, the Village Board finds it necessary and proper to amend said Code as follows, which this Board finds is in the best interests of the
Village of Bloomingdale.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, in open meeting assembled by the Village President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Bloomingdale, DuPage County, Illinois pursuant to its home rule powers as follows:
Section One - Recitals
The Board of Trustees hereby find that all of the recitals hereinbefore stated as contained in the preamble to this Ordinance are full, true and
correct and do hereby, by reference, incorporate and make them part of this Ordinance as legislative findings.
Section Two – Amendment to Village Code
Title 1 Chapter 4 Section 1-4-1A1 shall be amended and restated as follows:
1. Fine; Imprisonment: Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this code, any person found to have been in violation of any of the terms
and provisions of this code shall be fined in the amount not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) seventy five dollars ($75.00) and not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). No imprisonment for failure to pay such fine, penalty or cost shall exceed six (6) months
for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
Section Three - Codification
The title, chapter(s) and section(s) adopted by this Ordinance shall be numbered and placed in an appropriate title, chapter(s), and sections(s)
sections when and during the codification of the Bloomingdale Municipal Code.
Section Four – Home Rule Power
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 14/548
This ordinance represents an exercise of the home rule powers conferred upon the Village of Bloomingdale by the Constitution of the State of
Illinois. This ordinance is intended to preempt any ordinance, statute, law, requirement and/or regulation contrary to the regulations and
requirements contained herein to the extent permitted under the Constitution of the State of Illinois.
Section Five – Publication
This ordinance shall be published in book or pamphlet form as provided by the Illinois Municipal Code.
Section Six - Effective Date
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval and publication in a manner provided by law.
Section Seven - Conflict Clause
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of the conflict.
Section Eight - Recording
The Village Clerk of the Village of Bloomingdale shall be, and is hereby, directed to publish this Ordinance in pamphlet form pursuant to the
Statutes of the State of Illinois.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 15/548
DECIDED pursuant to a roll call vote as follows:
YES NO ABSENT PRESENT
Vince Ackerman
X X
William Belmonte
X X
Bill Bolen
X X
Frank Bucaro
X X
Patrick Shannon
X X
Judi Von Huben
X X
Franco A. Coladipietro
(only if necessary)
X
TOTAL
6 0 0 7
PASSED AND APPROVED by the Village of Bloomingdale Board of Trustees on the 11th day of February, 2019.
____________________________________
Franco A. Coladipietro
Village President
ATTEST:
____________________________________
Jane E. Michelotti
Village Clerk
PREFACE
This Village Code of the Village of Bloomingdale, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 2018-39, passed
November 12, 2018. Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this Village Code to the extent that they
are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 16/548
amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2012-14
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE VILLAGE OF BLOOMINGDALE
MUNICIPAL CODE, EXCLUDING TITLE 11 (ZONING REGULATIONS), AS
AN EXERCISE OF THE HOME RULE AUTHORITY OF THE VILLAGE OF
BLOOMINGDALE, DUPAGE COUNTY, ILLINOIS
WHEREAS, the village of Bloomingdale, DuPage County, Illinois (the "village") is a home rule unit of local government, and as such may
exercise any power and perform any function pertaining to its government and affairs, except as limited by article VII, section 6 of the 1970
Illinois constitution; and
WHEREAS, the village president and board of trustees (the "village board") determined that it is necessary, desirable and in the best interests of
the village, to produce a code of ordinances that will allow the general public and those having business with the village, as well as the officers
and employees of the village, to have greater ease of access to the laws of the village; and
WHEREAS, the creation of a code of ordinances will promote a more efficient and transparent operation of village government; and
WHEREAS, pursuant to statutory restrictions, title 11 (zoning regulations) of the proposed code of ordinances can only be adopted after a duly
noticed public hearing before the plan commission is held and a findings of fact and recommendation is prepared by the plan commission and
forwarded to the village president and board of trustees, so will be excluded from the adoption of the balance of the proposed code of
ordinances at this time.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the village president and board of trustees of the village of Bloomingdale, DuPage County, Illinois, in
the exercise of their home rule authority, as follows:
Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the village code of the village of Bloomingdale, Illinois (the "village code"),
containing the attached compilation of village ordinances is hereby adopted as the ordinances of the village of Bloomingdale, superseding all
prior laws and ordinances.
Section 2: To the extent that any prior ordinances or portions thereof are in conflict with or inconsistent with the code of ordinances, they are
hereby repealed, except ordinances passed after 2011-35 that are in conflict with the village code shall take precedence over the village code
provisions established by this ordinance.
Section 3: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose-leaf type of binding together with any and all supplements
thereto, either provided in-house or by a contractual service employed by the village, whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general and
permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions of the village code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the
proper place in each of the official copies, one (1) copy of which shall be maintained in the office of the village clerk, certified as to correctness
and available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly open.
Section 4: All ordinances of a general nature included in the village code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and
the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the village board shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in the village code. All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances,
franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a
provision of the village code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the village code.
Section 5: This ordinance and the village code adopted by the same shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED this 12th day of March, 2012.
AYES: Trustees Czernek, Von Huben, Bolen, Gebis, Hovde and King
NAYS: None
ABSENT: None
/s/
Robert G. Iden, Village President
ATTEST:
/s/
Irene M. Jones, Village Clerk
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 17/548
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
BLOOMINGDALE VILLAGE CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the village board of trustees, this code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official village code of
Bloomingdale. This code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the BLOOMINGDALE VILLAGE CODE and is hereby published by authority
of the board of trustees and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the village as provided in section 1-1-3 of this
chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title headings, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is
made to this code by title in any legal documents. (2012 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of
the state as the ordinances of the village of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section 1-2-1 of this
title. (2012 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All
such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared
for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each
individual copy of this code. (2012 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner
that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the village and shall be returned to the office of the village clerk when directed so to do by order of
the village board of trustees. (2012 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEALED AND UNAFFECTED ORDINANCES:
A. Repealed Ordinances: This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the
subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed
from and after the effective date of this code.
B. Unaffected Ordinances: All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this
code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication. (2012 Code)
1-2-2: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
When any provision of this code conflicts with another provision of this code, the provision that imposes the greater restriction shall be
controlling. (2012 Code)
1-2-3: PRIOR ACTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 18/548
Neither the enactment of this code nor the repeal of any ordinance or parts of ordinances as affected by the adoption of this code shall be
construed to affect or abate any action or cause of action for violation of said prior ordinance or ordinances. (2012 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code, or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein by reference,
is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein by reference. The village board
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that
any one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2012
Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
A. Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the village president and board of trustees may be fully carried out.
B. Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements
adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. (2012 Code)
C. Computation Of Time: The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last, unless the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, and then it shall also be excluded. If the day succeeding such Sunday or holiday is
also a holiday or Sunday, then such succeeding day shall also be included. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
D. Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the department director or some other village officer to do some act or
perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize
subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise.
E. Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as
well as to males.
F. Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
G. May; Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory. (2012 Code)
H. Or; And: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980)
I. Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language,
but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and
understood according to such meaning.
J. Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and
thing.
K. Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if
followed by the words "of the village of Bloomingdale".
L. Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
M. Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the village has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter",
"section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to village ordinances is
not meant to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2012 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 19/548
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes
such meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either expressly or by implication.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES: Unless otherwise indicated, the village board of trustees of the village of Bloomingdale.
CODE: The village code of the village of Bloomingdale.
COUNTY: The county of DuPage, state of Illinois.
IN THE VILLAGE OR WITHIN THE VILLAGE: All territory over which the village now has or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for any lawful
purpose.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and
welfare of inhabitants of the village, or any activity which, by its perpetuation, can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the
property of a person or persons within the community.
OATH; SWORN: The word "oath" shall be deemed to include an affirmation; the word "sworn" shall be construed to include the word "affirmed".
OCCUPANT OR TENANT: Applied to a building or land, means any person who holds a written or oral lease of or actually occupies the whole or
part of such building or land, either along or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a
part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock association or any city, or state, or any subdivision thereof and includes any
trustee, receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every species of property, except "real estate" as defined in this section.
PRECEDING; FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
REAL ESTATE: Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and shall embrace all chattels real.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the
consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use
of pedestrians.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
STREET: The entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
VILLAGE: The village of Bloomingdale, county of DuPage, state of Illinois.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any
person is required by law on any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person or, in case such person is
unable to write, by such person's proper mark.
YEAR: A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be
deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 20/548
provisions of any division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the
catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2012 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-07 - FINE STRUCTURE. Go to new ordinance.
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY1:
A. General Penalty Imposed:
1. Fine; Imprisonment: Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this code, any person found to have been in violation of any of the terms
and provisions of this code shall be fined in an amount not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) and not exceeding one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). No imprisonment for failure to pay such fine, penalty or cost shall exceed six (6) months for each offense. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
2. Conditional Discharge; Court Supervision; Restitution: In addition to a fine described in subsection A1 of this section, the circuit court may
impose a period of conditional discharge as defined in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1-4 or court supervision as defined in 730 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/5-1-21 of the criminal code for a period of up to six (6) months, an order of restitution, an order to perform community
service, an order to complete an education program and/or any other appropriate penalties or conditions authorized in any section of this
code or stand alone ordinance or any conditions for conditional discharge set forth in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-6-3 or for court
supervision in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-6-3.1 as the foregoing are amended from time to time.
3. Education Program:
a. A penalty imposed for violation of any provision of this code may include or consist of a requirement that the defendant complete an
education program; except, that a holder of a valid commercial driver's license who commits a vehicle weight or size restriction violation
shall not be required to complete an education program under this subsection.
b. A low income individual required to complete an education program under subsection A3a of this section who provides proof of eligibility
for the federal earned income tax credit under section 32 of the internal revenue code or the Illinois earned income tax credit under 35
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/212 shall not be required to pay any fee for participating in a required education program.
4. Additional Remedies: The appropriate authorities of the village may take such other action as they deem proper to enforce the terms and
provisions of this code including, without limitation, an action at law or in equity to compel compliance with its terms.
5. Costs And Fees: Any person violating the terms or provisions of this code shall be subject, in addition to the penalties set out in this
subsection, to the payment of court costs and reasonable attorney fees.
6. Default In Payment: A default in the payment of a fine or any installment of a fine may be collected by any means authorized for the
collection of monetary judgments. The village attorney may retain attorneys and private collection agents for the purpose of collecting any
default in payment of any fine or installment of that fine. Any fees or costs incurred by the village with respect to attorneys or private
collection agents retained by the village attorney under this subsection shall be charged to the offender. (Ord. 2012-17, 4-9-2012)
B. Acts Consistent With Criminal Laws Of State: If, by the terms of an ordinance, an act that would be consistent with the criminal laws of the
state is declared to be a misdemeanor, the penalty therefor shall be for a period of incarceration in a penal institution other than a
penitentiary not to exceed six (6) months. The matter shall be prosecuted under the rules of criminal procedure of the state, and the village
shall be required to establish guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
C. Limitation; Compliance With Statute: The provisions of subsection A of this section notwithstanding, no penalty shall be greater than that
established by state statute for the same offense. (2012 Code)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a
part of each and every separate section.
B. Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or
sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to
bar any other penalty being enforced.
C. Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this
code and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 21/548
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the village board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty
on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (2012 Code)
Chapter 5
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
1-5-1: CORPORATE SEAL:
A. Description: The seal now being used by and for the village, the impression of which is in circular form, on the outer circle of which are the
words, "Village of Bloomingdale, DuPage County, Illinois", and within the inner circle of which is the word "Seal", is hereby established and
declared to have been and to now and in the future be the official seal of the village, to be used in all cases in which, by law and custom, it is
necessary to use such a seal to authenticate the corporate acts of the village. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Custody And Use: The corporate seal shall be kept in the custody of the village clerk and an impression thereof attached to all instruments,
documents, and other corporate acts which are required by statute or by direction of the board of trustees to be authenticated by the
corporate seal. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980)
1-5-2: ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS:
A. Style Of Enacting Ordinances: The enacting style of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the President and Board of Trustees of the
Village of Bloomingdale.". (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980)
B. Approval Or Veto; Reconsideration Of And Passing Over:
1. All resolutions and motions: a) which create any liability against the village; or b) which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its
money; or c) to sell any village property, and all ordinances, passed by the board of trustees shall be deposited with the village clerk. If the
president approves them, he shall sign them. Those of which he disapproves he shall return to the board of trustees, with his written
objections, at the next regular meeting of the board of trustees occurring not less than five (5) days after their passage. The president may
disapprove of any one or more sums appropriated in any ordinance or motion making an appropriation, and if so, the remainder shall be
effective. If the president fails to return any ordinance, resolution, or motion of which he disapproves entirely, with his written objections,
within the designated time, it becomes effective without his signature. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
2. The board shall reconsider every resolution, motion or ordinance returned thereto under subsection B1 of this section and may override
the president's veto by the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the trustees elected to the board.
C. Passage:
1. Resolutions and motions: a) which create liability against the village; or b) which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money;
or c) to sell village property, and ordinances, or any amendments to such resolutions, motions, or ordinances, shall not be deemed passed
until such resolutions, motions, or ordinances are considered by and voted upon by the board of trustees; except, that the reading and
second consideration thereof may be waived by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the board of trustees.
2. When any such resolution, motion, ordinance or amendment considered by the board of trustees receives a favorable vote from the board
of trustees, it shall be placed on the agenda and brought before the board of trustees by the village clerk at the next regular meeting of the
board of trustees for a second vote upon said resolution, motion, ordinance, or amendment thereto unless the second reading and
consideration thereof has been waived as provided herein.
3. The said resolution, motion, ordinance or amendment thereto shall be deemed passed if it receives a passing vote at such second
consideration. If any said resolution, motion, ordinance, or amendment thereto fails to pass at its first consideration, it shall be deemed to
have failed its passage, and it is not required that it be brought before the board at its next regular meeting.
D. Reconsideration Of Vote At Special Meetings: No vote of the board shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting unless there are
present at the special meeting as many trustees as were present when the vote was taken. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980)
E. Publication Of Ordinances: All ordinances of the village imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment or forfeiture or making any appropriation
shall: 1) be printed in book or pamphlet form, published by authority of the board; or 2) be published at least once, within ten (10) days after
passage, in one or more newspapers with a general circulation in the village. No such ordinance shall take effect until ten (10) days after it is
so published; provided, that ordinances establishing rules and regulations for the construction of buildings or for the use of property, where
such rules and regulations have been previously printed in book or pamphlet form, may, by their terms, provide for the adoption of such rules
and regulations or portions thereof by references thereto without further printing or publication. All other ordinances, resolutions and motions
shall take effect upon their passage unless they otherwise provide. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 22/548
F. Proof Of Ordinances:
1. The contents of all village ordinances, the date of passage and the date of publication or posting, where required, may be proved by the
certificate of the village clerk, under the seal of the village.
2. Whenever village ordinances are printed in book or pamphlet form, and purport to be published by authority of the board of trustees, such
book or pamphlet shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage and legal publication of such ordinances, as of the dates
mentioned in such book or pamphlet, in all courts and administrative tribunals. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980)
Chapter 6
VILLAGE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
1-6-1: VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
A. Function: The village shall be governed by the village board.
B. Composition: The village board shall consist of a village president and six (6) trustees.
C. Voting Rights:
1. Trustees: Each trustee of the board shall have the right to vote on all questions coming before the board unless he is directly interested
therein.
2. President: The president shall preside at all meetings of the board and shall not vote except in case of a tie or unless it is necessary for a
majority or statutory approval or on a matter which he is given statutory authority to vote.
D. Powers:
1. Improvements: The board shall, in addition to all powers and duties already conferred thereon, make all orders for doing the work or the
making of any improvements within the village.
2. Revenue And Expense: The board shall levy all taxes, apportion and appropriate all funds and audit and allow all bills, accounts, claims
and payrolls and order the payment thereof.
3. Contracts: The board shall make or authorize the making of all contracts with the village, the same to be made either by ordinance or
resolution adopted by the board. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980)
4. Authority Over Committees, Department Directors And Supervisors: All committees, department directors and supervisors are subject to
the authority of the board of trustees. Their acts and decisions are subject to review, reconsideration, and final approval by the board.
Such department directors and supervisors may be required, at the discretion of the board, to make such report in writing concerning the
affairs of their function or assignment as the board may deem necessary. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
5. Removal Of Officers: Any appointive officer shall be subject to removal by the board of trustees at any time, and all appointments shall be
made upon such condition, and when so removed, the salary of such person shall cease. All suspended appointees shall have the right to
appeal to the village board of trustees from the suspension decrees of the president or other officer. The action of the board of trustees
shall be final.
6. Rules And Order Of Business: The board shall adopt rules governing its order of business and prescribing the manner in which legislation
shall be considered, which rules and order of business shall not be inconsistent with law and the ordinances of the village.
7. Creation, Discontinuance Of Offices: The board shall have the power, by ordinance, from time to time, to create, fill and discontinue offices
and employment, and to add, assign or transfer to any officer or employee new duties from time to time.
8. Changes In Compensation: The village board may, by ordinance, prescribe, limit or change the compensation of all officers and
employees. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980)
1-6-2: VILLAGE PRESIDENT1:
A. Powers And Duties:
1. The president shall have all the powers and perform all the duties hereinafter set forth and as are provided by the laws of the state of
Illinois or by the village ordinances. He shall be the chief executive officer and representative of the village. Among other things, he shall
perform the following duties:
a. Preside at all regular and special meetings of the board of trustees, unless unavoidably prevented.
b. Nominate persons to fill the appointive offices of the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 23/548
c. Investigate all matters pertaining to the interests of the village and well being of the residents.
d. Countersign all commissions, licenses and permits authorized by statute or village ordinance. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980)
e. Sign all contracts and warrants on behalf of the village, approved by resolution. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
f. Generally, be charged with the responsibility for the proper conduct of the village affairs and the enforcement of all ordinances of the
village.
2. The village president shall submit to the board of trustees a report relative to the affairs of the village, and he shall recommend for
consideration by the board such measures as he may deem expedient. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980)
B. President Pro Tem: If a temporary absence from the village or disability of the president incapacitates him from the performance of his duties,
but does not create a vacancy in the office, the board of trustees shall elect one of its members to act as village president pro tem. The
village president pro tem, during this absence or disability, shall perform the duties and possess all the rights and powers of the village
president but shall not be entitled to vote as president pro tem and trustee. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
1-6-3: MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the board of trustees shall be held on the second and fourth Mondays of each month at seven
thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M. (Ord. 80-20, 4-8-1980)
B. Special Meetings:
1. The president or any two (2) trustees, upon forty eight (48) hours' notice, may call special meetings of the board by giving written or
printed notice at the usual place of business or place of residence of each member before the hour of holding such meeting. Such notice
shall state the object of such meeting and may be served by any member of the police department or any member of the board or other
officer of the village who shall certify that he has served said notice by showing in what manner the same has been served. Such notices
and copies thereof shall be prepared by the village clerk when requested. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
2. At any regular meeting, a majority of the village board may call a special meeting, and said special meeting shall be noted by the village
clerk in the minutes of that meeting.
3. Special meetings shall be held at such location as is contained in the notice of said special meeting.
C. Quorum; Voting:
1. Four (4) members of the board, including the president, shall constitute a quorum to do business, but no ordinance shall be passed except
upon the favorable vote of a majority of the elected members. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980)
2. Upon every vote, the "ayes" and "nays" shall be called and recorded, and every motion, resolution or ordinance, if the president or any
member shall require it, shall be reduced to writing and read, unless waived, before a vote shall be taken thereon. Every trustee present
shall vote thereon unless the board shall, for good reason shown, excuse him from voting or unless he is directly interested therein, in
which case, he shall not be entitled to vote. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
D. Temporary Chair: In the absence of the village president, acting village president, or village president pro tem, the board of trustees may
elect a trustee to act as a temporary chair. He shall have only the powers of a presiding officer and a right to vote in his capacity as trustee
on any ordinance, resolution, or motion. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980)
E. Public Participation:
1. Rules: The following rules shall apply to public participation at regular meetings of the village board of trustees and the village board of
trustees acting as a standing committee of the whole or a special committee of the whole (hereinafter referred to as "board meetings"):
a. Public participation at board meetings is encouraged. A period of time at the beginning of each board meeting shall be made available
for public comments regarding items on the agenda or related to any other village ordinances, policies or operations (hereinafter
referred to as "audience participation").
b. A period of time at the end of each meeting shall also be available for public comments regarding items on the agenda only (hereinafter
referred to as "comments from the public").
c. A person shall be permitted to speak upon being recognized by the village president or the acting chair. The person shall stand (if
possible), state his/her name and address prior to making comments, and limit speaking to no more than five (5) minutes, unless
additional time is granted by the village president or acting chair. Each person will be permitted to speak only once during audience
participation and again during comments from the public.
d. All speakers shall address their comments to the village president or acting chair. The village president or acting chair may request that
the appropriate member of the board or staff respond to the comment.
e. The village president or acting chair shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide all questions of order.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 24/548
f. When addressing the board, members, administrative officers and other persons permitted to speak shall confine their remarks to the
matter at hand and avoid repetitious commentary, personal remarks, the impugning of motives, and merely contentious or disruptive
statements.
g. If any person indulges in such remarks or otherwise engages in conduct injurious to the harmony of the board and the meeting, the
village president or acting chair may immediately terminate the opportunity to speak. This decision is at the discretion of the village
president or acting chair or upon the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the trustees present. Any person, except a member of the
board, who engages in disorderly conduct during a meeting may be ejected from the meeting upon motion passed by a majority of the
trustees present.
2. Citizens' Guide Available At Each Meeting: The following shall be printed and made available to the public at each board meeting:
CITIZENS' GUIDE TO ADDRESSING THE BOARD:
Anyone wishing to speak under the agenda item entitled "Audience Participation" or "Comments from the Public" shall adhere to the
following guidelines:
1. A person shall be permitted to speak upon being recognized by the village president or acting chair. Please stand (if possible) and
approach the podium, announce your name and address before commencing. All comments under "Audience Participation" or
"Comments from the Public" are limited to five (5) minutes, and each person shall only be permitted to speak once.
2. All speakers shall address their comments to the village president or acting chair.
3. The village president or acting chair shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide all questions of order.
4. When addressing the board, members, administrative officers and other persons permitted to speak shall confine their remarks to
the matter at hand and avoid personal remarks, the impugning of motives, and merely contentious or disruptive statements. If any
person indulges in such remarks or otherwise engages in conduct injurious to the harmony of the board and the meeting, the village
president or acting chair may immediately terminate the opportunity to speak. This decision is at the discretion of the village president
or acting chair or upon the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the trustees present. Any person, except a member of the board, who
engages in disorderly conduct during a meeting may be ejected from the meeting upon motion passed by a majority of the trustees
present.
5. Please do not repeat comments that have already been made by others.
(Ord. 2011-22, 6-13-2011)
3. Exemptions From Rules: The rules and regulations included in this section do not apply to the meetings of the planning and zoning
commission, police pension board, board of fire and police commissioners, or any other appointed board and commission, as these
bodies have statutory requirements concerning public hearings and other public meetings. (Ord. 2011-22, 6-13-2011; amd. Ord. 2014-48,
10-27-2014)
F. Electronic Attendance At Meetings: The rules and policies for electronic attendance at meetings are located at section 2-0-1 of this code.
(Ord. 2014-51, 11-10-2014)
1-6-4: RULES AND ORDER OF BUSINESS:
The following rules for the government of the meetings of the board of trustees are hereby adopted:
A. Order Of Business:
1. Regular Meetings: The order of business at all regular meetings shall be determined by roll call vote at each meeting. The agenda for
each meeting may include the following items but not in any particular sequence:
a. Call to order and calling the roll of the trustees.
b. Pledge Of Allegiance.
c. Approval of minutes of any regular meeting and special meeting.
d. Approval of the directive to pay, and consideration of, bills against the village.
e. Communications and correspondence, reading and referring petitions and communications.
f. Reports of committees.
g. Reports of the administrative staff.
h. Old business.
i. New business.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 25/548
j. Discussion from the floor.
k. Adjournment.
2. Special Meetings: The order of business at special meetings shall be as follows:
a. Call to order and calling of the roll of the trustees.
b. Consideration of the object of the meeting.
B. Rules Of Procedure:
1. Unless otherwise provided by statute, meetings of the board of trustees shall be conducted in accordance with "Robert's Rules Of Order".
2. The president shall decide all questions of order, subject to an appeal to the board; and in all cases, where these rules are not applicable,
the board of trustees shall be governed by parliamentary law, as laid down in "Robert's Rules Of Order".
C. Suspension Of Rules: The rules of the board of trustees, other than those prescribed by statute, may be suspended during any one meeting
by a majority vote of the members present. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980)
D. Written Resolutions And Ordinances: All resolutions and ordinances shall be reduced to writing and handed to the clerk and read by him,
unless waived, before being presented to the board of trustees for action. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
E. President And Trustees To Attend Meetings: It shall be the duty of the president and board of trustees to attend every meeting of the board of
trustees and their respective committee meetings unless unavoidably detained.
F. Referring Documents: All ordinances, petitions, resolutions, orders, and communications to the village shall be referred by the president or
presiding officer to the proper committee, officer or employee.
G. Committee Reports: Each standing and special committee shall make a report in the committee minutes or orally on the state of the matters
before that committee. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980)
1-6-5: COMMITTEES:
A. General Committees: The following trustee assignments shall be made by the president:
Police and community relations.
Planning, zoning and environmental concerns.
Facilities and golf course.
Traffic and street infrastructure.
Finance, personnel and administration.
Intergovernmental relations.
(Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Other Committees: The president shall appoint such other and further committees as may be necessary to properly carry on the business of
the village. Written minutes shall be made of all committee meetings and submitted to the board of trustees at the next regular meeting.
C. Committee Of The Whole: In addition, a committee of the whole shall consist of the village president, the members of the board of trustees,
and the village administrator, if there be one. The chair of said committee shall be the village president. The village president shall be an ex
officio member of all committees. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-1980)
Chapter 7
VILLAGE CLERK1
1-7-1: ELECTED OFFICIAL:
The village clerk is an elected village official, and shall serve a four (4) year term of office and until a successor is elected and qualified, as
provided by state statute. (Ord. 2012-40, 11-12-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 26/548
1-7-2: DUTIES:
In addition to the statutory duties and those contained elsewhere in this code, the village clerk shall:
A. Attend all meetings of the board of trustees; and post notice of and record all proceedings of the board of trustees; and make available for
public inspection that record, within seven (7) days after approval by the board of trustees.
B. Tape, or make a digital recording of, all closed meetings of the board of trustees pursuant to the Illinois open meetings act2, secure such
recorded media in a safe place where it shall be kept in confidentiality, and otherwise assure that the requirements of the open meetings act
are met with respect to their release and destruction. If the village clerk cannot attend a closed meeting for whatever reason, the village
clerk, a deputy village clerk, or another designee of the clerk shall be responsible for assuring compliance with the requirements of this
subsection. The person taking minutes for such meeting shall record the meeting and then provide the village clerk with the original recorded
media for security thereof. No copies of such recorded media shall be made by any person other than the village clerk, or an authorized
deputy clerk.
C. Keep a record of all ordinances and resolutions of the village in a book or books provided for that purpose. For every ordinance requiring
posting or recording, the clerk shall, when so required, have noted thereon the date of such posting or recording, and to make a certificate of
such posting or recording and attach the same to the original ordinance kept in the records of the village.
D. Seal and attest all ordinances, resolutions and contracts of the village, certain licenses and permits, and other such documents as shall
require this formality. The seal of the village may be mechanically or digitally printed on certain licenses, permits and other such documents,
so that a manual seal by the clerk is not necessary, but all documents with a mechanical or digital seal, as provided herein, shall
nevertheless be considered officially sealed village documents.
E. Serve certain notices, either by personal service, by publication or posting, required by statute, local ordinance, or by order of the president
or board of trustees to be served and in the manner by law required, unless notices are expressly ordered to be served by another village
official.
F. Provide the election material for village residents running in village elections.
G. Provide facilities for local voter registration.
H. Keep a complete and accurate file of the official papers of the village so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had by any
properly authorized elected official, village officer, or village staff member.
I. Countersign, in writing, all contracts, bonds, other agreements, or evidence of indebtedness, of the village made in the name of the village,
and by the authority of the village president and board of trustees.
J. If created by the board of trustees, keep a list of all village board committees, and a record of the business brought before them.
K. The clerk shall be the custodian of the village seal and shall affix its impression on documents whenever this is required, pursuant to
subsection D of this section.
L. Perform all, and such duties as are, from time to time, imposed by the village president or board of trustees.
M. Appoint a deputy clerk or deputy clerks pursuant to section 1-7-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-40, 11-12-2012)
1-7-3: DEPUTY CLERK:
A. Appointment; Restrictions: The village clerk shall have the authority to appoint one deputy village clerk to discharge the functions and duties
of the office of village clerk, who need not be a resident of the village; provided, that no such appointment shall be made unless and until
funding for the deputy village clerk position described in this section has been approved by the village board in the fiscal year budget for the
year of any such proposed appointment. The deputy village clerk position identified in this section shall be a part time, nonexempt position in
village service, or be a full time, nonexempt position undertaken by a current employee whose duties in village service are combined with the
duties of deputy village clerk.
B. Additional Deputy Clerks: For administrative convenience and to provide better service to the general public, the village clerk shall have the
authority to appoint other deputy village clerks, in addition to the deputy clerk described in subsection A of this section. Such additional
deputy village clerks need not be residents of the village, but shall be employees of the village, and shall discharge certain functions and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 27/548
duties of the office of the village clerk without any compensation other than their budgeted salary as a village employee, regardless of
whether they are a full time, exempt/salaried employee, a full time, nonexempt/hourly employee or a part time, nonexempt/hourly employee.
C. Duties: The deputy village clerk, under the general supervision of the village clerk and village administrator, shall:
1. Maintain custody of all village records;
2. Publish and post notices of all public meetings and copies of resolutions and ordinances adopted by the village board when appropriate or
directed;
3. Maintain the corporate seal and certify the authenticity of all copies of village documents;
4. Serve as local registrar of all vital statistics kept by the village;
5. Attend meetings of the village president and board of trustees when the village clerk is unavailable and keep a record of their
proceedings; (Ord. 2011-32, 9-12-2011)
6. Register voters; (Ord. 2011-32, 9-12-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
7. Receive developer escrow application fees; and
8. Perform such functions or duties as assigned by the village clerk or village administrator. (Ord. 2011-32, 9-12-2011)
Chapter 8
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
1-8-1: PROCEDURES MANUAL ADOPTED:
A. The manual on file with the Village Clerk entitled "Bloomingdale Procedures Manual" is hereby adopted as the official manual of the Village
governing certain employee relations.
B. Copies of said manual are to be directed forthwith to the Village Administrator for immediate implementation in all departments of Village
government. (Ord. 76-19A, 4-26-1976)
1-8-2: BONDS:
A. Required; Amounts: The following Village officials shall obtain a public officials bond in the following amounts:
1. Village President: Equal to the minimum amount required by the Statutes of the State of Illinois.
2. Village Clerk: Equal to the minimum amount required by the Statutes of the State of Illinois.
3. Village Administrator: Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). (Ord. 94-29, 6-13-1994)
4. Village Engineer: Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). (Ord. 94-29, 6-13-1994; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
5. Finance Director-Treasurer: Three (3) times the latest Federal census population of the Village or any subsequent census figures used for
Motor Fuel Tax purposes. (Ord. 94-29, 6-13-1994; amd. 2012 Code)
6. Chief of Police: Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
7. Building Commissioner: Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
B. Conditions: All bonds required by this section shall be payable to the Village, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the
office and the payment of all monies received by each such officer according to the law and the ordinances of the Village. (Ord. 94-29, 6-13-
1994)
C. Filing: All bonds obtained pursuant to this section shall be filed with the Village Clerk, except the bond of the Village Clerk, which shall be
filed with the Village Finance Director-Treasurer. (Ord. 94-29, 6-13-1994; amd. 2012 Code)
D. Payment By Village: All bonds required by this section will be paid by the Village. (Ord. 94-29, 6-13-1994)
1-8-3: COMPENSATION FOR ELECTED OFFICIALS:
A. Elected In 2007:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 28/548
1. All Village Trustees who are elected in the April 2007 Municipal election to fill a four (4) year term of office and all Trustees elected or
appointed thereafter shall receive the following compensation:
Effective Date
Compensation
May 1, 2007 $90.00 for each Board of Trustees or Committee of the Whole meeting attended, with a maximum of $360.00 per
month
2. All Village Trustees who are elected in the April 2007 Municipal election to fill a four (4) year term of office and all Trustees elected or
appointed thereafter shall receive compensation of ninety dollars ($90.00) for each and every official special meeting attended, with a
maximum of twelve (12) such official special meetings per fiscal year as compensation for attendance at such official special meetings by
the Trustee. Such special meetings are duly called and posted as standing committee of the whole or Village Board meetings, and are
called in addition to those meetings published on a yearly basis as required by law. A continued regular meeting shall not constitute a
special meeting.
B. Elected In 2009:
1. President: The Village President who is elected in the April 2009 Municipal election and all elections thereafter shall receive the following
compensation:
Effective Date Compensation
May 1, 2009 $900.00 per month, plus $100.00 per month as Liquor Control Commissioner
(Ord. 2006-36, 8-14-2006)
C. Elected In 2017:
1. Clerk: The Village Clerk who is elected in the April 2017 Municipal election and all elections thereafter shall receive the following
compensation:
Effective Date
Compensation
May 1, 2017 $200.00 for each Board of Trustees or Committee of the Whole meeting attended, with a maximum of $600.00 per
month.
The amount shall be paid monthly in accordance with the Village's usual and customary payroll practices.
(Ord. 2016-44, 10-24-2016)
D. Compensation Increases: Beginning on May 1, 2010, and every May 1 thereafter, the compensation of the Village President/Liquor Control
Commissioner, the Village Clerk and the Village Trustees shall be increased by the lesser of three percent (3%) or the percentage increase
in the Consumer Price Index for the twelve (12) month period preceding May 1. The term "Consumer Price Index" shall mean the Chicago
area Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers for all items as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States
Department of Labor or any successor index created by the Department of Labor as a substitute index that measures the average change in
prices of goods and services purchased by urban consumers. The most recent consumer price index available on May 1 of each year shall
be used in applying this subsection to any increases in compensation. If the index is a negative number, then there shall be no decrease in
the compensation, but the compensation shall remain the same as the previous fiscal year. Amounts for monthly and per meeting
compensation shall be rounded to the nearest whole dollar.
E. Payment Of Compensation: Compensation shall be paid monthly, in arrears, on the first payroll of each month. (Ord. 2006-36, 8-14-2006;
amd. Ord. 2012-44, 11-12-2012)
1-8-4: INDEMNIFICATION:
A. It is found and declared by the village president and board of trustees ("village") as follows:
1. The village has the power to indemnify its officials, both elected and appointed, pursuant to law. (Ord. 92-78, 11-23-1992)
2. The term "officials", as used in this section, shall mean the president and trustees, the village administrator, department directors and
appointed committee and commission members, as well as all other officers of the village, whether or not currently serving. (Ord. 92-78,
11-23-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 29/548
3. It is in the best interest of the village to provide for the indemnification of its officials, both elected and appointed, against claims, expenses
and liabilities to which such persons may be subject by reason of their having acted in their capacity as a public official.
B. The village shall indemnify any official who was or is a party, or may become a party, to any threatened, pending or completed action, suit or
proceeding, whether civil, administrative or investigative, by reason of any act or omission, error, misstatement or misleading statement, or
neglect or breach of duty or any other action which could reasonably be construed to have been committed, attempted or allegedly
committed or attempted by such person in the discharge of his or her duties in his or her capacity as an official, both elected and appointed,
against expenses (including attorney fees), judgments and amounts paid in settlement actually and reasonably incurred by him or her in
connection with such action, suit or proceeding, if such person acted in good faith in a manner in which he or she reasonably believed was in
the best interests of the village. This indemnification shall not apply to any claim, suit, action or proceeding:
1. Which is for the return by any such official, both elected and appointed, of any remuneration paid in fact to him or her without the previous
approval of the village if it shall be determined by judgment or other final adjudication that such remuneration is in violation of law or if
such remuneration is to be repaid to the village under a settlement agreement.
2. Which is for an accounting of profits made from a purchase or sale by such official, both elected and appointed, of village property for any
transaction prohibited by the village ethics ordinance1.
3. Which is brought about or contributed to by the fraudulent or dishonest acts of such official, both elected and appointed, if a judgment or
other final adjudication adverse to such official establishes that acts of active and deliberate dishonesty were committed or attempted by
such official with actual dishonest purpose and intent and were material to the cause of action so adjudicated.
4. Which is brought about or contributed to by any criminal activities of such official, and there has been a judicial determination of said
criminal activities.
5. For which the village is not authorized by law to provide indemnification to the official, either elected or appointed.
6. With reference to any of the aforementioned enumerated items, a presumption shall exist that indemnification shall apply unless a judicial
finding to the contrary is made.
C. The termination of any action, suit or proceeding, contrary to the best interests of the official, by judgment, order, settlement or other
resolution shall not create a presumption that the official did not act in good faith in a manner in which he or she reasonably believed was in
the best interests of the village. To the extent that an official has been successful, on the merits or otherwise, in the defense of any action,
suit or proceeding or in the defense of any claim which qualifies herein for indemnification, such person shall be indemnified against
expenses (including attorney fees) actually and reasonably incurred by such person in connection therewith. However, the village shall not
withhold payment of attorney fees until the conclusion of any legal proceedings, but shall pay the attorney fees of the official on a timely
basis.
D. The village shall indemnify only those officials, either elected or appointed, from whom or with respect to whom the village has received
written notice of a claim. To the extent practicable, any notice from such official shall be mailed as soon as practicable and shall identify the
official seeking the indemnification and contain information with respect to the time, place and circumstances of the claim, the names and
addresses of any injured persons or other claimants and the names of any available witnesses. In the case where legal proceedings have
been commenced, indemnification may be denied if the official fails to mail to the village, within twenty (20) days after receiving service of
process, a copy of such process relating to a claimed wrongful act unless: 1) the village has otherwise received a copy of, or written notice
of, such process; or 2) the failure to notify within such twenty (20) day period does not adversely impact upon the village's ability to defend
against such claim. Notice of the claim shall be made in writing to the village clerk.
E. The village shall indemnify the official for any damages, expenses, court costs and legal fees incurred in connection with any defense of or
settlement of a claim, action or proceeding where such settlement has been approved in advance by the village, or where the village refuses
or fails to approve such settlement, such settlement is deemed to be reasonable by independent legal counsel chosen by both the village
and the official.
F. Any indemnification pursuant to this section shall be made by the village upon a determination that indemnification of the person is required
by this section. Such determination shall be made: 1) by the president and board of trustees by a majority vote of a quorum of the board who
were not parties to such claim, suit, action or proceeding; or 2) if such quorum is not obtainable or, even if obtainable, where a majority of a
quorum of the board fails to approve the indemnification, by independent legal counsel chosen by both the claimant and the village board.
G. Any official against whom any action, suit or proceeding is brought may employ his or her own attorney; provided, that such attorney is
reasonably acceptable to the village; and provided further, that the costs of such attorney shall not be paid by the village unless the village
attorney or independent counsel for the village shall have advised the village that such official's interests should not be represented by the
same counsel that represents the village in such action, suit or proceeding.
H. The indemnification provided herein shall be in addition to and not exclusive of any other indemnity or insurance or other protection to which
the indemnitee may be entitled. The indemnification provided herein shall be payable whether or not the village has obtained insurance
therefor and, in the case of the death of the indemnitee, shall inure to the benefit of his or her heirs or successors. (Ord. 92-78, 11-23-1992)
1-8-5: EQUAL EMPLOYMENT POLICY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 30/548
All persons shall have the right to be free from discrimination on the basis of race, color, creed, national ancestry and sex in hiring and
promotion practices of any employer.
(Ord. 77-58, 11-28-1977; amd. 2012 Code)
The village hereby recognizes that the absence of overt discrimination does not in itself assure equal opportunity to women and minority groups,
and that other factors such as poverty, inferior education, and traditional recruitment or employment practices also hinder the minority applicant.
The affirmative action program, with its result oriented procedures and specified goals, is intended to combat those handicaps. Furthermore,
through the efforts of the village administrator, there will be a continuing process of review of the hiring practices, the administrative procedures
and the promotion structure of the village. (Ord. 77-58, 11-28-1977)
1-8-6: PARTICIPATION IN ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND:
The village does hereby elect to participate in the Illinois municipal retirement fund, effective January 1, 1974. (Ord. 73-45, 9-26-1973)
ARTICLE A. FINANCE DIRECTOR-TREASURER1
1-8A-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
There is hereby created the office of finance director-treasurer. The finance director-treasurer shall be appointed by the village president, with
the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The finance director-treasurer shall have a term of office of one year and until his successor
has been chosen and has qualified. (Ord. 80-12, 2-26-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
1-8A-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. In addition to the duties specifically delegated to the finance director-treasurer by this code, the director of finance-treasurer shall have all
duties and powers which are assigned by any statute of the state of Illinois or any code, ordinance or resolution of the village to the office of
village treasurer and shall serve ex officio in such capacity concurrently with his full time employment as director of the finance department.
B. The finance director-treasurer shall:
1. Perform such duties as may be prescribed for the village treasurer by statute or ordinance.
2. Receive all monies paid into the village, whether directly from the person paying the money or from the hands of such other officer or
employee as may receive it, and he shall pay out money only on vouchers or orders properly signed by the village president and clerk.
3. Review all claims for reimbursement against the village and submit a list of all outstanding claims to the finance, personnel and
administration committee for their consideration, together with his report as to the status of the claims.
4. Prepare and file all fiscal, financial, and tax reports, documents, and materials as may be required of the village to be presented to public
agencies of the federal, state, and county governments, and to be presented to such financial institutions as may be doing business with
the village.
5. On or before June 15 of each year, submit to the board of trustees a report of his estimate, as nearly as may be, of the money necessary
to defray the expenses of the village during the current fiscal year. For the purpose of making this report, the finance director-treasurer
shall require all officers of the village to submit statements of the condition and expenses of their offices or departments; and any
proposed improvements and the estimated expense thereof; a statement of all unperformed contracts; and the amount of all unexpended
appropriations of the preceding year. His report shall also:
a. Classify the objects and purposes of such estimated expenditures and the amounts required for each;
b. Show the aggregate income of the preceding fiscal year, from all sources;
c. Show the amount of liability on which interest is to be paid;
d. Show the bonds and debts due and payable and the dates when such are due and payable; and
e. Give such other information regarding the financial situation of the village as the board of trustees may require.
6. Deposit the village funds in such depositories as may be selected from time to time as provided by law and keep the deposit of the village
monies separate and distinct from his own monies. The finance director-treasurer shall not use village monies for personal or private use.
7. Keep such books, accounts, and records as may be required by statute or ordinance, and establish, supervise, and maintain the financial
record system of the village. The records, books, and accounts of the finance director-treasurer shall show, among other things, all monies
received by him showing the source from which it is received and the purpose for which it is paid. (Ord. 80-12, 2-26-1980; amd. 2012
Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 31/548
1-8A-3: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUND:
All monies received on any special assessment shall be held by the finance director-treasurer as a special fund to be applied only to the
payment of the improvement, or bonds and vouchers issued therefor, together with interest thereon, for which the assessment was made, and
such money shall be used for no other purpose unless to reimburse the village for money expended for such improvements. Payment on bonds
or vouchers shall be made in accordance with the statutes and the law, and the finance director-treasurer shall keep his books and accounts in
such a manner so that proper prorations in payments of principal and interest can be made and ascertained. (Ord. 80-12, 2-26-1980; amd. 2012
Code)
1-8A-4: DRAWING WARRANTS; TRANSFER OF FUNDS:
A. All warrants drawn on the finance director-treasurer must be signed by the president and countersigned by the clerk, stating the particular
fund or appropriation to which the same is chargeable and the person to whom payable, and no money shall be otherwise paid except as
may be provided by statute.
B. Money shall not be transferred by the finance director-treasurer from one fund to another after it has been received by him, nor appropriated
to any other purpose than that for which has been collected or paid, except as may be ordered by the president and board of trustees in
manner and form prescribed by statute. (Ord. 80-12, 2-26-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
ARTICLE B. VILLAGE ATTORNEY
1-8B-1: OFFICE CREATED; QUALIFICATIONS:
There is hereby created the office of village attorney, which office shall be held by an attorney or firm of attorneys admitted to the bar and
licensed to practice law in the state. (Ord. 71-79, 9-8-1971)
1-8B-2: APPOINTMENT; LEGAL ADVISOR:
The village president may appoint and retain the village attorney to act as legal advisor to the village, and said village attorney shall render
advice on all legal questions affecting the village, as the board of trustees may request from time to time. (Ord. 71-79, 9-8-1971; amd. 2012
Code)
1-8B-3: DUTIES:
A. Prepare Documents: The village attorney shall prepare all ordinances and resolutions required by the board of trustees, and shall draft and/or
supervise the content of any contracts, leases, or other documents and instruments to which the village may be a party.
B. Attend Meetings: The village attorney shall attend all regular and special meetings of the board of trustees and such meetings of boards and
commissions of the village or committees of the board of trustees as he shall be directed by the board of trustees. (Ord. 71-79, 9-8-1971)
C. Suits And Actions: The village attorney shall defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the village may be a party, or in
which it may be interested, or which may be brought against or by any officer of the village, or in the capacity of such person as an officer of
the village. (Ord. 71-79, 9-8-1971; amd. 2012 Code)
1-8B-4: COMPENSATION:
For such services, the village attorney shall be paid such salary and compensation as shall be agreed upon by the village attorney and the
board of trustees at the time of appointment. (Ord. 71-79, 9-8-1971)
ARTICLE C. VILLAGE PROSECUTOR
1-8C-1: OFFICE CREATED; QUALIFICATIONS:
There is hereby created the office of village prosecutor, who shall be an attorney licensed to practice in the state. (Ord. 71-78, 9-8-1971)
1-8C-2: APPOINTMENT; DUTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 32/548
The village prosecutor shall be appointed by the village president and shall prosecute all matters involving the violation of any ordinances of the
village or in which the village may be interested. (Ord. 71-78, 9-8-1971; amd. 2012 Code)
1-8C-3: ASSISTED BY VILLAGE ATTORNEY:
The village attorney shall assist the village prosecutor at the request of the board of trustees. The village prosecutor shall notify the village
attorney of any notice of appeal served in connection with the imposition of any fine or other penalty for a violation of a village ordinance. The
village prosecutor shall report to the village attorney on the progress of any matters which have been continued from time to time and their final
disposition. (Ord. 71-78, 9-8-1971)
1-8C-4: COMPENSATION:
The compensation of the village prosecutor shall be as determined by the village board of trustees. (Ord. 71-78, 9-8-1971; amd. 2012 Code)
ARTICLE D. VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
1-8D-1: TITLE:
This article shall be entitled AN ORDINANCE CREATING AND ESTABLISHING THE OFFICE OF VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR IN AND FOR
THE VILLAGE OF BLOOMINGDALE. (Ord. 89-40, 9-25-1989)
1-8D-2: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT AND TERM; QUALIFICATIONS:
A. There is hereby created the office of village administrator. The village administrator shall be appointed by the president, with the advice and
consent of the board of trustees, for such term as determined at the time of his or her appointment or by contract or as otherwise provided
by law. The village administrator shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference
to his or her actual experience in, and knowledge of, accepted practices in respect to the duties of his or her employment as set forth herein.
At the time of such appointment, the village administrator need not be a resident of the village, but shall reside either within the village or
within reasonable distance therefrom during the term of office.
B. Upon the appointment of the village administrator, the president shall issue a certificate of appointment, under the corporate seal, to the
village clerk. The village administrator shall be commissioned by warrant, under the corporate seal, signed by the village clerk and the
president. (Ord. 89-40, 9-25-1989)
1-8D-3: OATH OF OFFICE:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the village administrator shall take and subscribe the oath as set forth in 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3.1-10-25, as may be amended from time to time. This oath, so subscribed, shall be filed in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 89-40,
9-25-1989; amd. 2012 Code)
1-8D-4: COMPENSATION:
The village administrator shall receive such compensation and benefits as the president and board of trustees shall determine by ordinance, or
alternatively, pursuant to any contract which defines said terms. No compensation shall be paid to the village administrator in addition to that
provided in the ordinance or by the terms of any contract; except, however, the village administrator shall be entitled to reimbursement for any
reasonable actual expenses incurred by him in the performance of his duties. (Ord. 89-40, 9-25-1989; amd. 2012 Code)
1-8D-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The village administrator shall be the administrative director of all departments of the village. He shall be responsible to the president and board
of trustees for the proper administration of all affairs of the village. The village administrator shall perform such duties in addition to those which
may be prescribed by law, and shall be subject to such other rules and regulations as the president and board of trustees may provide by
ordinance from time to time. Specifically, but without limitation, the village administrator shall have the following powers and duties: (Ord. 89-40,
9-25-1989; amd. 2012 Code)
A. Supervise and coordinate the work of all departments of the village now in existence or that may hereafter be created by the president and
board of trustees, except as limited or restricted by any ordinance of the village; (Ord. 89-40, 9-25-1989)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 33/548
B. Recommend to the president and board of trustees in regard to the hiring of all employees of the village. He shall recommend to the
president the removal or suspension of any department director or employee when such removal or suspension shall be consistent with the
village personnel manual and/or any relevant provisions of the Illinois state statutes. All such recommendations for the hiring of employees
shall be based upon merit and qualifications. Any recommendation for either hiring or removal shall be made without regard to political belief
or affiliation;
C. Review annually, salaries, wages and hours and conditions of employment of all department directors and employees under his jurisdiction.
No expenditure shall be made on account of or pursuant to such appointment or employment by the village administrator unless authorized
by or under the applicable appropriation or budget of the village, and all such expenditures shall be subject to the approval of the president
and board of trustees; (Ord. 89-40, 9-25-1989; amd. 2012 Code)
D. Act as purchasing agent of the village and make or supervise all necessary purchases of equipment, materials and supplies by the village,
and all contracts therefor. The village administrator shall have the power to enter into contracts for services and purchase goods and
materials involving up to and including twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) without the prior approval of the village board, as long as those
services, goods and materials have been previously appropriated. Contracts and purchases in excess of this amount shall require the prior
approval of the village board, whether or not they have been previously appropriated. The village administrator may issue rules and
regulations governing requisitions and the transaction of business of purchasing between himself, as purchasing agent, and the department
directors and employees of the village; (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
E. Make recommendations concerning compensation for each department director and employed position in the service of the village, including
minimum, intermediate and maximum rates; (Ord. 89-40, 9-25-1989; amd. 2012 Code)
F. Recommend the creation, consolidation and combination of offices, positions, departments or units of the administrative and executive
departments of the village;
G. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the village and services maintained by the
public utilities in the village, and see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the village are faithfully observed; (Ord. 89-40, 9-
25-1989)
H. Prepare and present to the president for his consideration at the end of each fiscal year an estimate of income and expenses for the ensuing
year; prepare the annual appropriation ordinance and tax levy ordinance in the form and within the time required by law; and prepare the
annual budget; and submit such ordinances and budget to the president for his submittal to the board of trustees, together with the village
administrator's opinion and recommendations covering their important features; and upon the adoption of such ordinances and budget, the
administration of the same. To the end that all financial matters of the village are coordinated, the village finance director-treasurer is hereby
directed to cooperate with the village administrator and to assist him in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by this article;
I. Act as business manager for the village under the direction of the president and board of trustees and in cooperation with the village finance
director-treasurer and clerk; control and direct all expenditures made by the village; supervise the keeping of all necessary records and
books of accounts of the village that are not under the supervision of the finance director-treasurer or clerk, by ordinance or statute; (Ord.
89-40, 9-25-1989; amd. 2012 Code)
J. Attend all regular and special meetings of the village board, and committees thereof, unless excused by the same;
K. Render or cause to be rendered monthly to the president and board of trustees written statements showing the exact financial condition of
the village as of the end of the preceding month, including the statement of current assets and liabilities, and a summarized statement of
receipts and expenditures;
L. Make recommendations to the president and board of trustees, or appropriate committee thereof, relative to the adoption of such ordinances
and resolutions as he may deem necessary or expedient; meet with the standing committees of the president and board of trustees as often
as necessary and when requested;
M. Make special reports or recommendations to the board of trustees, or the appropriate committee thereof, as the board of trustees may
request; (Ord. 89-40, 9-25-1989)
N. Render to all department directors of the village and said department directors shall render to him all such assistance as is possible in the
performance of their respective duties, and all department directors and employees of the village shall furnish and disclose to the village
administrator such oral or written information and material relating to the affairs of the village as he shall request;
O. Keep a current inventory of all real and personal property of the village and the location of such property; be responsible for the care and
custody of all village property which is not by law assigned to some other department director or body for care and control; (Ord. 89-40, 9-
25-1989; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 34/548
P. Devote his entire time during reasonable hours to the discharge of his official duties. He shall hold no other employment for compensation;
except, that he may receive occasional stipends for consultation with others not connected with the village, making speeches, writing
professional articles, and the like; provided, that such secondary duties do not conflict with his duties as village administrator; and
Q. Perform such other duties as may be required of him by the corporate authorities not inconsistent with the statutes of the state of Illinois or
with the ordinances of the village. (Ord. 89-40, 9-25-1989)
1-8D-6: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
The village administrator shall abide by the relevant provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes pertaining to conflicts of interest, disclosures of
economic interests and contracts, including, but not limited to, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-55-10 and 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 420/4A-
101 et seq., and as the same and any other relevant provisions of the state statutes may be amended from time to time by the Illinois general
assembly. The village administrator shall promptly disclose any potential conflict of interest to the president and board of trustees. (Ord. 89-40,
9-25-1989; amd. 2012 Code)
1-8D-7: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
The village administrator may be removed by the president on any formal charge whenever the president is of the opinion that the interests of
the village demand removal. Such removal is subject to the payment of any valid remaining portion of his contract, if hired by contract. The
president shall report the reasons for such removal to the village board at a meeting to be held not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) days
after the removal. If the president fails or refuses to report to the board of trustees the reasons for the removal, or if the village board, by a twothirds
(2/3) vote of all its members authorized by law to be elected, disapproves of the removal, the village administrator, thereupon, shall be
restored to office. Upon restoration, the village administrator shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office. (Ord. 89-40, 9-25-1989)
1-8D-8: ACTING VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR:
In the event the village administrator shall be incapacitated from performing the duties of his position, a qualified person shall be appointed as
acting village administrator by the president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, during such absence or incapacity, with all the
powers and duties of that office, who shall perform all the duties thereof without furnishing any additional bond if such appointee shall already be
under bond to the village in any other capacity. If such appointment shall be a person not already under bond to the village, such appointee shall
furnish a bond in such amount and with such surety as may be approved by the president and board of trustees. The compensation to be paid
the acting village administrator shall be fixed by the president and board of trustees. (Ord. 89-40, 9-25-1989)
ARTICLE E. VILLAGE ENGINEER
1-8E-1: APPOINTMENT AND TERM; RESIDENCY:
A. The Village Engineer shall be appointed by the President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, for such term as determined
at the time of his appointment; however, such term of office shall expire no later than the end of the term of the appointing President and as
soon after as his respective successor is appointed and has qualified. At the time of such appointment, the Village Engineer need not be a
resident of the Village, but shall reside either within the Village or within a reasonable distance therefrom during the term of office.
B. Upon the appointment of the Village Engineer, the President shall issue a certificate of appointment, under the Corporate Seal, to the Village
Clerk. The Village Engineer shall be commissioned by warrant, under the Corporate Seal, signed by the Village Clerk and the President.
(Ord. 89-42, 9-25-1989; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
1-8E-2: OATH OF OFFICE:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Village Engineer shall take and subscribe the oath as set forth in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/3.1-10-25, as may be amended from time to time. This oath, so subscribed, shall be filed in the Office of the Village Clerk. (Ord. 89-42, 9-25-
1989; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
1-8E-3: COMPENSATION:
The Village Engineer shall receive such compensation as the President and Board of Trustees shall determine by ordinance. No compensation
shall be paid to the Village Engineer in addition to that provided in the ordinance; except, however, the Village Engineer shall be entitled to
reimbursement for any reasonable actual expenses incurred by him in the performance of his duties. (Ord. 89-42, 9-25-1989; amd. 2012 Code;
Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
1-8E-4: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 35/548
A. The Village Engineer shall be generally responsible to the Corporate Authorities in the performance of his statutory powers, duties and
services, but he shall be primarily responsible to and subject to the supervision, direction and control of the Village Administrator. He shall be
required to attend regular and special meetings of the Village Board, Committee of the Whole meetings and conferences as and when
requested by the Village President, the Board of Trustees and/or the Village Administrator.
B. The Village Engineer shall perform such duties, in addition to those which may be prescribed by law, and shall be subject to such other rules
and regulations as the President and Board of Trustees may provide by ordinance from time to time. Specifically, but without limitation, the
Village Engineer shall have the following duties: (Ord. 89-42, 9-25-1989; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
1. Advise the Village President, Village Board of Trustees, and Planning and Zoning Commission on all matters concerning the engineering
and construction of public works within the Village; (Ord. 89-42, 9-25-1989; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014; Ord. 2017-42,
11-13-2017)
2. Review and approve or disapprove all engineering for all subdivisions and public improvements within the corporate limits of the Village
and, to the extent permitted by State law or Village ordinance, for a distance of one and one-half (11/2) miles outside the corporate limits of
the Village;
3. Inspect and approve or disapprove the construction of all public works within the corporate limits of the Village and, to the extent permitted
by State law or Village ordinance, for a distance of one and one-half (11/2) miles outside the corporate limits of the Village;
4. Prepare all engineering plans and specifications for and the supervision of all construction of all public improvements proposed to be
constructed by the Village; provided, that the President and Board of Trustees may, in any instance where they deem it appropriate, retain
an independent engineer to prepare such engineering plans and specifications and supervise such construction. In the event an
independent engineer is retained as aforesaid, the Village Engineer shall be responsible for the supervision of such independent engineer
and shall periodically report to the President and Board of Trustees with respect to the performance of such independent engineer;
5. Prepare all long range planning and forecasts of public improvements. The Village Engineer shall periodically advise the President, Board
of Trustees and the Village Administrator with respect thereto;
6. Maintain complete and accurate records of all public improvements in the Village and establish standards for subdivision improvements as
required by the subdivision ordinance of the Village; and
7. Perform such other duties as may be delegated to him by the ordinances of the Village or assigned to him by the President, the Board of
Trustees and/or the Village Administrator. (Ord. 89-42, 9-25-1989; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
1-8E-5: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
The Village Engineer shall abide by the relevant provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes pertaining to conflicts of interest, disclosure of
economic interests and contracts, including, but not limited to, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-55-10 and 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 420/4A-
101 et seq., and as the same and any other relevant provisions of the State Statutes may be amended from time to time by the Illinois General
Assembly. The Village Engineer shall promptly disclose any potential conflict of interest to the Village Administrator. (Ord. 89-42, 9-25-1989;
amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
1-8E-6: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
The Village Engineer may be removed by the President, on any formal charge, whenever the President is of the opinion that the interests of the
Village demand removal. The President shall report the reasons for such removal to the Village Board at a meeting to be held not less than five
(5) nor more than ten (10) days after the removal. If the President fails or refuses to report to the Board of Trustees the reasons for the removal,
or if the Village Board, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all members authorized by law to be elected, disapproves of the removal, the Village
Engineer, thereupon, shall be restored to office. Upon restoration, the Village Engineer shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office.
(Ord. 89-42, 9-25-1989; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
Chapter 9
VILLAGE DEPARTMENTS
(Reserved) (Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
Chapter 10
CODE OF ETHICS
1-10-1: STATEMENT OF POLICY AND INTENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 36/548
A. All Village public officials and employees, paid or unpaid, hold their positions for the benefit of the Village. They are bound to uphold the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois and to carry out the laws of the Nation, the State and the Village.
They are obligated to faithfully discharge the duties of their office, acting independently and impartially for the public interest. They are
expected to make and carry out decisions and policy within the proper channels of government structure without prejudice or favoritism; the
opportunity for personal gain will not influence their actions or decisions. They are expected to observe a high standard of conduct in the
discharge of their official duties and to avoid any actions that might, to a reasonable person, suggest the appearance of impropriety.
B. This Code of Ethics, which defines the expectations of the community in regard to the behavior of public officials and employees, is not
intended to work hardship on any individual dedicated to serving the public interest. It should not exclude those who are best qualified to
serve or work, nor violate any individual's right to personal privacy. It is not intended to impair an individual's ability to participate in functions
associated with official duties.
C. In recognition of these expectations, there is hereby established a Code of Ethics for all public officials and employees. (Ord. 2004-59, 12-20-
2004)
1-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
APPOINTED OFFICERS: Shall include the Village Administrator, Finance Director-Treasurer, Chief of Police and Village Engineer.
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of
any individual to any Federal, State or local public office or office in a political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of
presidential or vice presidential electors, but does not include activities:
A. Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action;
B. Relating to collective bargaining; or
C. That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed
to fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a "regular election", as defined in section 1-3 of the
Election Code1.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act2.
COMMISSIONER/COMMITTEE MEMBER: Individuals appointed by the Village President who serve on the Planning and Zoning Commission,
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, Septemberfest Commission, Family Fest Commission, Police Pension Board, or any other Village
commission or committee formed by ordinance or resolution duly adopted by the Village Board of Trustees.
COMPENSATED TIME: Means, with respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum
work time requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does not include any designated
holidays, vacation periods, personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to
officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the
control of the employer and any other time when the covered individual is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate, in whole or in part, for time worked in
excess of the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of the Election Code3.
COVERED INDIVIDUAL: Village President, Trustee, appointed officer, Village employee, commission member, and committee member.
ELECTED OFFICIALS: Shall include the Village President, Village Clerk, and Village Trustees.
EMPLOYEE: Any person employed by the Village, but does not include independent contractors, subcontractors, or elected public officials, or
members of commissions or committees.
EMPLOYER: The Village of Bloomingdale.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including,
but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the
official position of a covered individual.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive:
A. Compensation for employment;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 37/548
B. Service credit toward pension benefits; and
C. Health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is
compensated for service in his or her official capacity, including, but not limited to, the Village President, the Village Clerk, the Board of
Trustees, the Village Administrator, the Village Finance Director-Treasurer, the Chief of Police and the Village Engineer.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities:
A. Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action;
B. Relating to collective bargaining; or
C. That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a
statement of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under section 9-3 of the election code4, but only with regard to
those activities that require filing with the state board of elections or county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: A. Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration,
or other political event.
B. Soliciting contributions including, but not limited to, the purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
C. Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign
contribution.
D. Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
E. Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a
campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
F. Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
G. Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping
in an effort to get voters to the polls.
H. Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against
any referendum question.
I. Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
J. Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes.
K. Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
L. Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question.
M. Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
N. Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 38/548
O. Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
A. Is seeking official action:
1. By an officer; or
2. By an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
B. Does business or seeks to do business:
1. With the officer; or
2. With an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
C. Conducts activities regulated:
1. By the officer; or
2. By an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
D. Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duties of the covered individual.
(Ord. 2004-59, 12-20-2004; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
1-10-3: FINANCIAL INTEREST IN VILLAGE CONTRACTS OR PROPERTY:
A. Prohibited Interests:
1. No covered individual shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in his or her own name or in the name of any other person, association,
trust or corporation, in any contract, work or business of the Village, or in the sale of any article, whenever the expense, price or
consideration of the contract, work, business or sale is paid either from the Village Treasury or by any assessment levied by statute or
Village ordinance.
2. No covered individual shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in the purchase of any property which:
a. Belongs to the Village; or
b. Is sold for taxes or assessments; or
c. Is sold by virtue of legal process at the suit of the Village.
B. Exemptions For Village President And Trustees: (The dollar amounts included in the following paragraphs are those provided by State law.)
1. Less Than Seven And One-Half Percent Ownership Share: Any elected or appointed Village President or Village Trustee may provide
materials, merchandise, property, services or labor to the Village if:
a. The contract is with a person, firm, partnership, corporation or cooperative association in which such interested member of the
Governing Body of the Village has less than a seven and one-half percent (71/2%) share in the ownership; and
b. Such interested member publicly discloses the nature and extent of his or her interest prior to or during deliberations concerning the
proposed award of the contract; and
c. Such interested member abstains from voting on the award of the contract; and
d. Such contract is approved by a majority vote of those members presently holding office; and
e. The contract is awarded after sealed bids to the lowest responsible bidder if the amount of the contract exceeds one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00), but the contract may be awarded without bidding if the amount is less than one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00); and
f. The award of the contract would not cause the aggregate amount of such contracts so awarded to the same person, firm, association,
partnership, corporation, or cooperative association in the same fiscal year to exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 39/548
2. Contracts For Less Than Two Thousand Dollars: Any elected or appointed Village President or Village Trustee may provide materials,
merchandise, property, services or labor if:
a. The award of the contract is approved by a majority vote of the governing body of the village; provided, that any such interested
member shall abstain from voting; and
b. The amount of the contract does not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); and
c. The award of the contract would not cause the aggregate amount of all such contracts so awarded to the same person, firm,
association, partnership, corporation, or cooperative association in the same fiscal year to exceed four thousand dollars ($4,000.00);
and
d. Such interested member publicly discloses the nature and extent of his or her interests prior to or during deliberations concerning the
proposed award of the contract.
3. Public Utility Services: A contract for the procurement of public utility services by the village with a public utility company is not barred by
this section by one or more members of the corporate authorities being a covered individual of the public utility company or holding an
ownership interest of no more than seven and one-half percent (71/2%) in the public utility company.
4. Financial Services With A Local Bank: Nothing contained in this section shall preclude a contract of deposit of monies, loans or other
financial services by the village with a local bank or local savings and loan association, regardless of whether the village president or a
trustee is interested in such bank or savings and loan association as a covered individual or as a holder of less than seven and one-half
percent (71/2%) of the total ownership interest. Such interested member of the corporate authorities must publicly state the nature and
extent of his or her interest during deliberations concerning the proposed award of such a contract, but shall not participate in any further
deliberations concerning the proposed award. Such interested member or members shall not vote on such a proposed award. The award
of such a contract shall require approval by a majority vote of those members presently holding office. Consideration and award of any
such contract in which a member or members are interested may only be made at a regularly scheduled public meeting of the village
board of trustees.
C. Exemptions For Employees Or Committee Or Commission Members: Any employee or committee or commission member may provide
materials, merchandise, property, services or labor if:
1. Less Than Seven And One-Half Percent Ownership Share:
a. The contract is with a person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or cooperative association in which such employee has less
than a seven and one-half percent (71/2%) share in the ownership; and
b. The contract is awarded after sealed bids to the lowest responsible bidder if the amount of the contract exceeds one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00), or awarded without bidding if the amount of the contract is less than one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00); and
c. The award of the contract would not cause the aggregate amount of all such contracts so awarded to the same person, firm,
association, partnership, corporation or cooperative association in the same fiscal year to exceed twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00).
2. Contracts For Less Than Two Thousand Dollars: In addition, any employee or committee or commission member may provide materials,
merchandise, property, services or labor, regardless of the size of ownership interest the employee or committee or commission member
may have in the contracting entity, if:
a. The amount of the contract does not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); and
b. The award of the contract would not cause the aggregate amount of all such contracts so awarded to the same person, firm,
association, partnership, corporation, or cooperative association in the same fiscal year to exceed four thousand dollars ($4,000.00).
3. Public Utility Contracts: A contract for the procurement of public utility services by the village with a public utility company is not barred by
this section when an employee or committee or commission member is also a covered individual of the public utility company, or when an
employee or committee or commission member holds an ownership interest of any size in the public utility company.
4. Financial Services By A Local Bank: Nothing in this section shall preclude a contract of deposit of monies, loans or other financial services
by the village with a local bank or local savings and loan association regardless of whether a village employee or committee or
commission member is interested in such bank or savings and loan association as a covered individual or a holder of an ownership
interest of any size in such an institution.
5. Purchase Of Property At Auction: Nothing in this section shall prohibit any employee or committee or commission member from bidding
on and purchasing property auctioned by the village at an auction open to all members of the general public, whether the auction is
sponsored by the village or by an association of municipalities, such as the Northwest Municipal Conference. (Ord. 2004-59, 12-20-2004)
1-10-4: DISCLOSURE OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS:
All elected officials, appointed officers, commissioners, committee members and employees required to file economic disclosure statements
with the county clerk pursuant to article 4A of the Illinois governmental ethics act5, shall be in violation of this code of ethics if they fail to comply
with and fulfill the requirements set forth in the state act. (Ord. 2004-59, 12-20-2004; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 40/548
1-10-5: INCOMPATIBILITY OF OFFICE OR EMPLOYMENT:
No covered individual shall hold another office or position of employment where the duties of either office or employment are such that the
holder cannot, in every instance, properly and faithfully perform all of the duties of the other office or position of employment in accordance with
federal and state laws. This section is not intended to automatically exclude a village employee from holding an appointed office or position with
a local board, commission or committee, nor to prohibit an appointed commissioner or committee member from also holding a position of
employment with the village, either with or without compensation, unless, as provided in this section, the commissioner, committee member,
officer or employee cannot, in every instance, properly and faithfully perform all of the duties of both positions. When any questions arise under
this section, the opinion of the office of the Illinois attorney general shall be sought, and that opinion shall be followed. (Ord. 2004-59, 12-20-
2004)
1-10-6: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
A. No covered individual shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any "compensated time", as defined in section 1-10-2
of this chapter. No covered individual shall intentionally use any property or resources of the village in connection with any prohibited political
activity.
B. At no time shall any covered individual intentionally require any other covered individual to perform any prohibited political activity:
1. As part of that covered individual's duties;
2. As a condition of employment; or
3. During any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off).
C. No covered individual shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that covered individual
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued
employment or otherwise, nor shall any covered individual be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or her
participation in any prohibited political activity.
D. Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for a covered individual to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by a covered individual on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this chapter.
E. No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment; or 2) in a position, the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable
to grant in aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a
political committee, of a political party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. 2004-59, 12-20-2004)
1-10-7: GIFT BAN:
A. Prohibitions And Exceptions:
1. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no elected or appointed official, officer, member or village employee shall intentionally solicit
or accept any gift from any prohibited source or in violation of any federal or state statute, rule, or regulation. This ban applies to and
includes the spouse of and immediate family living with the official, officer, member, or village employee. No prohibited source shall
intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this subsection. The restriction does not apply to the following:
a. Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public.
b. Anything for which the covered individual pays the market value.
c. Any:
(1) Contribution that is lawfully made under the election code or under this chapter; or
(2) Activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political organization or candidate.
d. Educational materials and missions.
e. Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss village business.
f. A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great
aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, motherin-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister,
half brother, half sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's
fiance or fiancee.
g. Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the member, officer, or employee has reason to believe
that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the member, officer, or employee
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 41/548
and not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the member,
officer, or employee shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as:
(1) The history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of
gifts between those individuals;
(2) Whether, to the actual knowledge of the member, officer, or employee, the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or
sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and
(3) Whether, to the actual knowledge of the member, officer, or employee, the individual who gave the gift also, at the same time, gave
the same or similar gifts to other members, officers, or employees.
h. Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per person in value on a single calendar day; provided, that the food
or refreshments are: 1) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared; or 2) catered. For the purposes of this
section, "catered" means food or refreshments that are purchased ready to eat and delivered by any means.
i. Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside
activities that are not connected to the duties of the officer, member, or employee as an office holder or employee) of the officer,
member, or employee, or the spouse of the officer, member, or employee, if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of
the official position or employment of the officer, member, or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances.
j. Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of this chapter, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to a
covered individual from another covered individual, and "intergovernmental gift" means any gift given to a covered individual by a
member, officer, or employee of another governmental entity.
k. Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
l. Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
2. Each of the exceptions listed in this subsection is mutually exclusive and independent of one another.
B. Disposition Of Gifts: A covered individual does not violate this chapter if the covered individual promptly takes reasonable action to return the
prohibited gift to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation
under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded. (Ord. 2004-59, 12-
20-2004)
1-10-8: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
No covered individual shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information, including executive session materials and
discussions, concerning the property, government, or affairs of the village. The use of confidential information to advance the financial or any
other private interest of any covered individual or any other person is prohibited. (Ord. 2004-59, 12-20-2004)
1-10-9: MISUSE OF OFFICE OR VILLAGE PROPERTY:
A. Misuse Of Office: No covered individual shall use his or her position for individual gain rather than for the benefit of the village.
B. Use Of Public Property: No covered individual shall request or permit the use of village owned vehicles, equipment, materials or any other
property for personal use or personal profit, except when the property is made available to the public in general or provided to the covered
individual for his or her use as part of an approved village policy, adopted by either the board of trustees or the village administrator. It is
expected that covered individuals shall report suspected violations of this subsection. (Ord. 2004-59, 12-20-2004)
1-10-10: COMPLAINTS:
A. It is not the intention of this chapter to permit complaints designed to harass, embarrass or to serve a political purpose. It is the intention of
this chapter to bring forth well grounded allegations of violations of this chapter.
B. Any person wishing to file a complaint against a covered individual alleging a violation shall do so by filing a written, signed complaint in the
office of the village administrator in the case of village employees or to the village president in the case of the village administrator, other
elected officials, or commissioners for processing in the appropriate manner. Complaints regarding the village president shall be filed with
the village attorney. Copies of said complaint shall be distributed as provided herein.
C. Any such complaint shall be based on personal knowledge and shall include a statement of facts and circumstances sufficient to inform the
covered individual of the nature of the alleged violation. All complaints shall be signed by the person or persons bringing them forth and
having knowledge of the matters stated therein and shall be accompanied by a certification swearing, under oath, that the statements set
forth therein are true and correct. Any person who intentionally makes a false statement in a complaint shall be in violation of this code of
ethics.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 42/548
D. Within two (2) business days of receiving a complaint, the village clerk shall forward a copy to the person alleged to be in violation of this
code of ethics. Complaints made regarding a village employee or appointed officer who is subject to disciplinary procedures under the village
personnel manual and state law shall also be forwarded to the offices of the village president and village administrator. Complaints regarding
employees subject to the jurisdiction of the board of fire and police commissioners shall also be forwarded to each commissioner, along with
the village president and village administrator. Complaints made regarding all appointed officers shall be forwarded to the village president.
Complaints made regarding the village president, trustees, or commission/committee members shall be forwarded to the village president
and each of the trustees. (Ord. 2004-59, 12-20-2004)
1-10-11: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Enforcement Officials:
1. The enforcement of this code of ethics against any appointed officer and employees covered by the village personnel manual and state
law, which could result in disciplinary action, including, but not limited to, suspension or removal from village employment, shall be the
responsibility of the village president and the village administrator.
2. Complaints against employees subject to the jurisdiction of the board of fire and police commissioners shall be enforced by that board.
B. Enforcement Of Complaints:
1. Any applicable procedure requiring notification of the allegations and a hearing which is required, either by federal law, state law, the
village personnel manual, or any applicable ordinance, shall be followed by the administrator and board of fire and police commissioners
in enforcing this chapter.
2. Each complaint received by the village president involving appointed officers shall be enforced by the village president, in accord with
state law.
3. Each complaint received by the board of trustees involving the village president, trustees, or commission/committee members shall be
enforced by the board of trustees, in accord with state law.
4. Violations of this chapter which would require judicial procedure for enforcement shall be forwarded to the county state's attorney. (Ord.
2004-59, 12-20-2004)
1-10-12: PENALTIES:
Any person found to be in violation of this code of ethics by the appropriate enforcing person, officer or public body shall be subject to
reprimand, censure, suspension, removal or other appropriate disciplinary/monetary action to the extent allowed by the law. If a complaint is
determined to be intentionally false, the complaining party shall be liable to the party complained of for all legal expenses incurred in the
defense of the complaint. If a violation of this chapter results in a direct loss of funds or property to the village, the person found guilty of such a
violation shall make restitution to the village for such a loss. (Ord. 2004-59, 12-20-2004)
1-10-13: COPIES TO VILLAGE OFFICIALS AND PERSONNEL:
A copy of this code of ethics shall be provided to all elected officials, appointed officers and appointed commissioners/committee members upon
beginning their term of office. A copy of this code of ethics shall be provided to all employees upon its passage and to new employees upon
employment. All appointed officers, employees, and commission and committee members shall sign a receipt acknowledging delivery of the
code of ethics in a manner to be determined by the village administrator. Notwithstanding the foregoing, failure to receive a copy of same shall
not constitute a defense for any violation of this code of ethics. (Ord. 2004-59, 12-20-2004)
1-10-14: PROVISIONS ARE ADDITIONAL:
The requirements set forth in this chapter are in addition to, and not a substitute for, any similar requirements provided under state or federal
law. (Ord. 2004-59, 12-20-2004)
Chapter 11
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION RULES AND REGULATIONS
1-11-1: PUBLIC RECORDS:
A. The village recognizes that, pursuant to 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/1, the Illinois freedom of information act ("FOIA") provides that it is a
primary obligation of public bodies to provide records.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 43/548
B. The village also recognizes that, pursuant to 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/3.3 of the FOIA, public bodies are not required to interpret or
advise requesters as to the meaning or significance of public records.
C. The village also recognizes that, pursuant to 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/1 of the FOIA, public bodies are not obligated to create a public
record which was not already created or prepared by the public body.
D. Pursuant to the authority contained in the FOIA, the village hereby promulgates this chapter as the rules and regulations, but to the extent
that said rules and regulations might otherwise be interpreted as inconsistent with the FOIA, the FOIA shall govern in all respects. (2012
Code)
1-11-2: FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT OFFICER:
A. Position Created: There is hereby created the position of "freedom of information act officer" ("FOIA officer"). There may be one or more
FOIA officer(s) designated. The corporate authorities of the village will designate one or more officials or employees of the village to act as a
freedom of information officer, and the village shall disclose the identity of its FOIA officer(s) on either its website or by means of a list of
such officers available for public access. The list of FOIA officer(s) shall also be provided to the state's public access counselor ("PAC").
B. Duties And Responsibilities: The FOIA officer(s) or his or her designee shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
1. Training: Initially, within six (6) months after January 1, 2010, all FOIA officers shall successfully complete, via electronic means, a training
course administered by the Illinois PAC. All FOIA officer(s) shall thereafter complete additional training on an annual basis. New FOIA
officers must complete the curriculum within thirty (30) days after their appointment to the position.
2. Responsibilities: The FOIA officer shall be responsible for:
a. Receiving FOIA requests.
b. Ensuring timely responses to FOIA requests.
c. Issuing FOIA responses.
d. Developing a list of documents or categories of records that the village will immediately disclose upon request.
e. Meeting with requesters to inspect records in his or her presence.
3. Duties: Upon receiving an FOIA request, the FOIA officer shall do the following:
a. Note the date the village received the written request;
b. Compute the day on which the period for response will expire and make a notation of that date on the written request;
c. Maintain an electronic or paper copy of a written request, including all documents submitted with the request until there has been
compliance with the request or the request has been denied; and
d. Create a file for the retention of each original request, a copy of the response, a record of written communications with the requester,
and a copy of other related communications.
4. Notices: The FOIA officer or his or her designee is authorized to issue notices of extension of time for production of records as well as
notices of denial and/or intent to deny production of records.
C. Posting And Providing Information: In compliance with the provisions of the Illinois FOIA, the village shall prominently display at its
administrative office at the village hall, make available for inspection and copying, and send through the mail, if requested, any or all of the
following:
1. A brief description of itself, including a short summary of its purpose, a block diagram giving its functional subdivisions, the total amount of
its operating budget, the number and location of all of its separate offices, the approximate number of full and part time employees, and
the identification and membership of any board, commission, committee, or council which operates in an advisory capacity relative to the
operation of the public body, or which exercises control over its policies or procedures, or to which the public body is required to report and
be answerable for its operations; and
2. A brief description of the methods whereby the public may request information and public records, a directory designating the freedom of
information officer or officers, the address where requests for public records should be directed, and any fees allowable under the FOIA.
3. The village shall also post this information on any website the village maintains. (2012 Code)
1-11-3: PROCEDURE FOR FILING REQUEST:
A. Pursuant to the FOIA, requests for inspection of or copies of records shall be made in writing and directed to the village FOIA officer, but no
standard form for such request is required. Requests may be made by appointment, mail, e-mail, facsimile request, or personal delivery. If a
requester wishes, the FOIA officer will provide the requester with a "freedom of information act request form" for his or her use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 44/548
B. Questions regarding access to village records shall be directed to the FOIA officer or his or her designee. In consideration of the type, size,
and complexity of the document(s) requested, it may be necessary for a requester to make an appointment with the FOIA officer to answer
questions or review documents. (2012 Code)
1-11-4: INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
A. Inspection; Copies: The FOIA officer or his or her designee shall obtain the file or files requested and allow the requester to inspect them in
his or her presence. Should the requester request copies of all or a portion of the information, the requester must indicate in writing, or on
the FOIA request form what copies are desired, and the FOIA officer or his or her designee will make the requested copies and provide them
to the requester within the time frame prescribed by the FOIA, provided, however, that such information is not determined to be exempt.
B. Redaction Of Exempt Information: For any request made to inspect and/or photocopy a public record containing information that is both
exempt from disclosure and not exempt from disclosure, the village shall make only the nonexempt information available for inspection
and/or photocopying by redacting the exempt information from the document.
C. Hours: Public records may only be inspected at the village hall during the hours when it is regularly open.
D. Business Days: Monday through Friday, both inclusive, except holidays, as defined or fixed by any statute of the state, are hereby declared
to be "business days".
E. Search, Location And Reproduction Of Records: Only village personnel shall be permitted to search village files to locate records requested,
and only village personnel shall be permitted to operate village equipment to reproduce the requested copies. (2012 Code)
1-11-5: PROCEDURE FOR FULFILLING REQUEST:
Upon receiving an FOIA request, the FOIA officer or his or her designee shall:
A. Note the date the village received the written request;
B. Compute the day on which the period for response will expire and make a notation of that date on the written request (5 business days, or a
reasonable time of up to 21 business days for requests for commercial purposes);
C. Maintain an electronic or paper copy of a written request, including all documents submitted with the request until there has been compliance
with the request or the request has been denied;
D. Meet with requesters, if necessary, to inspect records in his or her presence;
E. Create a file for the retention of each original request, a copy of the response, a record of written communications with the requester, and a
copy of other related communications;
F. Assemble and duplicate the requested records, except for records which are exempt, and redact any records which may be partially exempt;
and
G. Notify the requester, in writing, of the status of production of the requested records, i.e., that such records are ready and available for the
requester, that production of the records is denied in whole or in part and the reasons therefor, and/or that the village intends to deny such
request and is so notifying the Illinois PAC. (2012 Code)
1-11-6: TIME FOR PRODUCTION OF RECORDS:
A. Pursuant to the FOIA, the village is required to produce the requested records within five (5) business days of receipt of the request,
excluding the day the request was received by the village.
B. Relative to requests for commercial purposes, the village is required to produce the requested records within a "reasonable period", up to
twenty one (21) business days. "Commercial enterprise", as used in the FOIA, shall include both profit and not for profit ventures,
organizations and entities. The village may inquire as to whether the records requested are sought to advance a commercial purpose, and if
a requester attempts to procure a public record for a commercial purpose without disclosing that the use is for a commercial purpose, that
constitutes a violation of the FOIA. The village response to such commercial requests may include an estimate of the time it may take to
provide the requested records and an estimate of the fees to be charged, and may require the requester to pay the copying charges in full
before the copies are made.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 45/548
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a request is delivered on a day which is not a business day, or after the close of business, the request shall
be deemed made on the first business day subsequent thereto.
D. If, upon review of the request, the FOIA officer or his or her designee finds that he or she is not able to compile all of the necessary
information immediately, another time may be arranged within the prescribed time frame for the requester to return to receive a response to
the request.
E. The FOIA officer or his or her designee may extend the time limit for responding to a request by an additional five (5) business days where:
1. The requested record is in a place other than the office in charge of the record.
2. The request requires an extensive search.
3. The records have not been found in time and additional efforts are necessary to retrieve them.
4. The record requires examination to determine if it should be exempt from viewing.
5. Compliance with the request would cause undue burden or interfere with the operations of the village. (Repeated requests for the same
information by the same person shall be deemed unduly burdensome under this provision.)
F. If it is necessary to extend the time limit for production of records, the requester will be notified, in writing, by the FOIA officer or his or her
designee within five (5) business days of receipt of the request, and such notice will give the reason for the extension. Failure to respond to
the request within five (5) business days is considered a denial of the request. (2012 Code)
1-11-7: FEES AND WAIVERS:
A. Each requester is required to pay to the village the appropriate fees for copies of village records and will receive a receipt for same. The
village will charge the following fees for reproduction or copying of records as set forth in the FOIA:
1. There is no charge for providing the initial fifty (50) pages of black and white, letter or legal size copies. The cost after fifty (50) pages will
be fifteen cents ($0.15) per page.
2. The fee for color or irregular sized copies shall be the actual cost incurred by the village for reproducing the records.
3. If the village maintains the respective document(s) in electronic format, such document(s) must be furnished in the electronic format if the
requester so requests. The village is not required to produce records kept in electronic format in an alternate manner. The fee charged for
producing records in an electronic format shall be the actual cost incurred by the village for purchasing the recording medium.
B. All payments for production of records shall be made in the form of cash or certified or cashier's check made payable to the village.
C. Requests to waive any fee(s) for reproduction of document(s) must be made, in writing, to a village FOIA officer and must state how the
information requested "primarily benefits the general public". The FOIA officer shall be authorized to determine whether such request for a
waiver shall be honored. (2012 Code)
1-11-8: EXEMPT AND NONEXEMPT RECORDS:
A. The FOIA officer or his or her designee may not give out information which falls within one or more of the following exempt categories:
1. Disclosure of the requested information is specifically prohibited by federal or state law or rules and regulations implementing federal or
state law.
2. The information requested is "private information", unless disclosure is required by another provision of the FOIA, a state or federal law, or
a court order.
3. The information requested is a file(s), document(s), and/or other data or database(s) maintained by one or more law enforcement
agencies and specifically designed to provide information to one or more law enforcement agencies regarding the physical or mental
status of one or more individual subjects (P.A. 96-0558).
4. The documents requested relate to personal information contained within public records, the disclosure of which would constitute a clearly
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy, unless the disclosure is consented to, in writing, by the individual subjects of the information.
"Unwarranted invasion of personal privacy" means the disclosure of information that is highly personal or objectionable to a reasonable
person and in which the subject's right to privacy outweighs any legitimate public interest in obtaining the information. The disclosure of
information that bears on the public duties of public employees and officials shall not be considered an invasion of personal privacy.
5. The documents requested are in the possession of the public body and were created in the course of administrative enforcement
proceedings, and any law enforcement or correctional agency for law enforcement purposes, and that disclosure would do one or more of
the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 46/548
a. Interfere with pending or actually and reasonably contemplated law enforcement proceedings conducted by any law enforcement or
correctional agency that is the recipient of the request;
b. Interfere with active administrative enforcement proceedings conducted by the public body that is the recipient of the request;
c. Create a substantial likelihood that a person will be deprived of a fair trial or an impartial hearing;
d. Unavoidably disclose the identity of a confidential source, confidential information furnished only by the confidential source, or persons
who file complaints with or provide information to administrative, investigative, law enforcement, or penal agencies; except, that the
identities of witnesses to traffic accidents, traffic accident reports, and rescue reports shall be provided by agencies of local government
except when disclosure would interfere with an active criminal investigation conducted by the agency that is the recipient of the request;
e. Disclose unique or specialized investigative techniques other than those generally used and known or disclose internal documents of
correctional agencies related to detection, observation or investigation of incidents of crime or misconduct, and disclosure would result
in demonstrable harm to the agency or public body that is the recipient of the request;
f. Endanger the life or physical safety of law enforcement personnel or any other person; or
g. Obstruct an ongoing criminal investigation by the agency that is the recipient of the request.
6. The document(s) requested is a record that relates to or affects the security of correctional institutions and detention facilities.
7. The documents requested are preliminary drafts, notes, recommendations, memoranda and other records in which opinions are
expressed, or policies or actions are formulated; except, that a specific record or relevant portion of a record shall not be exempt when the
record is publicly cited and identified by the head of the public body.
8. The document(s) requested would disclose trade secrets and commercial or financial information obtained from a person or business
where the trade secrets or commercial or financial information are furnished under a claim that they are proprietary, privileged or
confidential, and that disclosure of the trade secrets or commercial or financial information would cause competitive harm to the person or
business, and the claim directly applies to the records requested, including all trade secrets and commercial or financial information
obtained by a public body, including a public pension fund, from a private equity fund or a privately held company within the investment
portfolio of a private equity fund as a result of either investing or evaluating a potential investment of public funds in a private equity fund.
This exemption does not apply to the aggregate financial performance information of a private equity fund, nor to the identity of the fund's
managers or general partners. This exemption does not apply to the identity of a privately held company within the investment portfolio of
a private equity fund, unless the disclosure of the identity of a privately held company may cause competitive harm. Nothing contained in
this exemption is to be construed to prevent a person or business from consenting to disclosure.
9. The documents requested constitute proposals or bids for a contract, grant or agreement, including information which, if it were disclosed,
would frustrate procurement or give an advantage to any person proposing to enter into a contract or agreement with the body, until an
award or final selection is made. Information prepared by or for the body in preparation of a bid solicitation is exempt until an award or final
selection is made.
10. The documents requested are valuable formulas, computer geographic systems, designs, drawings or research data obtained or
produced by any public body when disclosure could reasonably be expected to produce private gain or public loss. The exemption for
"computer geographic systems" does not extend to requests made by "news media", as defined in section 2 of the FOIA1, when the
requested information is not otherwise exempt, and the only purpose of the request is to access and disseminate information regarding
the health, safety, welfare, or legal rights of the general public.
11. The documents requested are architect plans, engineer technical submissions, and other construction related technical documents for
projects not constructed or developed in whole or in part with public funds and the same for projects constructed or developed with public
funds, including, but not limited to, power generating and distribution stations and other transmission and distribution facilities, water
treatment facilities, airport facilities, sport stadiums, convention centers, and all government owned, operated, or occupied buildings, but
only to the extent that disclosure would compromise security.
12. The documents requested are minutes of meetings of public bodies closed to the public as provided in the open meetings act until the
public body makes the minutes available to the public under section 2.06 of the open meetings act2.
13. The documents requested constitute or reflect communications between a public body and an attorney or auditor representing the public
body that would not be subject to discovery in litigation, and materials prepared or compiled by or for a public body in anticipation of a
criminal, civil or administrative proceeding upon the request of an attorney advising the public body, and materials prepared or compiled
with respect to internal audits of public bodies.
14. The documents requested are records relating to a public body's adjudication of employee grievances or disciplinary cases, but this
exemption does not extend to the final outcome of cases in which discipline is imposed.
15. The documents requested relate to administrative or technical information associated with automated data processing operations,
including, but not limited to, software, operating protocols, computer program abstracts, file layouts, source listings, object modules, load
modules, user guides, documentation pertaining to all logical and physical design of computerized systems, employee manuals, and any
other information that, if disclosed, would jeopardize the security of the system or its data or the security of materials under this exemption.
16. The documents requested relate to records relating to collective negotiating matters between public bodies and their employees or
representatives, but any final contract or agreement is subject to inspection and copying.
17. The documents requested relate to test questions, scoring keys, and other examination data used to determine the qualifications of an
applicant for a license or employment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 47/548
18. The documents requested relate to records, documents and information relating to real estate purchase negotiations until those
negotiations have been completed or otherwise terminated. With regard to a parcel involved in a pending or actually and reasonably
contemplated eminent domain proceeding under the eminent domain act3, records, documents and information relating to that parcel are
exempt except as may be allowed under discovery rules adopted by the Illinois supreme court. The records, documents and information
relating to a real estate sale are exempt until a sale is consummated.
19. The documents requested relate to any and all proprietary information and records related to the operation of an intergovernmental risk
management association or self-insurance pool or jointly self-administered health and accident cooperative or pool, including any claims,
loss or risk management information, records, data, advice or communications.
20. The documents requested relate to information contained in or related to examination, operating, or condition reports prepared by, on
behalf of, or for the use of a public body responsible for the regulation or supervision of financial institutions or insurance companies,
unless disclosure is otherwise required by state law.
21. The documents requested relate to information that would disclose or might lead to the disclosure of secret or confidential information,
codes, algorithms, programs, or private keys intended to be used to create electronic or digital signatures under the electronic commerce
security act4.
22. The documents requested relate to vulnerability assessments, security measures, and response policies or plans that are designed to
identify, prevent, or respond to potential attacks upon a community's population or systems, facilities, or installations, the destruction or
contamination of which would constitute a clear and present danger to the health or safety of the community, but only to the extent that
disclosure could reasonably be expected to jeopardize the effectiveness of the measures or the safety of the personnel who implement
them or the public. Information under this exemption may include such things as details pertaining to the mobilization or deployment of
personnel or equipment, to the operation of communication systems or protocols, or to tactical operations.
23. The documents requested relate to maps and other records regarding the location or security of generation, transmission, distribution,
storage, gathering, treatment, or switching facilities owned by a utility, by a power generator, or by the Illinois power agency.
24. The documents requested relate to information contained in or related to proposals, bids, or negotiations related to electric power
procurement under section 1-75 of the Illinois power agency act5 and section 16-111.5 of the public utilities act6 that is determined to be
confidential and proprietary by the Illinois power agency or by the Illinois commerce commission.
25. The documents requested relate to one or more of the following statutory exemptions to the extent provided for by such specific
statute(s):
a. Firm performance evaluations under section 55 of the architectural, engineering, and land surveying qualifications based selection act7.
b. Information contained in a local emergency energy plan submitted to a municipality in accordance with a local emergency energy plan
ordinance that is adopted under section 11-21.5-5 of the Illinois municipal code8.
c. Information and data concerning the distribution of surcharge monies collected and remitted by wireless carriers under the wireless
emergency telephone safety act9.
d. Law enforcement officer identification information or driver identification information compiled by a law enforcement agency or the
department of transportation under section 11-212 of the Illinois vehicle code10.
e. Records and information provided to a residential healthcare facility resident sexual assault and death review team or the executive
council under the abuse prevention review team act11.
f. Information that is prohibited from being disclosed under section 4 of the Illinois health and hazardous substances registry act12.
g. Information prohibited from being disclosed by the personnel records review act13.
h. Information prohibited from being disclosed by the Illinois school student records act14.
i. Information, the disclosure of which is restricted under section 5-108 of the public utilities act15. (2012 Code)
1-11-9: INTENT TO DENY RECORDS:
A. If the village intends to deny an FOIA request, in whole or in part, pursuant to 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/7(1)(c) (related to personal
information) or 140/7(1)(f) (related to drafts, notes, recommendations, or memoranda where opinions are expressed or policies or actions
formulated), the FOIA officer shall, within the time period(s) provided for responding to a request, send written notice of its intent to deny the
request, in whole or in part, in the form of a "notice of intent to deny request for records" to the PAC, with a copy to the requester. The
address of the PAC is:
Public Access Counselor
Office Of The Attorney General
100 West Randolph, 12th Floor
Chicago, IL 60601
Tel.: (312) 814-5526
Public Access Counselor
Office Of The Attorney General
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 48/548
500 S. 2nd Street
Springfield, IL 62706
Tel.: (877) 299-3642
Fax: (217) 782-1396
E-mail: publicaccess@atg.state.il.us
B. The notice of intent to deny request for records shall include: a copy of the FOIA request; the village's proposed response; and a detailed
summary of the village's basis for asserting the exemption. Within five (5) days of receipt of said notice of intent to deny access to records,
the PAC shall notify the village and the requester whether further inquiry is warranted. (2012 Code)
1-11-10: DENIAL OF RECORDS; EXEMPTIONS:
A. If requested information cannot be released due to its exempt nature, or if a request is unduly burdensome, the FOIA officer or his or her
designee shall complete a "denial of request for records" form and mail same to the requester along with a blank "notice of appeal" form.
The denial of request for records form shall include: 1) the decision to deny the request; 2) the reasons for the denial, including a detailed
factual basis for the application of any exemption claimed; 3) the names and titles or positions of each person responsible for the denial; 4)
the right to review by the PAC and the address and phone number for the PAC; and 5) the right to judicial review. If an exemption is claimed,
then the denial shall include the specific reason(s) for the denial, including a detailed factual basis and a citation to support legal authority.
B. A copy of each such denial letter and the completed request form shall also be provided to the village president and the village attorney.
Copies of all notices of denial shall be retained by the FOIA officer or his or her designee in a central file that is publicly accessible and
indexed by type of exemption. (2012 Code)
1-11-11: APPEAL TO DENIAL OF REQUEST:
A. If a request for records is denied, the requester has a right to seek judicial review of such denial pursuant to 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes
140/11, or the requester may, within sixty (60) days from receipt of such denial, pursuant to 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/9.5, file an
appeal to the denial of production of records directed to the Illinois PAC, whose address is:
Public Access Counselor
Office Of The Attorney General
100 West Randolph, 12th Floor
Chicago, IL 60601
Tel.: (312) 814-5526
Public Access Counselor
Office Of The Attorney General
500 S. 2nd Street
Springfield, IL 62706
Tel.: (877) 299-3642
Fax: (217) 782-1396
E-mail: publicaccess@atg.state.il.us
B. The Illinois PAC will respond to such appeal and issue a binding opinion within sixty (60) days after the request for review (appeal), unless a
request for extension of twenty one (21) business days is given by the PAC. The PAC's binding opinion must make findings of fact and
conclusions of law and shall be issued to the requester and public body. The PAC's binding opinion is subject to administrative review by
either party. (2012 Code)
1-11-12: BINDING OPINION:
A binding opinion issued by the attorney general shall be considered final for purpose of administrative review. (2012 Code)
Chapter 12
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
1-12-1: PLAN ADOPTED:
The "Village Of Bloomingdale 2010 Comprehensive Land Use Plan", which is attached to ordinance 2010-37 as exhibit A, and any subsequent
updates or amendments, are hereby adopted by reference. Copies of the most current comprehensive plan land use plan are on file in the office
of the village clerk for public use and inspection. (2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 49/548
Chapter 13
ANNEXATIONS
1-13-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Any territory which is not within the corporate limits of the village but which is contiguous thereto may be annexed to the village as provided in
this chapter.
B. When any land proposed to be annexed is part of any fire protection district or any public library district, the trustees of each district shall be
notified in writing, by certified or registered mail or by personal service, before any action is taken for annexation. Such notice shall be
served ten (10) days in advance. An affidavit that there has been service of notice as provided by this section must be filed with the village
clerk. No annexation of such land is effective as to territory within any fire protection district or public library district unless service is had and
the affidavit filed as provided in this section.
C. The new boundary shall extend to the far side of any adjacent highway and shall include all of every highway within the area annexed. When
any land proposed to be annexed includes any highway under the jurisdiction of any township, the township commissioner of highways and
the board of town auditors shall be notified in writing, by certified or registered mail, before any action is taken for annexation. These
highways shall be considered in the legal description set forth in the petition for annexation.
D. No annexation, disconnection and annexation, or disconnection of territory having electors residing therein made: 1) prior to any primary
election to be held within the village and after the time for filing petitions as a candidate for nomination to any office to be chosen at such
primary election; or 2) within sixty (60) days prior to any general election to be held within the village, shall be effective until the day after the
date of such primary or general election, as the case may be. (Ord. 78-15, 5-8-1978)
1-13-2: CONTIGUOUS TERRITORY:
Any territory which is not within the corporate limits of the village, but which is contiguous thereto, and which territory has no electors residing
therein, or any such territory with electors residing therein, may be annexed to the village in the following manner: A written petition, signed by
the owners of record of all land within such territory, and by at least fifty one percent (51%) of the electors residing therein, shall be filed with the
village clerk. The petition shall request annexation and shall state that no electors reside therein or that at least fifty one percent (51%) of such
electors residing therein join in the petition, whichever shall be the case, and shall be under oath. The corporate authorities of the village shall
then consider the question of the annexation of the described territory. A majority vote of the corporate authorities then holding office is required
to annex. The vote shall be by "yeas" and "nays" entered on the legislative records. A copy of the ordinance annexing the territory, together with
an accurate map of the annexed territory, shall be recorded with the recorder of deeds and filed with the county clerk. (Ord. 78-15, 5-8-1978;
amd. 2012 Code)
1-13-3: TERRITORY DEDICATED FOR STREETS OR HIGHWAYS:
The corporate authorities may annex any territory contiguous thereto even though the annexed territory is dedicated or used for street or
highway purposes under the jurisdiction of the department of transportation of the state of Illinois, or a county or township highway department,
if no part of the annexed territory is within any other municipality. After the passage of the ordinance of annexation, a copy of the ordinance, with
an accurate map of the territory annexed, certified as correct by the village clerk, shall be filed with the county recorder of deeds. (Ord. 78-15, 5-
8-1978; amd. 2012 Code)
1-13-4: SURROUNDED OR NEARLY SURROUNDED TERRITORY:
A. Upon a written petition which is signed by a majority of the owners of record of land in any contiguous unincorporated territory wholly
bounded by two (2) or more municipalities, and after the notice required by this section has been given, the specified territory may be
annexed by the village by the passage of an ordinance providing therefor. The corporate authorities shall cause notice of the filing of such
petition to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the territory to be annexed not less than ten (10) days before the
passage of the annexation ordinance. The ordinance shall describe the territory annexed, which may not exceed one-third (1/3) the area of
the village before the annexation. A copy of the annexing ordinance and an accurate map of the annexed territory shall be recorded by the
county recorder of deeds.
B. Whenever any unincorporated territory containing sixty (60) acres or less is wholly bounded by: 1) the village of Bloomingdale; 2) the village
of Bloomingdale and a river or lake; 3) the village of Bloomingdale and property owned by the state of Illinois, except a highway right of way
owned in fee by the state; or 4) the village of Bloomingdale and a forest preserve district, that territory may be annexed by the village by the
passage of an ordinance to that effect after notice is given as provided in this subsection. The corporate authorities shall cause notice,
stating that annexation of the territory described in the notice is contemplated under this chapter, to be published once in a newspaper of
general circulation within the territory to be annexed, not less than ten (10) days before the passage of the annexation ordinance. The
ordinance shall describe the territory annexed and a copy thereof, together with an accurate map of the annexed territory, shall be recorded
in the office of the county recorder of deeds. (Ord. 78-15, 5-8-1978; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 50/548
1-13-5: CONTESTING ANNEXATIONS:
No person, firm or corporation, public or private, nor any association of persons shall commence an action contesting, either directly or
indirectly, the annexation of any territory to the village unless initiated within one year after the date such annexation becomes final. (Ord. 78-15,
5-8-1978)
1-13-6: ZONING OF ANNEXED TERRITORY:
When territory is annexed to the village, the territory automatically is classified to the highest restrictive zoning classification under the village
zoning ordinance1. (Ord. 78-15, 5-8-1978; amd. 2012 Code)
1-13-7: ANNEXATION AGREEMENTS:
A. Authority To Enter Into Agreements: The corporate authorities may enter into an agreement with one or more of the owners of record of land
in any territory which may be annexed to the village, such agreement to be valid and binding for a period of not to exceed ten (10) years
from the date of execution thereof.
B. Contents And Scope:
1. Any such agreement may provide for the following as it relates to the land which is the subject of the agreement:
a. The annexation of such territory to the village.
b. The continuation in effect, or amendment, or continuation in effect as amended, of any ordinance relating to subdivision controls,
zoning, official plan, and building, housing and related restrictions; provided, however, that any public hearing required by law to be held
before the adoption of any ordinance amendment provided in such agreement shall be held prior to the execution of the agreement, and
all ordinance amendments provided in such agreement shall be enacted according to law.
c. A limitation upon increases in permit fees required by the village.
d. Contributions of either land or monies, or both, to the village and to other municipal corporations having jurisdiction over all or part of
such land.
e. The granting of utility franchises for such land.
f. Any other matter not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, nor forbidden by law.
2. Any action taken by the corporate authorities during the period such agreement is in effect, which, if it applied to the land which is the
subject of the agreement, would be a breach of such agreement, shall not apply to such land without an amendment of such agreement.
(Ord. 78-15, 5-8-1978)
C. Procedure:
1. The corporate authorities shall fix a time for and hold a public hearing upon the proposed annexation agreement or amendment, and shall
give notice of the proposed agreement or amendment not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the date fixed for the
hearing. This notice shall be published at least once in one or more newspapers published in the village, or if no newspaper is published
therein, then in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the village. (Ord. 78-15, 5-8-1978; amd. 2012 Code)
2. After such hearing, the agreement or amendment may be modified before execution thereof. The annexation agreement or amendment
shall be executed by the president and attested by the village clerk only after such hearing and upon the adoption of a resolution or
ordinance directing such execution, which resolution or ordinance must be passed by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the corporate authorities
then holding office.
D. Effect And Enforcement: Any annexation agreement executed pursuant to this section shall be binding upon the successor owners of record
of the land which is the subject of the agreement. (Ord. 78-15, 5-8-1978)
1-13-8: ANNEXATION FEE:
A. Fee Established: An annexation fee is hereby assessed to all territory hereafter annexed to the village, said fee to be computed at the rate of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each dwelling unit authorized under the zoning classification provided in title 11 of this code.
B. Library Board Allocation: The annexation fee specified above shall include the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each dwelling,
which sum shall be disbursed upon receipt by the village finance director-treasurer for use by and with the approval of the Bloomingdale
public library board. (Ord. 93-25, 6-14-1993; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 51/548
C. Due Date: The annexation fee provided herein shall be due and payable at the time a building permit is issued for each dwelling
contemplated in such annexation, unless a date of payment is otherwise provided by an annexation agreement.
D. Exemption From Fee: Except as may be provided by an annexation agreement, the annexation fee hereby established shall not apply
whenever such territory is annexed pursuant to authority of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-1-13. (Ord. 93-25, 6-14-1993)
Title 2
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-40 - COMMUNITY EVENTS COMMITTEE. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 0
GENERAL REGULATIONS
2-0-1: ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS:
The Village of Bloomingdale hereby creates and adopts the following rules and policies for electronic attendance at meetings:
A. Rules Statement: It is the decision of the Village that any member of the Board of Trustees may attend any open or closed meeting of the
Village Board via electronic means (such as by video or audio conference) provided that such attendance is in compliance with these rules
and any applicable laws.
B. Prerequisites: A member of the Board of Trustees may attend a meeting electronically if the member meets the following conditions:
1. The member shall notify the Village Clerk before the meeting, unless advance notice is impractical, so that necessary communications
equipment can be arranged. Inability to make the necessary technical arrangements will result in denial of a request for remote
attendance.
2. The member must assert one of the following three (3) reasons why he or she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
a. The member cannot attend because of personal illness or disability,
b. The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the business of the Village, or
c. The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency.
C. Authorization To Participate:
1. The Village Clerk, after receiving the electronic attendance request, shall inform the Board of Trustees of the request for electronic
attendance.
2. After establishing that a quorum is physically present at a meeting where a member of the Village Board desires to attend electronically,
the presiding officer shall state that: a) notice was received by the member of the Village Board in accordance with these rules, and b) the
member will be deemed authorized to attend the meeting electronically unless a motion objecting to the member's electronic attendance is
made, seconded, and approved by a majority of the members of the Village Board physically present at the meeting. If no such motion is
made and seconded, or if any such motion fails to achieve the required vote by the members of the Village Board physically present at the
meeting, then the request by the member to attend the meeting electronically shall be deemed approved by the Village Board and the
presiding officer shall declare the requesting member present. After such declaration by the presiding officer, the question of a member's
electronic attendance may not be reconsidered.
D. Adequate Equipment Required: The member participating electronically and other members of the Village Board must be able to
communicate effectively, and members of the audience must be able to hear all communications at the meeting site. Before allowing
electronic attendance at any meeting, the Village Board shall provide equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the meeting site.
E. Minutes: Any member attending electronically shall be considered an off site attendee and counted as present electronically for that meeting
if the member is allowed to attend. The meeting minutes shall also reflect and state specifically whenever a member is present by electronic
means.
F. Rights Of Remote Member: A member permitted to attend electronically will be able to express his or her comments during the meeting and
participate in the same capacity as those members physically present, subject to all general meeting guidelines and procedures previously
adopted and adhered to. The member attending electronically shall be heard, considered, and counted as to any vote taken. Accordingly, the
name of any member attending electronically shall be called during any vote taken, and his or her vote counted and recorded by the Village
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 52/548
Clerk and placed in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member attending electronically may leave a meeting and return as in the
case of any member, provided the member attending electronically shall announce his or her leaving and returning.
G. Committees, Boards And Commissions: These rules shall apply to all committees, boards and commissions established by the Village of
Bloomingdale. (Ord. 2014-51, 11-10-2014)
2-0-2: POLICY PERTAINING TO PUBLIC COMMENT:
A. Right To Speak: The Illinois Open Meetings Act, section 2.06(g) provides that: Any person shall be permitted an opportunity to address public
officials under the rules established and recorded by the public body.
B. Public Comment:
1. Public Comment Period: Persons desiring to address the Board of Trustees ("Board") will do so during the public comment period on the
agenda of the Board meeting. At least fifteen (15) minutes will be allowed at each meeting for public comment(s). Public comments at
other times during the meeting will be permitted solely at the discretion of the Board.
2. Participation Procedure:
a. Persons wishing to speak may do so only after being recognized for that purpose by the Village President.
b. Only one person may address the Board at a time.
c. No more than five (5) persons shall be permitted to speak at any given meeting.
d. A signup sheet shall be prominently displayed on the speaker's platform prior to the meeting.
e. The Board may, without creating precedent and in its sole discretion, expand the numbers of those permitted to speak, at any given
meeting.
3. Public Participation:
a. Persons addressing the Board shall identify themselves for the record, and for the Board and members of the public also attending the
meeting.
b. Persons addressing the Board will offer all comments in a courteous and professional manner, and refrain from use of inappropriate,
offensive or profane language.
c. Persons addressing the Board may comment on issues of public interest relating to the operations of the Village: the Board will not
respond nor engage in debate or discussion relating to comments offered or made. The public comment period is intended to afford
members of the public with an opportunity to express their views to the respective Board. The Board will generally take comments made
to it by speakers under advisement.
d. Residents of the Village addressing the Board will be limited to a period of no more than three (3) minutes for comments, unless
additional time is granted by the Chairperson; after which they will return to their seat in an orderly, quiet and non-disruptive manner.
e. Non-residents of the Village addressing the Board will be limited to a period no more than one minute for comments, unless additional
time is granted by the Chairperson; after which they will return to their seat in an orderly, quiet and non-disruptive manner.
f. The granting of additional time to one or more persons or on one or more occasions does not entitle other persons at that meeting or
any other meetings to have additional time to address the Board.
g. Persons addressing the Board should refrain from offering repetitive or duplicative comments which offer no new information or
perspective and which otherwise impede progress of the stated and published purpose of the meeting. Such comments may be limited
at the sole discretion of the Board.
h. No person shall be permitted to address the same topic more than once within a three (3) month period unless otherwise permitted by
the Board.
C. Misconduct:
1. All persons addressing the Board must do so in a civil and appropriate manner. Rude or abusive behavior will not be condoned.
Comments that are defamatory, disparaging, or otherwise constitute an unwarranted invasion of privacy will not be allowed. Persons in
violation of the foregoing will be directed by the Chair of the meeting to leave the meeting.
2. Persons addressing the Board will refrain from comments, gestures, or other verbal or non-verbal communications when not recognized
to offer public comment. The Chairperson is charged with enforcing orderly decorum at meetings to enable effective and efficient
consideration by the Board of the stated and published purpose of the meeting; to that end the Chairperson will request person(s) causing
disruptive conduct to cease such conduct.
3. In the event public comment or behavior at the meeting becomes disruptive to the Board's effective and efficient conduct of the meeting,
the Chairperson may recess the meeting until such time that conditions are conducive to resume conduct of the business of the public
body. If the disturbance is particularly egregious, the Chairperson may recess the meeting to reconvene at a designated time, date and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 53/548
place. The proposition by the Chairperson to recess or to recess and reconvene at a later time, date and place shall be approved by the
Board. If taken, the decision to recess shall be recorded in the minutes, along with the vote of the Board and a statement as to the cause
of the disruption necessitating the recess. (Ord. 2017-27, 6-26-2017)
Chapter 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
2-1-1: CREATED; PURPOSE:
A planning and zoning commission is hereby created under authority of the Illinois municipal code in order that adequate provisions be made for
the development of a planning program for the guidance, direction and control of the growth and development or redevelopment of the village
and contiguous territory within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits and not included in any municipality. (Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-
2014)
2-1-2: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; RESIDENCY:
The planning and zoning commission shall consist of seven (7) regular members appointed by the village president, with the advice and
consent of the board of trustees. Such appointments should give due recognition to the particular fitness of such appointees to carry out the
distinctive purpose of the planning and zoning commission. The village president shall designate one of the members as chairperson of the
commission. All members of the commission shall reside within the area of jurisdiction of the planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 2014-48,
10-27-2014)
2-1-3: TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES:
A. Terms: All duly appointed and acting regular members of the planning and zoning commission and holding office on the effective date hereof
shall serve until the expiration of the term for which they were appointed. Thereafter, each regular member of the planning and zoning
commission shall serve for a term of five (5) years or until his successor is nominated and approved.
B. Vacancies: Any vacancies shall be filled by the village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, as soon as possible for
the unexpired term of any member whose place has become vacant. In the event that the office of chairperson is vacated for any reason, the
village president shall immediately appoint, at his option, either one of the remaining members of the planning and zoning commission, or
any member who is appointed to fill such vacancy as the new chairperson. (Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
2-1-4: COMPENSATION; EXPENSES FOR TECHNICAL ADVICE AND SERVICES:
A. All regular members of the planning and zoning commission shall serve without compensation.
B. If the planning and zoning commission shall deem it advisable to secure advice or services on technical matters, it may do so upon authority
from the village board. (Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
2-1-5: REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
The village president may remove any member of the planning and zoning commission appointed by him on any formal charge whenever he is
of the opinion that the interest of the village demands removal, but he shall report the reasons for the removal to the board of trustees at a
meeting to be held not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) days after the removal. If the village president fails or refuses to report to the
board of trustees the reasons for the removal, or if the board of trustees, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the members authorized by law to be
elected, disapproves of the removal, the planning and zoning commission member shall thereupon be restored to the planning and zoning
commission. The vote shall be by yeas and nays which shall be entered in the clerk's minutes. (Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
2-1-6: ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES:
A. Adoption Of Rules, Procedures And Bylaws:
1. The members of the planning and zoning commission shall adopt a set of rules, procedures and bylaws. These are to be adopted by a
simple majority vote at a regularly stated meeting. These rules, procedures and bylaws are to be compiled in pamphlet form and made
available to all commission members, the corporate authorities and the public at large. The chairperson shall cause notice to be published
in a newspaper having general circulation within the village advising the public that such rules, procedures and bylaws were adopted and
are available.
2. The members of the planning and zoning commission shall review the rules, procedures and bylaws annually at the first regular meeting
of the new year. Changes can be made by simple majority vote and must follow subsection A1 of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 54/548
B. Secretary: The planning and zoning commission shall appoint a secretary who is not a member of the planning and zoning commission and
who shall have no vote on matters coming before the planning and zoning commission.
C. Meetings:
1. All meetings and hearings of the planning and zoning commission shall comply with the requirements of the open meetings act.
2. Meetings and hearings of the commission shall be scheduled for the first and third Tuesdays of each month at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. In
addition, the commission may hold meetings and hearings at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the commission or the
corporate authorities may determine.
3. All meetings and hearings required by this chapter to be conducted by the commission shall be open to the public. Any person may
appear and testify at a hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. All testimony shall be given under oath. The
chairperson or vice chairperson, or his or her designee, shall administer oaths and may compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena.
No meeting or hearing shall be held without a quorum of the commission being present which shall consist of a majority of the members.
All decisions arrived at by the planning and zoning commission shall require a majority vote of all its members. Any formerly absent
member who certifies that he or she has read the transcript of the proceedings before the commission may vote upon any question
presently before the commission.
4. The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact. The commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with this chapter or with the resolutions
and ordinances of the village or with the laws of the state.
5. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the commission shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of an administrative official, or to decide in favor of an applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under
ordinances of the village or to recommend any variation or to recommend any variation or modification in the zoning code.
6. Any regular meeting and/or public hearing of the planning and zoning commission may be canceled, provided there is no item for
discussion at said regular meeting and/or public hearing reflected in the proposed agenda, or that there is no quorum of members
available; provided, however, that each of the members of the planning and zoning commission is contacted to inform them of the lack of
subject matter for the meeting or hearing and that a majority of the quorum of the planning and zoning commission does not object to the
cancellation. When canceling a meeting, the village shall comply with the requirements of the open meetings act.
7. A copy of every rule or regulation, every appeal or variation and every recommendation, order, requirement, decision or determination of
the planning and zoning commission shall be filed immediately in the office of the village clerk and shall be a public record.
D. Records Kept: The planning and zoning commission shall keep a written record of its proceedings which shall be open to public inspection
during regular business hours of the village hall.
E. Annual Report: The planning and zoning commission may submit an annual written report to the president and board of trustees containing
recommendations on membership, the comprehensive plan and such other matters as the president and board of trustees may require.
(Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
2-1-7: ADVISORY MEMBERS; REVIEW OF AND ASSISTANCE TO COMMISSION:
A. The village president may appoint, subject to confirmation by the board of trustees, advisory members to the planning and zoning
commission, who shall serve without compensation. The terms of office of advisory members shall be fixed at the time of appointment.
Advisory members may participate in all deliberations of the planning and zoning commission but may not vote on any matter coming before
the planning and zoning commission and shall not be counted in determining whether a quorum of the planning and zoning commission is
present.
B. The village planner, the village attorney and the building and zoning official shall be accessible to the planning and zoning commission for the
express purpose of planning and zoning commission review. The planning and zoning commission shall have reasonable authority to enlist
the aid of other village officials and department directors and request their attendance at meetings of the planning and zoning commission.
(Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
2-1-8: EXPENDITURES:
The chairperson of the planning and zoning commission shall be required to provide an estimate of its expected expenditures sixty (60) days
prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. Budget requests shall be directed to the village administrator. (Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
2-1-9: JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY:
A. As established by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-5, the general jurisdiction of the planning and zoning commission shall be as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 55/548
1. To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities a comprehensive plan for the present and future development or redevelopment
of the village1. Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or functional parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be
the official comprehensive plan, or part thereof, of the village. This plan may include reasonable requirements with reference to streets,
alleys, public grounds, and other improvements hereinafter specified. The plan, as recommended by the planning and zoning commission
and as thereafter adopted in the village, may be made applicable, by the terms thereof, to land situated within the corporate limits of the
village and contiguous territory not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any
municipality. Such plan may be implemented by ordinances:
a. Establishing reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for resubdivisions of unimproved land and of areas subject to
redevelopment in respect to public improvements as herein defined;
b. Establishing reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course, and surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways
for public service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for
residential purposes, stormwater drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers, and sewage collection and treatment; and
c. May designate land suitable for annexation to the village and the recommended zoning classification for such land upon annexation2.
2. To recommend changes, from time to time, in the official comprehensive plan.
3. To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities, from time to time, plans for specific improvements in pursuance of the official
comprehensive plan.
4. To give aid to the village officials charged with the direction of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, to further the
making of these projects, and generally, to promote the realization of the official comprehensive plan.
5. To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by this chapter as may be conferred by the corporate authorities.
6. For purposes of implementing ordinances regarding developer donations or impact fees, and specifically for expenditures thereof, "school
grounds" is defined as including land or site improvements, which include school buildings or other infrastructure necessitated and
specifically and uniquely attributed to the development or subdivision in question. This applies to all impact fees or developer donations
paid into a school district or held in a separate account or escrow fund by any school district or the village for a school district.
B. In addition to those matters specified in subsection A of this section, the planning and zoning commission is herewith delegated additional
authority:
1. To hear, consider and recommend to the president and board of trustees applications for amendments to the zoning ordinance.
2. To hear, consider and recommend to the president and board of trustees applications for the granting of special use permits.
3. To hear, consider and recommend to the president and board of trustees applications requesting the designation of planned unit
developments.
4. To hear, consider and recommend to the president and board of trustees applications for variations from the requirements of the zoning
code, subject to the standards set forth therein.
5. To hear, consider and recommend to the president and board of trustees appeals for review of any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the building and zoning official charged with the enforcement of the zoning ordinance of the village.
6. To review site plans for all development in zoning districts that are subject to such review pursuant to section 11-4-3 of this code and make
recommendations to the president and board of trustees.
7. To recommend, subject to final consideration, evaluation and approval by the president and board of trustees, methods of cooperation
with the municipal or regional planning commissions and other agencies or groups to further the local planning for the area. (Ord. 2014-48,
10-27-2014)
Chapter 2
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
2-2-1: ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT; CHAIR:
There is hereby established a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners which shall consist of three (3) members, one of whom shall be Chair.
The members of the board shall be appointed by the Village President, with the consent of the Board of Trustees; provided, however, that no
appointment shall be made by the President within thirty (30) days before the expiration of his term of office. The board members shall elect a
Chair to serve during the Municipal fiscal year. (Ord. 73-18, 4-25-1973)
2-2-2: TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES:
In connection with the first appointments to the board, one member shall be designated to serve until April 30, 1973; another member shall be
designated to serve until April 30, 1974; and the third member shall be designated to serve until April 30, 1975. With the exception of the initial
appointments to the board, all reappointments or subsequent appointments shall be for a three (3) year term. Vacancies on the board shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 56/548
filled in the manner provided herein, and appointments to such vacancy shall be effective until the end of the term applicable to the
Commissioner being replaced. (Ord. 73-18, 4-25-1973)
2-2-3: QUALIFICATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Each member of the board shall be considered an officer of the Village.
B. No person holding an office under the United States, this State or any political subdivision thereof, or the Village shall be a member of the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners or the Secretary thereof. The acceptance of any such office by a member of the board shall be
treated as a resignation of his office as a member of the board or the Secretary thereof.
C. No person shall be appointed a member of the board who is related, either by blood or marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any
elected official of the Village. (Ord. 73-11, 3-14-1973; amd. 2012 Code)
D. Appointments may be made without limitation regarding political party status. All current members of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners are hereby qualified to serve without regard to their relationship or political party status and their appointments are affirmed
as of the adoption of this subsection. (Ord. 2017-25, 5-22-2017)
E. No person shall be appointed a member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners who has been convicted of a felony under the laws
of this State or comparable laws of any other state of the United States. (Ord. 73-11, 3-14-1973; amd. 2012 Code)
2-2-4: OATH AND BOND:
Each member shall take an oath (or affirmation) of office and shall give bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The cost of
such bond will be borne by the Village. (Ord. 73-11, 3-14-1973)
2-2-5: COMPENSATION:
No member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be compensated for his services. (Ord. 73-11, 3-14-1973; amd. 2012 Code)
2-2-6: REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
A member shall not be subject to removal, except for cause, upon written charges, and after an opportunity to be heard, within thirty (30) days,
in his own defense, before a regular meeting of the village board of trustees. A majority vote of the corporate authorities shall be required to
remove any such member from office. (Ord. 73-11, 3-14-1973)
2-2-7: OFFICERS AND ADVISORS:
A. Secretary:
1. The board may employ a secretary at such compensation as may be approved by the board of trustees in the appropriation ordinance or
otherwise. In the alternative, the board may designate one of its own members to act as secretary, with or without compensation. If the
secretary is to be compensated, the amount thereof shall be fixed by the board of trustees.
2. The secretary shall keep the minutes of the board's proceedings (copies of which shall be sent to the village board), shall be custodian of
all records pertaining to the business of the board, shall keep a record of all examinations held, and shall perform such other duties as the
board may prescribe. (Ord. 73-11, 3-14-1973; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Attorney For Board: The village attorney or an attorney appointed by the village president, with the consent of the board of trustees, shall
serve as counsel for the board. (Ord. 73-11, 3-14-1973)
2-2-8: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. The board shall make such rules and regulations as may be necessary to provide for the appointment, promotion, suspension and removal of
the members of the police and fire departments and from time to time may make such changes in the rules and regulations as may be
required.
B. The rules and changes therein shall be printed immediately for distribution. The board shall give notice: 1) of the places where the printed
rules may be obtained; and 2) of the date, not less than ten (10) days subsequent to the time of publication, when the rules or changes
therein shall go into operation. This notice shall be published in one or more newspapers with a general circulation in the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 57/548
C. The rules of the board shall apply only to the conduct of examinations for original appointments, for promotions, and to the conduct of
hearings on charges brought against a member of the police or fire department. No such rules shall be made by the board to govern the
operation of the police or fire department, or the conduct of its members. (Ord. 73-11, 3-14-1973)
2-2-9: APPOINTMENTS BY BOARD:
A. The board shall appoint all officers and members of the fire department and police department; except, that the chief of police and the chief of
the fire department shall be appointed by the village president, with the consent of the board of trustees.
B. All appointments by the board to the police and fire departments, other than that of the lowest rank, shall be from the rank next below that to
which the appointment is made.
C. The board shall conduct and hold examinations for original appointment and promotion examinations for the police and fire departments as
provided by law.
D. The board shall issue certificates of appointment as provided by law. (Ord. 73-11, 3-14-1973)
2-2-10: ANNUAL REPORT AND BUDGET:
A. Annual Report:
1. The board of fire and police commissioners shall, on or before the first Monday of June each year, submit a written report to the village
president containing the following:
a. A statement of the board's activities for the twelve (12) month period ending with the preceding May 31.
b. A copy of all rules and regulations of the board then in effect.
c. A statement concerning the practical effect of such rules and regulations.
d. Such suggestions the board may have which would result in the greater efficiency of the police department (and of the fire department if
the village then has one).
e. Such other information as the board deems advisable to include in such report.
2. The report required to be submitted by subsection A1 of this section shall be signed by the members of the board. Any member who
wishes to comment on any portion of the report separately from the other members may do so, and his separate comments shall be
attached to and be made a part of such report.
3. The village president shall advise the board of trustees, the village administrator, if any, and the police chief of the contents of such report
as soon as practicable after receipt by the village president. (Ord. 73-20, 6-13-1973)
B. Annual Budget Request: The board shall submit an annual budget request to the village president and board of trustees prior to April 30 of
each year. (Ord. 73-11, 3-14-1973)
2-2-11: ROOMS AND FUNDS:
The board of trustees shall provide suitable rooms for the board of fire and police commissioners, and shall allow reasonable use of public
buildings for holding examinations by the board, and shall further provide adequate funds in the annual appropriation ordinance or other
financing ordinance for the operation of the board. (Ord. 73-11, 3-14-1973)
Chapter 3
FAMILY FEST AND SEPTEMBERFEST COMMISSIONS
2-3-1: PURPOSES:
A. Family Fest Commission: The purpose of the family fest commission will be to plan and manage an annual celebration in the village to be
known as the "Family Fest".
B. Septemberfest Commission: The purpose of the Septemberfest commission will be to plan and manage an annual celebration in the village
to be known as the "Septemberfest". (Ord. 96-36, 8-26-1996, eff. 10-1-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 58/548
2-3-2: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
Each commission shall be composed of a minimum of seven (7) members who are not elected to village office. All members shall be appointed
by the village president, with the advice and consent of the village board, to serve for a period of four (4) years. Each commission shall annually
elect one member to act as chairperson for the commission. (Ord. 96-36, 8-26-1996, eff. 10-1-1996)
2-3-3: REVENUES:
A. The family fest commission shall be responsible for raising and collecting a portion of the funds necessary for the family fest. The
Septemberfest commission shall be responsible for raising and collecting a portion of the funds necessary for the Septemberfest. All funds
raised shall be deposited with the village finance director-treasurer who shall properly and separately account for same.
B. All funds received by the village finance director-treasurer and appropriated by the village for use on the family fest and the Septemberfest
shall be subject to the authorization and control of the corporate authorities and shall be allocated and disbursed in the same manner as
other village funds. (Ord. 96-36, 8-26-1996, eff. 10-1-1996; amd. 2012 Code)
2-3-4: BUDGETS:
The family fest and Septemberfest commissions shall submit for approval by the corporate authorities, a detailed budget for their celebrations.
Each budget shall be submitted no less than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the proposed opening date of the fest and no less than
ninety (90) days from the end of the fiscal year (April 30). Each said budget shall include a breakdown of anticipated expenditures and
anticipated revenues in a form satisfactory to the corporate authorities. (Ord. 96-36, 8-26-1996, eff. 10-1-1996)
2-3-5: EXPENDITURES:
Where expenditure of funds is provided within an approved budget pursuant to section 2-3-4 of this chapter, the disbursement shall follow the
same process as all other village funds. If the expenditure of funds is not provided within an approved budget pursuant to section 2-3-4 of this
chapter, a written request shall be forwarded by the family fest or Septemberfest chair to the village administrator, who shall refer same to the
corporate authorities. (Ord. 96-36, 8-26-1996, eff. 10-1-1996)
2-3-6: REPORTS:
A. Within ninety (90) days after the close of their fests, the family fest and Septemberfest commissions shall each submit a complete and final
financial statement to the corporate authorities. This financial statement form shall be furnished to each of the commissions by the village
finance director-treasurer. (Ord. 96-36, 8-26-1996, eff. 10-1-1996; amd. 2012 Code)
B. In addition to the financial reporting required by this chapter, the family fest and Septemberfest commissions shall report to the corporate
authorities as often and to the extent required by the corporate authorities. (Ord. 96-36, 8-26-1996, eff. 10-1-1996)
2-3-7: HIERARCHY; LIAISON:
The family fest and Septemberfest commissions shall report to the police and community relations committee of the village board or to such
other committee of the board of trustees as is approved by the corporate authorities from time to time. The trustee liaison (a nonvoting member)
to the family fest and Septemberfest commissions shall be designated by the village president, with approval of the village board. (Ord. 96-36,
8-26-1996, eff. 10-1-1996)
Chapter 4
BUSINESS PROMOTION COMMITTEE
2-4-1: CREATED; PURPOSE:
There is hereby created a business promotion committee, hereinafter the "committee". The purpose of the committee shall be to develop and to
assist in the implementation of programs and activities which will increase retail activity and tourism in the village. The committee shall also
coordinate and communicate its activities with the Bloomingdale chamber of commerce as well as other local and regional economic
development agencies and organizations. (Ord. 2012-47, 11-26-2012)
2-4-2: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT, TERM AND VACANCIES; LIAISON:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 59/548
A. The committee shall consist of five (5) village residents and/or business representatives who shall be appointed by the village president, with
the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The term shall be two (2) years, and vacancies shall be filled by appointment in the same
manner.
B. The chairperson shall be appointed by the village president for a one year term.
C. One village trustee, chosen by the village president and the board of trustees working together, shall act as liaison with the committee and
with the Bloomingdale chamber of commerce. (Ord. 2012-47, 11-26-2012)
2-4-3: MEETINGS:
The committee shall meet, as necessary, at the village hall, or at another location within the village, as long as the meeting is duly noticed
according to the requirements of the Illinois open meetings act1, and may be called by the chairperson, or a majority of the quorum of the
committee. (Ord. 2012-47, 11-26-2012)
2-4-4: EXPENDITURES:
The committee shall require the approval of the board of trustees through the fiscal year budget process for all expenditures of funds. (Ord.
2012-47, 11-26-2012)
Chapter 5
GOLF COURSE OPERATIONS COMMITTEE
2-5-1: CREATED; PURPOSE:
There is hereby created a Golf Course Operations Committee, hereinafter the "committee". The purpose of the committee shall be to support
and provide recommendations as required to the Village Board of Trustees concerning the management of the Bloomingdale Golf Course. (Ord.
2015-35, 8-10-2015)
2-5-2: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT, TERM AND VACANCIES; LIAISON:
A. The committee shall consist of seven (7) members: golf course manager, golf pro, concessionaire manager, grounds superintendent, Village
Administrator and two (2) Village residents who shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees. The term for the Village appointees shall be three (3) years and vacancies shall be filled by appointment in the same manner.
(Ord. 2018-39, 11-12-2018)
B. The Chairperson shall be appointed by the Village President for a one year term.
C. Two (2) Village Trustees, chosen by the Village President and the Board of Trustees shall serve as liaisons to the committee. (Ord. 2015-35,
8-10-2015)
2-5-3: MEETINGS:
The committee shall meet quarterly at the Bloomingdale Golf Course. The meeting will be duly noticed according to the requirements of the
Illinois Open Meetings Act, and may be called by the Chairperson, or a majority of the quorum of the committee. (Ord. 2015-35, 8-10-2015)
Title 3
FINANCE AND TAXATION
Chapter 1
GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS
3-1-1: FISCAL AND MUNICIPAL YEARS:
The fiscal and municipal years shall commence on May 1 in each year and shall extend through April 30 of the following year. (Ord. 80-3, 1-22-
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 60/548
1980)
3-1-2: DEPOSIT OF VILLAGE FUNDS:
A. Authorized Depository: Any bank having a physical presence in the village, a public treasurer's investment pool created under section 17 of
the state treasurer's act, and a money market mutual fund registered under the investment company act of 1940 and pursuant to 30 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 235/5 is hereby designated as an authorized depository in which the funds of the village may be deposited. (Ord. 2000-
08, 2-28-2000)
B. Finance Director-Treasurer Not Responsible For Deposited Funds: The finance director-treasurer is hereby discharged from responsibility for
all funds or monies deposited in the depositories while the funds and monies are so deposited, and furthermore, as said deposits comply
with the village investment policy as approved May 11, 1999, and as same may be amended from time to time.
C. Maximum Amount Of Deposits: If such funds or monies are deposited in the depositories designated herein, the amount of such deposits
shall not exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the capital stock and surplus of said depositories. The finance director-treasurer shall be
responsible for funds or monies deposited in the depositories in excess of this limitation.
D. Enforcement By President And Finance Director-Treasurer: The village president and finance director-treasurer shall be, and each of them is,
hereby authorized to endorse for deposit any and all checks, drafts, notes, bills of exchange, and orders for the payment of money, either
belonging to or coming into the possession of the village; and further, that such endorsements for deposit may be by the written or stamped
endorsement of the village without designation of the person making the endorsement.
E. Drawing On Village Funds: Upon compliance with the appropriate provisions of title 1, chapter 8, article A of this code, the village finance
director-treasurer is hereby empowered to draw checks, drafts, and orders against funds standing to the credit of the village within said
depositories for the general corporate use and for other authorized purposes of the village, subject to the countersignature of the village
president. Furthermore, the finance director-treasurer is hereby empowered to engage in electronic transfer of funds against funds standing
to the credit of the village within said depositories for the general corporate use and for other authorized purposes of the village, subject to
either the countersignature or other written direction of the village president.
F. Finance Director-Treasurer's Sureties Advised: The village clerk is hereby authorized and directed to advise the sureties of the finance
director-treasurer in writing of this designation. (Ord. 2000-08, 2-28-2000; amd. 2012 Code)
3-1-3: RETURNED CHECK FEE:
A. Established: The village shall impose upon all drawers a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for all checks payable to the village which are returned
because the drawer did not have sufficient funds in his account, or because the drawer did not have an account with the drawee, or because
the drawer did not have sufficient credit with the drawee.
B. Form Of Payment: The village shall reserve the right to demand payment in full of this fee in the form of United States currency, cashier's
check or money order prior to accepting any other payment in consideration of any other amounts owed by the drawer to the village.
C. Failure To Pay: Failure to pay this fee upon demand may result in the village taking legal action against and/or suspending services to the
drawer who has written nonsufficient funds checks, checks on closed accounts or has insufficient credit with the drawee. (Ord. 2000-38, 9-
11-2000)
Chapter 2
PURCHASING, PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL PROCEDURES
3-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
There is hereby established certain rules and regulations of the village hereinafter known as the PURCHASING, PROCUREMENT AND
DISPOSAL PROCEDURES, as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 2013-37, 12-16-2013)
3-2-2: PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION:
A. It is the purpose of this chapter to assure that all services, materials, equipment, labor, supplies, and personal property are purchased in a
manner to obtain the best possible price, and that the quality of services, materials, equipment, labor, supplies and personal property is
assured, giving due consideration to the efficient operation of the village and the costs of administration of any established procedures. (Ord.
2013-37, 12-16-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 61/548
B. It is also the purpose of this chapter to assure that all real and personal property deemed to be no longer necessary, useful to, or for the best
interests of the village, be disposed of in the manner provided herein.
C. This chapter shall be construed and interpreted in a manner consistent with applicable Illinois statutes as they relate to entering into
contracts for municipal projects including, without limitation, the purchase of goods and services, and the disposal of real and personal
property. (Ord. 2012-36, 7-23-2012)
3-2-3: POWERS OF VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR; AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE BOARD:
A. Subject to the provisions of subsection B of this section, the village administrator, or an authorized designee, may authorize and initiate all
purchases of commodities, supplies, materials, services and equipment, by contract or otherwise, for use by and in all departments,
committees, and commissions of the village, except as otherwise provided. The village administrator, or an authorized designee, may invite
proposals and bids, and may supervise and administer the awarding of term contracts for contractual services which may be required by the
village. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 2013-37, 12-16-2013)
B. No obligation shall be incurred that is not addressed by this section without authority from the village board, except in the event of an
emergency as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011)
3-2-4: GENERAL PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES:
A. General Method Of Procurement: If not included in this chapter, the office of the village administrator shall prescribe the requirements to be
met whenever competitive bidding is utilized or proposals are solicited or requested. In any instance where the procurement is exempt by
virtue of the provisions of this chapter or Illinois statute, the procurement shall be accomplished in a manner that will be most advantageous
to the village, giving due consideration to the cost of and quality of goods and services, the ability of the vendor to perform, or other relevant
factors. If not included in this chapter, the office of the village administrator may also prescribe the procedures by which competitive bids or
proposals for any specific procurement shall be received, the time limit for receiving such bids or proposals, and the procedure by which bids
or proposals shall be opened, accepted, and examined, and by which recommendations for the acceptance or rejection of bids or proposals
shall be made to the village board.
B. Competitive Bidding: When competitive bidding is required or proposals for goods or services other than professional services are solicited
from vendors, the bid or proposal shall be disqualified from consideration unless the bid is submitted to the village in a sealed envelope in
accordance with the provisions of this section. The exterior of the envelope shall contain only the following information: the name, address
and responsible contact information as necessary of the bidder or vendor making the proposal and the name of the project, goods, services
or equipment for which the bid is submitted. If the village collects a bid or proposal that is not sealed, or for which the required information is
not clearly noted on the outside of the bid, such bid or proposal may be immediately disqualified at the discretion of the village, and returned
unopened to the bidder or proposer, if feasible. If a bid or proposal is properly received by the department that issued the bid specification or
the office of the village administrator, the individual receiving the bid or proposal shall note the date and time that the bid was received on the
bid itself or on a bid acceptance form, and sign his or her name. All bids or proposals shall be kept in a secure location in an office
designated by the village administrator. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011)
C. Holding And Returning Bids: Bids or proposals shall not be unsealed and examined until the date and time specified for opening; provided,
that prior to the bid or proposal opening, the bidder or vendor making the proposal shall be entitled to withdraw the bid or proposal. If such a
request to withdraw is made in writing to the department that issued the bid specification or to the office of the village administrator, the
village administrator, or an authorized designee, shall direct that the bid or proposal be returned to the bidder or vendor and notify the
department director involved in the procurement of such returned bid or proposal. Once bids or proposals are opened, they may not be
withdrawn except upon the approval of the village board. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 2013-37, 12-16-2013)
D. Waivers And Refusals: The village board, or the village administrator when authorized by the village board, reserves the right to waive all
formalities and to refuse any and all proposals and does not obligate itself to accept the lowest bid, or any bid, or to make any commitment
when bids are opened. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011)
3-2-5: BID SECURITY:
A. On all contracts and purchases, not including professional services, wherein competitive bidding procedures are utilized, if bid security is
required of the bidders, a bid security, in a form and substance acceptable to the village, of at least five percent (5%), but no more than ten
percent (10%), of the actual bid shall be required (hereinafter "bid security").
B. The bid security designated in subsection A of this section shall be in the form of a bank cashier's check that is clearly marked payable to the
"Village of Bloomingdale"; provided, however, that if state law allows the bidder or vendor to submit a bid bond or letter of credit for the bid
security in lieu of a bank cashier's check, then a bid bond with surety or letter of credit may be furnished to the village by the bidder or
vendor. The bid security shall be returned to any unsuccessful bidder when a contract has been awarded and signed or all bids have been
rejected. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 2013-37, 12-16-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 62/548
3-2-6: PURCHASING PROCEDURES:
Competitive bidding with advertisement, as described in subsection 3-2-4B of this chapter, shall not be required for purchases specified in this
section, however, the following special purchasing procedures shall be followed as stated: (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011)
A. Purchases of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or less may be authorized at the appropriate department level, provided the
purchase is supported by a properly executed purchase approval form, designated as exhibit A and attached to ordinance 2011-35,
indicating the requisite sequential approvals as prescribed by the village's purchasing and accounts payable approval matrix, hereinafter
referred to as section 3-2-13 of this chapter, as updated from time to time by the director of finance-treasurer and approved by the village
administrator, with documented competitive pricing and vendor comparisons being undertaken on a periodic basis.
B. Purchases greater than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) but less than or equal to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), but not
including professional services, may be authorized at the appropriate department level, provided the purchase is supported by a properly
executed purchase approval form indicating the requisite sequential approvals as prescribed by section 3-2-13 of this chapter, as updated
from time to time by the Director of Finance-Treasurer and approved by the Village Administrator, with documented competitive pricing and
vendor comparisons being undertaken on a frequent basis.
C. Purchases greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), but less than or equal to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), but not including
professional services, may be authorized at the appropriate department level, provided the purchase is supported by a properly executed
purchase approval form indicating the requisite sequential approvals as prescribed by section 3-2-13 of this chapter, as updated from time to
time by the Director of Finance-Treasurer and approved by the Village Administrator, and with documented competitive pricing and vendor
comparisons being required.
D. Purchases greater than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), but less than or equal to twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), but not including
professional services, may be authorized at the appropriate department level, provided the purchase is supported by a properly executed
purchase approval form indicating the requisite sequential approvals as prescribed by section 3-2-13 of this chapter, as updated from time to
time by the Director of Finance-Treasurer and approved by the Village Administrator, and shall be submitted with a minimum of three (3)
written quotes directly from the vendors. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
E. Individual purchases for the bulk purchase of gasoline and/or diesel fuel for use in Village vehicles may be authorized by the Director of
Public Works, with the approval of the Village Administrator, in any amount, regardless of whether the total of such individual purchases
exceeds twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) during any one fiscal year, as long as the purchase approval form is accompanied by written
overnight quotes from regional vendors as procured by the soliciting department and at least one of the written quotes is obtained from an
intergovernmental group of municipalities or other local governments, or an agency of the Federal, State or County government as more fully
described in subsection 3-2-9A1c of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-37, 12-16-2013; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
F. In certain circumstances, purchases or contracts for the purchase of certain commodities, supplies, or services may be authorized by the
Village Board without advertising for bids regardless of whether the total of such individual purchases exceeds twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) during any one fiscal year, pursuant to a "spot market" purchase approach. The process, requirements and restrictions for such
a spot market purchase approach shall be developed by the Director of Public Works and approved by the Village Administrator. (Ord. 2011-
35, 9-12-2011; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
G. No elected or appointed official, officer, committee member or employee may circumvent the limitations of this chapter by means of "string
purchasing" or similar devices. For purposes of this chapter, "splitting or stringing purchases" is the practice of issuing multiple purchases
requisitions, procurement card transactions, or requisitions for purchasing like items or services with the wilful intent to circumvent Village
purchasing procedures.
H. 1. All purchase approval forms shall be submitted to the Finance Department and shall contain the line item account, a description of the
goods or services, unit cost, quantity, total cost, the appropriate levels of approval by signature, and such other information as the Finance
Department may require. At its discretion, the Finance Department may request to require a properly executed purchase approval form for
any request for payment.
2. No purchase approval form need be created and printed by the Finance Department for other departments. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011)
3. All department directors are encouraged to use open purchase approval forms when such use makes for a more efficient operation and
assists the Village in controlling costs, e.g., dealing with certain vendors with whom the Village conducts a significant level of business
during any given fiscal year or over multiple fiscal years, subject to the approval requirements for purchase approval forms as established
in this section. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
I. All Village departments are required to submit all vendor invoices directly to the Finance Department for payment. Said invoices must contain
any and all information necessary to explain or describe the services or goods so purchased. Additionally, the following shall be submitted to
the Finance Department prior to payment of any related invoice:
1. Receipts, receiving tickets, or other evidence of purchase, if appropriate;
2. Copy of the bid, contract or other document, if requested by the Finance Department;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 63/548
3. Usual and customary documents for the transaction (lien waivers, engineer's or architect's certificates, and the like), if appropriate; and
4. Bills of lading, shipping invoices, and freight bills, as appropriate. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011)
3-2-7: COMPETITIVE BIDDING, ADVERTISING AND DISPOSAL PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Competitive Bidding: Except for purchases or contracts for professional services and purchases authorized under subsections 3-2-6E and F
of this chapter, all purchases or contracts for materials, supplies, commodities, labor, and services involving amounts in excess of twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000.00), made by or on behalf of the village, shall be let by competitive bidding, after advertisement, to the lowest
responsive and responsible bidder. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011)
B. Bids Publicly Opened: At the date, time, and place designated in the bid notice, such sealed bids submitted shall be publicly opened and
read by the village administrator, or an authorized designee. The report concerning the bid results shall be forwarded to the village board for
review and action at the soonest possible regular meeting of the village board. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 2013-37, 12-16-2013)
C. Sale Of Personal Property Over Twenty Thousand Dollars: The sale of all village owned personal property valued over twenty thousand
dollars ($20,000.00) shall be let by competitive bidding, after advertisement, to the highest responsible bidder.
D. Sale Of Real Property: The sale of all real property made by or on behalf of the village shall be governed by its home rule powers or the
provisions contained in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-76-1 et seq., whichever is more advantageous to village operations, as designated
by the village board at the time that a decision is made to initiate the sale of the real property.
E. Disposal Of Personal Property Under Twenty Thousand Dollars: If in the opinion of a simple majority of the village board then holding office,
personal property valued under twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) is deemed to be no longer necessary or useful to, or in the best
interest of the village to keep, the village board may dispose of the surplus personal property in one of the following manners:
1. Adopting an ordinance authorizing the sale of that surplus personal property in such a manner as the village board may designate, with or
without advertising the sale; or (Ord. 2012-36, 7-23-2012)
2. Authorizing the village administrator or an authorized designee to convert the surplus personal property into some other form that is useful
to the village by using the material contained in the surplus personal property; or
3. Authorizing the village administrator or an authorized designee to convey or turn in any specified article of personal property as partial
payment on a purchase of any similar equipment or article, however, no equipment or article shall be turned in as part of the purchase
price on any new purchase except upon receipt of competitive bids, in such manner as may be prescribed by the village administrator or
an authorized designee, after notice to all bidders that the article will be turned over as part of the purchase price.
F. Disposal Of Property Having No Market Value: The village administrator, or an authorized designee, is authorized to dispose of personal
property which is reasonably deemed by the village administrator, with the concurrence of the finance director/treasurer, to have no market
value within or outside of village operations, in any reasonable manner, without approval by the village board. (Ord. 2012-36, 7-23-2012;
amd. Ord. 2013-37, 12-16-2013)
G. Purchases Of Amounts Between Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars And Twenty Thousand Dollars: Except for purchases or contracts for
professional services, all purchases or contracts for goods and services involving amounts of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00)
or more, but less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), made by the village, shall be let in the open market through a solicitation by
mail, telephone, facsimile machine, or e-mail, or otherwise to ensure the best interest of the public pursuant to section 3-2-6 of this chapter.
H. Bulk Purchase Of Gasoline: Except for purchases authorized under subsection 3-2-6E of this chapter, all individual purchases or contracts
for the bulk purchase of gasoline and/or diesel fuel for use in village vehicles involving amounts in excess of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00), but less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), and made by or on behalf of the village, shall be let in the open market,
through a solicitation by mail, telephone, facsimile machine, or e-mail, or otherwise, to ensure the best interest of the public.
I. Financial Status; Proposed Subcontractors: As a condition precedent to contract award, bidder's financial status and his proposed
subcontractors will be carefully considered. No bid shall receive consideration unless accompanied by bid security as prescribed by section
3-2-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 2012-36, 7-23-2012)
1. All bid security accompanying the bids, except those of the lowest, second lowest and third lowest, will be returned within thirty (30) days
after bids are opened. The bid security of the lowest, second lowest and third lowest will be retained until the awarded contract and any
required performance, labor, and material payment bonds have been properly executed. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 2012-36, 7-
23-2012; Ord. 2013-37, 12-16-2013)
2. If any bid is withdrawn after the closing time for receipt of bids, or if the bidder fails or refuses to execute the contract and to furnish and
execute a performance, labor, and material payment bond, the bid security accompanying the bid shall be retained by the village as
liquidated damages and not as a penalty. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 2012-36, 7-23-2012)
3. Unless waived by the village administrator or an authorized designee, and due to the project bid being of nominal value and that only a
single payout for the project is anticipated, the accepted bidder to whom award has been made for the entire project must be able to
furnish and deliver to the village administrator, or an authorized designee, prior to the village execution of the contract, a satisfactory
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 64/548
performance, labor and materials bond in an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the contract sum for the entire project. (Ord.
2011-35, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 2012-36, 7-23-2012; Ord. 2013-37, 12-16-2013)
3-2-8: MULTIYEAR CONTRACTS:
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, and pursuant to the exercising of the village home rule powers, the village board
may enter into public works contracts for a term exceeding one year in order to promote efficient operations and to protect the general health,
safety and welfare of the village. In such case, the village board shall include in the annual appropriation ordinance for each fiscal year an
appropriation of a sum of money sufficient to pay the amount which, by the terms of the contract, is to become due and payable during the
current fiscal year. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 2013-37, 12-16-2013)
3-2-9: EXEMPTIONS FROM CERTAIN PROVISIONS:
A. Bidding Requirements:
1. The following purchases are exempt from the requirements of open and competitive bidding set forth in this chapter:
a. Purchase contracts for professional services which by their nature are not adaptable to award by competitive bidding. Such contracts
shall include, but not be limited to, contracts for the services of individuals possessing a high degree of professional skill, such as
accountants, actuaries, architects, auditors, building plan examiners and inspectors, chemists, engineers, land surveyors, land planners,
and legislative advocates. The requirements to be met and the means and methods to be used in procuring such professional services
shall be determined by the village administrator with the concurrence of the village president and board of trustees, and the
requirements of the local government professional services selection act1.
b. Purchase contracts for commodities, supplies, services, goods, materials, parts, or equipment which are available only from a single
source.
c. All purchases or contracts for goods and services for which the price to be paid by the village has been established within one year
preceding the letting of the proposed contract by the village, through an open and competitive bidding process administrated by an
intergovernmental group of municipalities or other local governments, or an agency of the federal, state or county government. (Ord.
2011-35, 9-12-2011)
d. All purchases or contracts for goods or services for which the requirement of advertising for competitive bids is waived by a two-thirds
(2/3) majority vote of the village trustees then holding office, except in such instances where open and competitive bidding is required by
Illinois statutes that preempt the exercise of home rule authority. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 2013-37, 12-16-2013)
e. All purchases or contracts for the supply of electric power for which the village has employed a licensed broker to compile competitively
priced proposals from a number of qualified suppliers2.
2. Nothing in this chapter will serve to prevent the village board from authorizing procurement from any federal, state or local governmental
unit or agency thereof of any such materials, supplies, commodities, labor or equipment as may be made available through the operation
of any legislation heretofore or hereinafter enacted even if the procurement does not conform with the competitive bidding requirements of
this chapter. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011)
B. Emergency Exemptions From Advertisement Requirements:
1. In the event of an emergency or disaster affecting the public health or safety which is either: a) declared by the village board at a duly
noticed or special emergency meeting, which declaration shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the village trustees holding
office, and shall set forth the nature of the danger to the public health or safety; or b) proclaimed by the county board chair in a
"Proclamation Of Emergency For DuPage County, Illinois"; or c) proclaimed by the village president, the acting village president, village
administrator or police chief in the event of a local emergency or local disaster, and in the absence of a village board vote, then contracts
may be let by any of the aforementioned village officers to the extent necessary to resolve such emergency without public advertisement
or compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
2. The village administrator, or an authorized designee, shall report any emergency purchase provided for in this chapter to the village board
at the soonest possible regular, special, or emergency meeting following said emergency purchase, giving the name of the vendor, date,
description of the items or services purchased and the amount of the purchase, and the nature of the emergency, furnishing all the
particulars of the circumstances which endangered the public health, safety or general welfare. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011; amd. Ord. 2013-
37, 12-16-2013)
3. In addition, all emergency purchases and other financial transactions will comply with the provisions contained within the functional
annexes - additional annexes - 2.3.11.1 (financial management) of the "Village Of Bloomingdale's Emergency Operations Plan", dated
April 22, 2013, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 2013-37, 12-16-2013)
4. Officers and employees acting in accordance with a disaster declared pursuant to subsection B1 of this section, by responding to,
resolving, or attempting to resolve an emergency or disaster, shall be relieved of all personal responsibility for letting or approving a
contract consistent with village emergency procedures and shall not be held individually or personally liable for the cost incurred by the
village for the contract so let or approved.
C. Employment Contracts: Employment or personal service contracts or agreements shall not be subject to provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
2011-35, 9-12-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 65/548
3-2-10: CHANGE ORDERS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS:
A. Monitoring Of Change Orders: It is the policy of the village to monitor change orders as revisions to municipal contracts on a timely basis and
report such change orders so that any required budgetary revisions can be effected and so that funding can be made available before
invoices are processed.
B. Approval Of Change Orders For Public Works Contracts: Change orders for public works contracts shall be approved only as follows: (Ord.
2011-35, 9-12-2011)
1. The department director or consulting professional service provider administrating the public works contract shall submit the change order,
together with an explanation of the reason for the change order, to the village administrator for review. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011; amd.
2012 Code)
2. The village administrator may approve increases in public works construction and engineering contracts due to change orders without
village board approval subject to the following conditions:
a. For contracts that were originally approved in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or less, no single change
order may exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) without village board approval, and any single change order which exceeds ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be approved only after a written determination that:
(1) The circumstances said to necessitate the change were not reasonably foreseeable at the time the contract was signed; or
(2) The change is germane to the original contract as signed; or
(3) The change order is in the best interests of the village and is authorized by law. The written change order and the written
determination shall be preserved in the contract's file, which shall be open to the public for inspection3.
b. For contracts that were originally approved in an amount exceeding one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), no single change
order may exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) without village board approval, but any single change order which exceeds ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of the original contract amount shall be approved only after a written determination that:
(1) The circumstances said to necessitate the change were not reasonably foreseeable at the time the contract was signed; or
(2) The change is germane to the original contract as signed; or
(3) The change order is in the best interest of the village and is authorized by law. The written change order and the written
determination shall be preserved in the contract's file, which shall be open to the public for inspection4.
3. Any series of change orders which authorizes an increase in the cost of a public works construction or engineering contract that exceeds
the thresholds described in subsection B2 of this section of the awarded contract amount shall be submitted by the village administrator to
the village board for approval.
4. According to the provisions of the Illinois public works contract change order act5, any proposed change orders resulting in increases in a
public works construction contract which would exceed a total of fifty percent (50%) of the original awarded contract price if approved, are
not allowed. That portion of the proposed change to the original awarded contract work must be rebid according to the bidding procedures
set forth in this chapter.
C. Report Change Orders To Public Works Construction And Engineering Contracts Required: Regardless of the amount, the village
administrator shall report all approvals of change orders which increase the cost of public works construction and engineering contracts to
the village board, in writing, at the earliest possible time, but in any event not later than the next regularly scheduled village board meeting.
(Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011)
3-2-11: PREVAILING WAGE FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS:
The Illinois prevailing wage act6, shall apply with respect to all public works contracts awarded by the village; provided, that notwithstanding the
provisions of such act, the following shall apply:
A. The prevailing rate of wages to be paid by the Village on public works projects, as mandated by the Act, shall, in each year, be that prevailing
rate of wages in the County as ascertained and determined by the Village, or by the Illinois Department of Labor, for that year. If the
determination is made by the Illinois Department of Labor and accepted by the Village, said determination shall be binding without further
investigation or other action by the Village.
B. The Village need not publish the prevailing wage rates as ascertained and determined by the Illinois Department of Labor each year, nor
request each year that the Illinois Department of Labor ascertain the rates and provide a listing of those rates to the Village.
C. Prevailing wage rate information, as received from time to time from the Illinois Department of Labor, shall be kept on file in the Office of the
Village Clerk and shall be kept open for public inspection. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 66/548
D. Each contractor or subcontractor employed by a public works contract with the Village must make, and keep for not less than three (3) years
from the date of the last payment on the public works contract or subcontract, records of all laborers, mechanics, and other workers
employed by them on the project, and must also submit a certified payroll to the Village for the immediately preceding calendar month no
later than the tenth day of the following month. The content of the certified payroll report will be as specified by the Act.
E. The Village shall keep the payroll reports for not less than three (3) years from the date of the last payment on the public works contract or
subcontract, and these documents are public records subject to disclosure under the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
F. Each contractor or subcontractor employed by a public works contract with the Village must make its records available to the Illinois
Department of Labor and its agents, and to Federal, State or local law enforcement agencies and prosecutors.
G. The Act provides that violations of its provisions are subject to prosecution as a Class A misdemeanor under 820 Illinois Compiled Statutes
130/6 et seq. (Ord. 2012-36, 7-23-2012)
3-2-12: DRUG FREE WORKPLACE CONTRACTOR CERTIFICATION:
For each and every public works contract and other contracts for services rendered to the Village, the Village shall require the contractor to
execute a certification that it is in compliance with the Drug Free Workplace Act7, as amended. (Ord. 2011-35, 9-12-2011)
3-2-13: PURCHASING AND ACCOUNTS PAYABLE APPROVAL MATRIX:
VILLAGE OF BLOOMINGDALE
PURCHASING AND ACCOUNTS PAYABLE APPROVAL MATRIX
Required Authorizations For Purchase Approvals >$1,500.00 And =$5,000.00
Department Initiator Authorization #1 Authorization #2 Authorization #3 Authorization #4
Administration Employee Manager Administrator
Manager Administrator
Administrator Village President
Finance Employee Manager Department Director
Manager Department Director
Department Director Administrator
Police Employee Manager Department Director
Manager Department Director
Department Director Administrator
Public Works Employee Supervisor Department Director
Supervisor Department Director
Department Director Administrator
Engineering Employee Department Director
Department Director Administrator
Building and Zoning Employee Department Director
Department Director Administrator
Golf course (GC) Employee GC Manager Manager (AVA)
Required Authorizations For Purchase Approvals >$5,000.00 And =$20,000.00
Department Initiator Authorization #1 Authorization #2 Authorization #3 Authorization #4
Administration Employee Manager Administrator
Manager Administrator
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 67/548
Administrator Village President
Finance Employee Manager Department Director Administrator
Manager Department Director Administrator
Department Director Administrator
Police Employee Manager Department Director Administrator
Manager Department Director Administrator
Department Director Administrator
Public Works Employee Supervisor Department Director Administrator
Supervisor Department Director Administrator
Department Director Administrator
Engineering Employee Department Director Administrator
Department Director Administrator
Building and Zoning Employee Department Director Administrator
Department Director Administrator
Golf course (GC) Employee GC Manager Manager (AVA) Administrator
Required Authorizations For Purchase Approvals >$20,000.00
Department Initiator Authorization #1 Authorization #2 Authorization #3 Authorization #4
Administration Employee Manager Administrator Village Board
Manager Administrator Village Board
Administrator Village Board
Finance Employee Manager Department Director Administrator Village Board
Manager Department Director Administrator Village Board
Department Director Administrator Village Board
Police Employee Manager Department Director Administrator Village Board
Manager Department Director Administrator Village Board
Department Director Administrator Village Board
Public Works Employee Supervisor Department Director Administrator Village Board
Supervisor Department Director Administrator Village Board
Department Director Administrator Village Board
Engineering Employee Department Director Administrator Village Board
Department Director Administrator Village Board
Building and Zoning Employee Department Director Administrator Village Board
Department Director Administrator Village Board
Golf course (GC) Employee GC Manager Manager (AVA) Administrator Village Board
(Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
Chapter 3
TAXES
ARTICLE A. HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' AND SERVICE OCCUPATION
TAXES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 68/548
3-3A-1: TAXES IMPOSED; RATES:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal
property titled or registered with an agency of this state's government, at retail, in the village, at the rate of one-half percent (1/2%) of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this article is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons
engaged in the village in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one-half percent (1/2%) of the selling price of all tangible personal
property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of service. (Ord. 2002-11, 3-25-2002, eff. 7-1-2002)
3-3A-2: EXEMPTIONS:
Such home rule municipal retailers' occupation tax and the home rule municipal service occupation tax shall not be applicable to the sales of
food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food
which has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin,
urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics. (Ord. 2002-11, 3-25-2002, eff. 7-1-2002)
3-3A-3: STATUTE AUTHORITY:
The imposition of these home rule taxes are in accordance with the provisions of sections 8-11-1 and 8-11-5, respectively, of the Illinois
municipal code1. (Ord. 2002-11, 3-25-2002, eff. 7-1-2002)
3-3A-4: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
department of revenue of the state of Illinois (the "department"). The department shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions
of this article. (Ord. 2002-11, 3-25-2002, eff. 7-1-2002)
ARTICLE B. HOME RULE MUNICIPAL USE TAX
3-3B-1: DEFINITION:
The words "selling price", as used in this article, shall have the meaning of the words "selling price", as defined in the use tax act1, which act
provides that "selling price" means the consideration for a sale valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash,
credits, property other than as hereinafter provided, and service, but not including the value of or credit given for traded in tangible personal
property where the item that is traded in is of like kind and character as that which is being sold, and shall be determined without any deduction
on account of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost or any other expense whatsoever, but does not include interest
or finance charges which appear as separate items on the bill of sale or sales contract nor charges added to prices by sellers on account of the
seller's tax liability under the retailers' occupation tax act2, or on account of the seller's duty to collect, from the purchaser, the tax that is
imposed by the use tax act3, or, except as otherwise provided with respect to any cigarette tax imposed by the village, on account of the seller's
tax liability under any local occupation tax administered by the Illinois department of revenue, or, except as otherwise provided with respect to
any cigarette tax imposed by the village on account of the seller's duty to collect, from the purchasers, the tax that is imposed under any local
use tax administered by the Illinois department of revenue, but shall include charges that are added to prices by sellers on account of the
seller's tax liability under the cigarette tax act4, on account of the seller's duty to collect, from the purchaser, the tax imposed under the cigarette
use tax act5, and on account of the seller's duty to collect, from the purchaser, any cigarette tax imposed by the village. The phrase "like kind
and character", as used in this definition, shall be liberally construed (including, but not limited to, any form of motor vehicle for any form of
motor vehicle, or any kind of farm or agricultural implement for any other kind of farm or agricultural implement), while not including a kind of
item which, if sold at retail by that retailer, would be exempt from retailers' occupation tax and use tax as an isolated or occasional sale. (Ord.
75-1, 1-13-1975; amd. 2012 Code)
3-3B-2: TAX IMPOSED; RATE:
A tax is hereby imposed, in accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-6 of the Illinois municipal code, upon the privilege of using in the
village any item of tangible personal property which is purchased at retail from a retailer, and which item is titled or registered at a location within
the village with a governmental agency of the state of Illinois. The rate of the tax imposed shall be one percent (1%) of the selling price of such
tangible personal property. (Ord. 75-1, 1-13-1975; amd. 2012 Code)
3-3B-3: COLLECTION AND REMITTANCE OF TAX:
The tax imposed shall be collected by the village from all persons whose address, for title or certificate of registration purposes, for the tangible
personal property is given as within the village. (Ord. 75-1, 1-13-1975; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 69/548
ARTICLE C. MUNICIPAL MOTOR FUEL TAX
3-3C-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
MOTOR FUEL: All volatile liquids compounded or used for fueling motor vehicles, including gasoline, gasohol and diesel fuel.
MOTOR FUEL RETAILER: Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of selling motor fuel at retail and not for resale. (Ord. 2010-
32, 8-23-2010, eff. 11-1-2010)
3-3C-2: TAX IMPOSED; RATE:
There is hereby imposed and levied a tax at a rate of two cents ($0.02) per gallon, or fraction thereof, upon the retail purchase of motor fuel
within the village. This tax shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. The ultimate incidence and liability for payment of such tax shall be
upon the retail purchaser of motor fuel. Nothing herein shall be construed to impose a tax upon the occupation of selling motor fuel. (Ord. 2010-
32, 8-23-2010, eff. 11-1-2010)
3-3C-3: COLLECTION AND REMITTANCE OF TAX:
Each motor fuel retailer in the village shall have the duty to collect the municipal motor fuel tax from each purchaser of motor fuel and to remit
one hundred percent (100%) of said collection to the village and to provide a full accounting therefor with each remittance on a form provided by
the village. The form and remittance shall be filed with the village finance director-treasurer on the same due date as established for filing the
Illinois department of revenue's ST-1 sales and use tax return or the twentieth of the month following the month in which the tax was collected,
whichever is earlier. The village may bring an action to collect any unpaid tax. If such action is taken, the village may add up to one hundred
percent (100%) of the costs of said action to the tax due from the motor fuel retailer which would be in addition to the tax and any other
penalties or fines authorized by this article. (Ord. 2010-32, 8-23-2010, eff. 11-1-2010)
3-3C-4: CREDIT FOR OVERPAYMENT:
If an amount of tax has been remitted which was not due under the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an
error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any future remittance due or to become due under this article, along with a full
accounting therefor; provided, that said mistake or error occurred within the most recent prior twelve (12) consecutive month period. (Ord. 2010-
32, 8-23-2010, eff. 11-1-2010)
3-3C-5: LATE PAYMENT PENALTY:
If the tax imposed by this article is not remitted to the village when due, a late penalty in the amount of twelve percent (12%) per annum based
on a three hundred sixty (360) day year of the unpaid tax shall be added for each day or portion thereof that said tax remains unpaid, and the
total of the tax due, plus the late penalty imposed herein, shall be paid to the village. The village may bring an action to collect any unpaid late
penalty. (Ord. 2010-32, 8-23-2010, eff. 11-1-2010)
3-3C-6: ACCOUNTING:
The finance director-treasurer shall deposit all municipal motor fuel tax receipts into the special revenue fund entitled "motor fuel tax fund" and
further, record and account for all uses and expenses thereof in said fund. (Ord. 2010-32, 8-23-2010, eff. 11-1-2010)
3-3C-7: RECORDS KEPT:
Each motor fuel retailer shall have the duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records and accounts showing the gross receipts for the
sale of motor fuel and the taxes collected from the purchaser thereof, which shall be available to the village for examination and for audit by the
village upon reasonable notice during customary business hours. Costs incurred by the village for said examination and audit are the
responsibility of the village. (Ord. 2010-32, 8-23-2010, eff. 11-1-2010)
3-3C-8: PENALTY:
In addition to any other penalty, any person or motor fuel retailer violating any provision of this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2010-32, 8-23-2010, eff. 11-1-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 70/548
ARTICLE D. HOTEL AND MOTEL USE TAXES
3-3D-1: USE TAX ON BUSINESSES:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RENTAL RECEIPTS: The total amount of consideration for occupancy, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise,
including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, including, but not limited to, amounts charged for the
making, servicing or facilitating reservations.
HOTEL: Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping
accommodations. The term includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses and apartment houses.
PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any person who occupied or has the right to occupy any room or rooms, regardless of whether or not it is the
same room or rooms, in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, limited
liability company, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court.
RENT OR RENTAL: The consideration received for occupancy, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all
receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature.
ROOM OR ROOMS: Any living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. (Ord. 86-33, 7-28-1986; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2018-
28, 6-25-2018)
B. Tax Levied And Imposed: There is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of engaging in the business of leasing, renting,
making, facilitating or servicing the leasing or renting of a hotel or motel room in the Village of Bloomingdale, a tax of six percent (6%) on the
gross rental receipts (not including taxes or other non-room rental charges added to the hotel or motel bill) for each such hotel or motel room
rented for every twenty four (24) hour period, or any fraction thereof.
C. Tax Return And Payment:
1. Each person, business, corporation, partnership or other entity, subject to the tax imposed in this section shall, on or before the fifteenth
day of each month following thereafter, pay to the Village Finance Director-Treasurer the amount of tax imposed hereby during the prior
month and remit said payment to the Village Finance Director-Treasurer along with a sworn return that shall state as follows:
a. The name and location of the hotel at which the Hotel Tax was collected;
b. The principal place of business;
c. The gross receipts received by the hotel upon which the Hotel Tax is imposed;
d. The amount of the Hotel Tax collected; and
e. Such other reasonable and related information as the Corporate Authorities may require.
2. Each person making the return shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the Village Finance Director-Treasurer, the amount of tax
herein imposed. (Ord. 2018-28, 6-25-2018)
D. Duty To Collect Tax: The owner and operator of each hotel and the person to whom the license to operate said hotel was issued by the
Village shall, as trustees of said tax, bear jointly and severally the duty to collect the Use Tax hereby imposed from each user, lessee or
tenant of a hotel room and remit such tax to the Village in accordance with this section. The tax imposed hereby shall be tendered to and
collected by such owner, operator or licensee from the user, lessee or tenant of a room or rooms at the time that such owner, operator or
licensee collects the price, charge or rent to which it applies.
E. Use Of Proceeds: The monies collected by the Village pursuant to this amended section and that collected by the Village pursuant to the
preamended form of this section, from and after the date that the Village attained home rule authority through and including the last day
preceding the effective date hereof, may be, and have been, pursuant to the Village home rule authority, expended in any lawful manner and
for any lawful purpose determined necessary or desirable by the Village.
F. Inspection Of Records: Any person or agent designated by the Village Administrator as a representative of the Village may, upon prior written
notice to the owner, operator or licensee of a hotel, enter the premises of such hotel for the purpose of inspection and examination of books
and records for the proper administration and enforcement of this section. It is unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the
Village or the Village representative in the discharge of the procedures as provided in this section. (Ord. 2011-25, 6-27-2011)
G. Enforcement And Penalties:
1. Any person, firm or corporation who shall be convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2011-25, 6-27-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 71/548
2. In addition, a fee of twelve percent (12%) per annum of the balance of taxes collected or required to be collected pursuant to this section,
but yet unpaid to the Village, shall be applied to all such taxes unpaid on or before the fifteenth day of the month following the month in
which said taxes accrued. (Ord. 2011-25, 6-27-2011)
3. The appropriate authorities of the Village may take such actions they deem proper to enforce the terms and conditions of this section,
including, without limitation, an action in equity to compel compliance with its terms and an action to collect unpaid taxes with interest at
the aforementioned rate. (Ord. 2011-25, 6-27-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
4. The failure to comply with any obligation imposed by this section shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of any business
license or registration issued by the Village to a hotel or accepted by the Village for a hotel, as the case may be, pursuant to the applicable
provisions of this Code. (Ord. 2011-25, 6-27-2011)
3-3D-2: USE TAX ON PATRONS:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
HOTEL AND/OR MOTEL: Any building or buildings in which the public may, for consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping, or
housekeeping accommodations including, without limitation, inns, hotels, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, and rooming
houses.
ROOM: Any living quarters, sleeping, or housekeeping accommodations. (Ord. 2007-27, 7-30-2007)
B. Tax Imposed; Rate: The Village hereby establishes a one percent (1%) Hotel/Motel Use Tax upon the privilege of renting, leasing, or letting of
rooms from a hotel/motel within the Village by patrons thereof. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall be borne
by those patrons who rent, lease or let a room in accordance herewith, without regard to such patrons' duration of stay or status as
"permanent residents", as defined by the Hotel/Motel Operators' Occupation Tax Act. (Ord. 2011-25, 6-27-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
C. Effective Date Of Tax; Tax Return And Payment: The tax imposed pursuant to subsection B of this section shall be effective from and after
September 1, 2007. Beginning September 1, 2007, each hotel/motel operator who collects, or is required to collect, from his patrons the
Hotel/Motel Tax established by this section shall, on or before the fifteenth day of each month following thereafter, pay to the Village Finance
Director-Treasurer the amount of tax imposed hereby during the prior month and remit said payment to the Village Finance Director-
Treasurer along with a return that shall state as follows: (Ord. 2007-27, 7-30-2007; amd. 2012 Code)
1. The name and location of the hotel/motel at which the Hotel/Motel Tax was collected by the hotel/motel operator;
2. The principal place of business of the hotel/motel operator;
3. The gross fees received by the hotel/motel operator upon which the Hotel/Motel Tax is imposed;
4. The amount of the Hotel/Motel Tax collected; and
5. Such other reasonable and related information as the Corporate Authorities may require. (Ord. 2007-27, 7-30-2007)
D. Duty To Collect Tax: The owner and operator of each hotel/motel and the person to whom the license to operate said hotel/motel was issued
by the Village shall, as trustees of said tax, bear jointly and severally, the duty to collect the Use Tax hereby imposed from each user, lessee
or tenant of a hotel/motel room and remit such tax to the Village in accordance with this section. The tax imposed hereby shall be tendered
to and collected by such owner, operator or licensee from the user, lessee or tenant of a room or rooms at the time that such owner, operator
or licensee collects the price, charge or rent to which it applies.
E. Use Of Proceeds: The monies collected by the Village pursuant to this amended section and that collected by the Village pursuant to the
preamended form of this section from and after the date that the Village attained home rule authority through and including the last day
preceding the effective date hereof, may be, and have been, pursuant to the Village home rule authority, expended in any lawful manner and
for any lawful purpose determined necessary or desirable by the Village.
F. Inspection Of Records: Any person or agent designated by the Village Administrator as a representative of the Village may, upon prior written
notice to the owner, operator or licensee of a hotel/motel, enter the premises of such hotel/motel for the purpose of inspection and
examination of books and records for the proper administration and enforcement of this section. It is unlawful for any person to prevent,
hinder or interfere with the Village or the Village representative in the discharge of the procedures as provided in this section.
G. Enforcement And Penalties:
1. Any person, firm or corporation who shall be convicted of violating any provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), with each and every day that the violation of this section is allowed to remain in effect being
deemed a complete and separate offense.
2. In addition, a fee of twelve percent (12%) per annum of the balance of taxes collected or required to be collected pursuant to this section,
but yet unpaid to the Village, shall be applied to all such taxes unpaid on or before the fifteenth day of the month following the month in
which said taxes accrued.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 72/548
3. The appropriate authorities of the Village may take such actions they deem proper to enforce the terms and conditions of this section,
including, without limitation, an action in equity to compel compliance with its terms and an action to collect unpaid taxes with interest at
the aforementioned rate.
4. Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms of this section shall be subject, in addition to the penalties of this subsection, to the
payment of court costs and reasonable attorney fees of the Village.
5. The failure to comply with any obligation imposed by this section shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of any business
license or registration issued by the Village to a hotel/motel or accepted by the Village for a hotel/motel, as the case may be, pursuant to
the applicable provisions of this Code. (Ord. 2011-25, 6-27-2011)
ARTICLE E. SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
3-3E-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in the village regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the village and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money, whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services
and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the
cost of the materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be
included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel termination point within
the village and charges for that portion of the interoffice channels provided within the village. Charges for that portion of the interoffice channel
connecting two (2) or more channel termination points, one or more of which is located within the jurisdictional boundary of the village, shall be
determined by the retailer by multiplying an amount equal to the total charge for the interoffice channel by a fraction, the numerator of which is
the number of channel termination points that are located within the jurisdictional boundary of the village and the denominator of which is the
total number of channel termination points connected by the interoffice channel. However, "gross charge" shall not include any of the following:
A. Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: 1) the tax imposed by this article; 2) the tax imposed by
the telecommunications excise tax act1; 3) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the internal revenue code; 4) 911 surcharges; or 5) charges
added to customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public utilities act, as amended, or any similar charges
added to customers' bills by retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois commerce commission for the purpose of
recovering any of the tax liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act.
B. Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the village.
C. Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data
or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers,
data processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time
sharing agreement.
D. Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such
charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges.
E. Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and
during the period of time specified by the department of commerce and economic opportunity.
F. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this article has already been paid to a
retailer and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such
service.
G. Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible
or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of
the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in
which the payment is made).
H. Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunications devices.
I. Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee act.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 73/548
J. Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if: 1) those charges are aggregated with other charges for telecommunications
that are taxable; 2) those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or invoice; and 3) the retailer can reasonably identify the
nontaxable charges on the retailer's books and records kept in the regular course of business. If the nontaxable charges cannot
reasonably be identified, the gross charge from the sale of both taxable and nontaxable services or telecommunications billed on a
combined basis shall be attributed to the taxable services or telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on
the retailer of the telecommunications.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and terminate within this state.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court, the federal and state governments, including
state universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Includes every person engaged in the business of making "sales at retail" as defined in this section.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term): Includes any retailer having or maintaining within this
state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any
agent or other representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do
business in this state.
SALES AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and state universities created by statute and other than
between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for
resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones,
paging systems, and maritime systems, "service address" means the customer's place of primary use as defined in the mobile
telecommunications sourcing conformity act. For air to ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are
sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in the village and who incurs a tax liability as authorized by this article.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed thereto, includes, without limitation, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, private line services, channel services, telegraph services,
teletypewriter, computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio,
paging service, or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or
information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar
facilities. As used in this article, "private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles the customer to
exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified
locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to
act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include
purchases of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end to end communications. Carrier access charges, right of
access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision of, used as a
component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid telephone calling
arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications" subject to the tax imposed under this article. For purposes of this definition,
"prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in section 2-27 of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act. (Ord. 2010-15, 3-22-
2010)
3-3E-2: TAX IMPOSED; EXEMPTIONS:
A. Effective for all gross charges billed by telecommunications retailers on: 1) the first day of July next following the adoption and filing of the
ordinance codified herein with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding March 20th or 2) the first day of January next
following the adoption and filing of the ordinance codified herein with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding
September 20th, a tax is hereby imposed upon the following acts or privileges:
1. The act or privilege of originating in the Village or receiving in the Village intrastate telecommunications by a person, at a rate of one
percent (1%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multimunicipal taxation
of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this section, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another
municipality on that event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent of the
amount of the tax properly due and paid in the Village that was not previously allowed as a credit against any other Municipal tax.
2. The act or privilege of originating in the Village or receiving in the Village interstate telecommunications by a person, at a rate of one
percent (1%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multistate or
multimunicipal taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection A2, any taxpayer, upon proof that the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 74/548
taxpayer has paid a tax in another state or municipality in this State on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted
pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly paid in a municipality in this State which was not
previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in this State. (Ord. 2010-15, 3-22-2010; amd. Ord. 2016-31, 8-22-2016;
Ord. 2018-31, 8-27-2018)
B. This tax is not imposed on the acts or privileges taxed hereunder to the extent such acts or privileges may not, under the Constitution and
Statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the Village. (Ord. 2010-15, 3-22-2010)
3-3E-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
A. The tax authorized by this article shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this State and shall be
remitted by such retailer to the department in the manner required by the Act. Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the
tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner prescribed by
the department. The tax authorized by this article shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable
at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the
taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the department in the manner provided by the department.
B. Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this article shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications. (Ord. 2010-15, 3-22-2010)
3-3E-4: TAX RETURNS:
Every month the tax imposed under this article on telecommunications retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and information as
required by the department pursuant to the Act and any accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to implement the Act.
(Ord. 2010-15, 3-22-2010)
3-3E-5: RESALES:
The act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this State shall not be made tax free on the ground of being a sale for
resale, unless the person has an active resale number from the department and furnishes that number to the retailer in connection with
certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is nontaxable because of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 2010-15, 3-22-2010)
Chapter 4
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRATION RULES
3-4-1: RULES ADOPTED; REGISTRATION FORM:
In accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-4.2, the village hereby adopts the registration rules of this chapter as registration
rules for each interested parties registry. Additionally, the village hereby prescribes the registration form attached to ordinance 2006-32 as
exhibit B as the registration form each resident and organization must complete in order to be placed on the interested parties registry. (Ord.
2006-32, 7-10-2006)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the definitions set forth below:
ACT: The tax increment allocation redevelopment act, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-1 et seq., as amended from time to time.
INTERESTED PARTY(IES): A. Any organization(s) active within the village;
B. Any resident(s) of the village; and
C. Any other entity or person otherwise entitled under the act to register in a specific registry who has registered in such registry and whose
registration has not been terminated in accordance with this chapter.
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA: A redevelopment project area that:
A. Is intended to qualify (or has subsequently qualified) as a "redevelopment project area" under the act; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 75/548
B. Is subject to the interested parties registry requirements of the act.
REGISTRATION FORM: The form appended to ordinance 2006-32 or such revised form as may be approved by the village consistent with the
requirements of the act.
REGISTRY OR REGISTRIES: Each interested parties registry, and all such registries, collectively, established by the village pursuant to 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-4.2 for the redevelopment project area.
VILLAGE: The village of Bloomingdale, a home rule unit of government under section 6, article VII of the 1970 constitution of the state of Illinois.
(Ord. 2006-32, 7-10-2006)
3-4-3: REGISTRIES ESTABLISHED:
The village shall establish a separate interested parties registry for each redevelopment project area, whether existing as of the effective date
hereof or hereafter established. The village shall establish a new registry whenever it has identified an area for study and possible designation
as a redevelopment project area. In any event, the process of establishing the new registry must be completed prior to the deadline for sending
any of the notices required by section 3-4-10 of this chapter or any other notices required by the act with respect to the proposed redevelopment
project area. (Ord. 2006-32, 7-10-2006)
3-4-4: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRIES:
The registries shall be maintained by the village clerk or his or her designee. In the event the village determines that a village official other than
the clerk should maintain the registries, the village may transfer the responsibility for maintaining the registries to such other village official;
provided, that the village: (Ord. 2006-32, 7-10-2006; amd. 2012 Code)
A. Gives prior written notice to all interested parties not less than thirty (30) days prior to such transfer; and
B. Publishes notice of such transfer in a newspaper of general circulation in the village. (Ord. 2006-32, 7-10-2006)
3-4-5: SUBMISSION OF REGISTRATION:
A. Individuals: An individual seeking to register as an interested person with respect to a redevelopment project area must complete and submit
a registration form to the village clerk. Such individual must also submit a copy of a current driver's license, lease, utility bill, financial
statement or such other evidence as may be acceptable to the clerk to establish the individual's current village residency.
B. Organizations: An organization seeking to register as an interested person with respect to a redevelopment project area must complete and
submit a registration form to the village clerk. Such organization must also submit a copy of a one page statement describing the
organization's current operations in the village. (Ord. 2006-32, 7-10-2006)
3-4-6: ELIGIBILITY DETERMINED:
All individuals and organizations whose registration form and supporting documentation complies with this chapter shall be registered in the
applicable registry within ten (10) business days of the village clerk's receipt of all such documents. The clerk shall provide written notice to the
registrant confirming such registration. Upon registration, interested parties shall be entitled to receive all notices and documents required to be
delivered under this chapter or as otherwise required under the act with respect to the applicable redevelopment project area. If the village clerk
determines that a registrant's registration form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or does not comply with this chapter, the clerk
shall give written notice to the registrant specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be entitled to correct any defects and resubmit a new
registration form and supporting documentation. (Ord. 2006-32, 7-10-2006)
3-4-7: RENEWALS AND TERMINATION:
An interested person's registration shall remain effective for a period of three (3) years. At any time after such three (3) year period, the village
clerk shall provide written notice by regular mail to the interested person stating that such registration shall terminate unless the interested
person renews such registration within thirty (30) days of the clerk's mailing of written notice. To renew such registration, the interested person
shall, within such thirty (30) day period, complete and submit the same registration form and supporting documentation then required of initial
registrants in order to permit the clerk to confirm such person's residency or such organization's operations in the village. The registration of all
individuals and organizations whose registration form and supporting documentation is submitted in a timely manner and complies with this
chapter shall be renewed for an additional, consecutive three (3) year period. If the village clerk determines that a registrant's renewal
registration form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or does not comply with this chapter, the clerk shall give written notice to the
registrant at the address specified in the renewal registration form submitted by such registrant, specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be
entitled to correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form and supporting documentation within thirty (30) days of receipt of the clerk's
notice. If all defects are not corrected within thirty (30) days of the interested person's receipt of the village clerk's notice, the interested person's
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 76/548
registration shall be terminated. Any interested person whose registration is terminated shall be entitled to register again as if a first time
registrant. (Ord. 2006-32, 7-10-2006; amd. 2012 Code)
3-4-8: AMENDMENT TO REGISTRATION:
An interested party may amend its registration by giving written notice to the village clerk by certified mail of any of the following: a) change in
address for notice purposes; b) in the case of organizations, a change in the name of the contact person; and c) a termination of registration.
Upon receipt of such notice, the clerk shall revise the applicable registry accordingly. (Ord. 2006-32, 7-10-2006)
3-4-9: PUBLIC INSPECTION OF REGISTRIES:
Each registry shall be available for public inspection during normal village business hours. The registry shall include the name, address and
telephone number of each interested person, and for organizations, the name and phone number of a designated contact person. (Ord. 2006-
32, 7-10-2006)
3-4-10: NOTICES TO INTERESTED PARTIES:
Interested parties shall be sent the following notices and any other notices required under the act with respect to the applicable redevelopment
project area:
A. Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-5(a), notice of the availability of a proposed redevelopment plan and eligibility report,
including how to obtain this information. Such notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable period of time after the adoption of the
ordinance fixing the public hearing for the proposed redevelopment plan.
B. Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-5(a), notice of changes to proposed redevelopment plans that do not: 1) add additional
parcels of property to the proposed redevelopment project area; 2) substantially affect the general land uses proposed in the redevelopment
plan; 3) substantially change the nature of or extend the life of the redevelopment project; or 4) increase the number of low or very low
income households to be displaced from the redevelopment project area; provided, that measured from the time of creation of the
redevelopment project area, the total displacement of households will exceed ten (10). Such notice shall be sent by mail not later than ten
(10) days following the village adoption by ordinance of such changes.
C. Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-5(c), notice of amendments to previously approved redevelopment plans that do not: 1)
add additional parcels of property to the redevelopment project area; 2) substantially affect the general land uses in the redevelopment plan;
3) substantially change the nature of the redevelopment project; 4) increase the total estimated redevelopment project costs set out in the
redevelopment plan by more than five percent (5%) after adjustment for inflation from the date the plan was adopted; 5) add additional
redevelopment project costs to the itemized list of redevelopment project costs set out in the redevelopment plan; or 6) increase the number
of low or very low income households to be displaced from the redevelopment project area; provided, that measured from the time of
creation of the redevelopment project area, the total displacement of inhabited households will exceed ten (10). Such notice will be sent by
mail not later than ten (10) days following the village adoption by ordinance of such amendment.
D. Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-5(d)(9) for redevelopment plans or projects that would result in the displacement of
residents from ten (10) or more inhabited residential units or that contain seventy five (75) or more inhabited residential units, notice of the
availability of the annual report described by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-5(d), including how to obtain the annual report. Such
notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable period of time after completion of the certified audit report.
E. Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-74.4-6(e), notice of the preliminary public meeting required under the act for a proposed
redevelopment project area that will result in the displacement of ten (10) or more inhabited residential units or which will contain seventy
five (75) or more inhabited residential units. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail not less than fifteen (15) days before the date of such
preliminary public meeting. (Ord. 2006-32, 7-10-2006)
3-4-11: NONINTERFERENCE:
This chapter shall not be used to prohibit or otherwise interfere with the ability of eligible organizations and individuals to register for receipt of
information to which they are entitled under the act. (Ord. 2006-32, 7-10-2006)
3-4-12: AMENDMENT OF PROVISIONS:
The village, with the consent of the village attorney as to form and legality, shall have the authority to amend the registration rules and the form
from time to time as may be necessary or desirable to comply with and carry out the purposes intended by the act. (Ord. 2006-32, 7-10-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 77/548
Chapter 5
TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
3-5-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY
ORDINANCE. (2012 Code)
3-5-2: SCOPE; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village procedures in connection with all of the village locally imposed and
administered taxes.
B. Application Of Provisions; Conflicting Provisions: This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the village
tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling. (2012
Code)
3-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
ACT: The local government taxpayers' bill of rights act1.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The village president and board of trustees.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village president, including those village staff members, employees or agents, to the extent they are
authorized by the "local tax administrator" to act in the "local tax administrator's" stead, who are charged with the administration and collection
of the locally imposed and administered taxes.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village that is collected or administered by the village, and
not an agency or department of the state, but excludes any taxes imposed upon real property under the property tax code or fees collected by
the village other than infrastructure maintenance fees if lawfully enacted and validly existing.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed
and administered taxes.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax, including the person upon whom the legal incidence of such
tax is placed, and, with respect to consumer taxes, the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to
the village.
VILLAGE: The village of Bloomingdale, Illinois. (2012 Code)
3-5-4: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing and mailed not less than seven (7) calendar
days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local administrator. The notice shall be sent by U.S.
registered or certified mail. (2012 Code)
3-5-5: DELINQUENT NOTICES, PAYMENTS, REMITTANCES OR OTHER FILINGS:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it
is: a) physically received by the village on or before the due date; or b) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable
U.S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate postage prepaid. (2012 Code)
3-5-6: APPLICATION OF TAX PAYMENTS:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: first, to the tax due for the applicable period; second,
to the interest due for the applicable period; and third, to the penalty for the applicable period. (2012 Code)
3-5-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 78/548
A. Written Protest Required: The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the
event that a locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction.
However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest
the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
B. Statute Of Limitations: The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four (4) years after the payment in error was made.
The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the village.
C. Procedure: The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be
as follows:
1. The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund, together with a statement specifying:
a. The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
b. The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
c. The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled check or receipt for the payment;
d. The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
e. A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest, and penalties overpaid,
and as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in
the event the taxpayer owes any monies to the village.
2. Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
a. Grant the claim; or
b. Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
3. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for a refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit
shall bear interest at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of
days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing a refund check or the grant of a credit. (2012 Code)
3-5-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any locally administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
A. Information Required: Each notice shall contain the following information:
1. The tax;
2. The time period of the audit; and
3. A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor.
B. Time For Conducting Audit:
1. Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours, and if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not
agreeable to the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the originally designated
audit and during normal business hours.
2. The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor
more than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agree to some other
convenient time. In the event the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may request another
date within the thirty (30) days, approved in writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
C. Taxpayer's Books And Records:
1. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books
shall be kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
2. It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available his books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer (or
tax collector) fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax
determination and assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's liability.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 79/548
D. Overpayments: If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit,
written notice of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the village's determination of the amount
of overpayment.
E. Payment To Improper Entity: In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator
shall notify the local governmental entity imposing such tax. (2012 Code)
3-5-9: APPEALS:
A. Contents Of Notice Regarding Taxes Due: The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax
administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice
shall include the following information:
1. The reason for the assessment;
2. The amount of the tax liability proposed;
3. The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
4. The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process.
B. Request For Hearing: The taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment
may file with the local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a
hearing. The written protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five (45) days of receipt of the
written notice of the tax determination and assessment.
C. Hearing Scheduled; Notice: If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for
hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the
written protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
D. Time Limit For Filing Hearing Request: If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the tax
determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill, due and owing, without further notice.
E. Reopening, Extension Of Hearing Request: Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax
liability along with interest accrued as of the date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written
protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for
more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five (45) day period.
F. Conduct Of Hearing; Decision:
1. Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing under this section, the local tax
administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
2. No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack
of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
3. At the hearing, the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax
determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
4. At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at
the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision. (2012 Code)
3-5-10: PAYMENT REQUIRED; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
A. Time For Payment: In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the
tax must be paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
B. Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax,
to be five percent (5%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed.
C. Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of
five percent (5%) of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and
prior to the village issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to ten
percent (10%) of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment
penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 80/548
D. Abatement Of Penalties: The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or
failure to file penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. (2012 Code)
3-5-11: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written
notice by the local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure
any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) working day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in
restructuring the installment contract with the local tax administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the
taxpayer. (2012 Code)
3-5-12: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
A. The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any
amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request
for refund or provide any tax still due and owing.
B. No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the
return for the applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs
later.
C. If any tax return is not filed or if, during any four (4) year period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after
the end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, or end of the calendar year in which the return for the
applicable period was filed, whichever occurs later.
D. No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. (2012 Code)
3-5-13: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment
from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax
due. A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per
month for all periods prior to the filing of the application, but not more than four (4) years before the date of filing the application. Except for the
amount of tax and interest due under this section, a taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be liable for any additional
tax interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid
the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment
was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case, the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and
interest must be made no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid
under this section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount
owed or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (2012 Code)
3-5-14: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES; COPIES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet will satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village
clerk's office. (2012 Code)
3-5-15: REVIEW OF LIENS:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayer for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
A. Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
B. Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 81/548
C. Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (2012 Code)
Title 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE PROVISIONS
4-1-1: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever, in this chapter or in any village ordinance, a license or occupancy permit is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of
any business or establishment, or for doing business, or engaging in any activity or occupation, any person, firm or corporation shall be subject
to the requirement, if by himself or itself, or through an agent, employee or partner, he or it is held forth as being engaged in the business,
activity, or occupation, or if he or it solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively, or if he or it performs or attempts to perform any part of such
business, activity, or occupation in the village. (Ord. 80-52, 8-11-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
4-1-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
All persons, firms or corporations engaging in or conducting any of the businesses or occupations enumerated and set forth in section 4-1-5-1 of
this chapter shall make application for and be issued a license, and otherwise be subject to the provisions of this code. Applications for licenses
and occupancy permits required by this chapter shall be made in writing to the village clerk on forms to be provided by the village in the
absence of provision to the contrary. In addition to the requirement of this chapter, each application shall contain: a) the name of the applicant;
b) the permit or license desired; c) the location to be used, if any; d) sales tax number; e) the time period covered; and f) the fee to be paid.
Each application shall contain such additional information as may be needed for the proper evaluation of such application by village officials.
(Ord. 80-52, 8-11-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
4-1-3: FORMS AND SIGNATURES:
Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be prepared and kept on file by the village clerk. Each license or permit
issued shall bear the signature of the village administrator, with the village clerk's signature attesting the administrator's signature, in the
absence of any provisions to the contrary. (Ord. 80-52, 8-11-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
4-1-4: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
In case the license requested shall be for an activity of a transitory nature including, but not limited to, circuses, carnivals, street shows or other
activities which, in the judgment of the village administrator may cause the accumulation of material on the site after the conclusion of the
activity, the village administrator may, in addition to the other requirements of this code, require the posting of a cash or surety bond in an
amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to guarantee the cleanup and restoration of the site following the conclusion of such activities.
Such bond shall be approved by the village administrator and filed with the village clerk. (Ord. 80-52, 8-11-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
4-1-5: FEES:
A. Required: No license or permit authorized or required by any provision of this code shall be issued by the village clerk unless and until the
applicant pays the appropriate fee as designated in the schedule set forth in section 4-1-5-1 of this chapter.
B. Proration: When an applicant has not engaged in the business or activity until after the expiration of part of the current license year, the
license fee shall be prorated by quarters and the fee paid for each quarter or fraction thereof during which the business or activity has been
or will be conducted.
C. Disposition: Except as otherwise provided, all license and permit fees shall become a part of the corporate fund.
D. No Refunds: In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any license or permit fee or part thereof by reason of death or departure of
the licensee or permittee; nor shall any rebate or refund be made by reason of nonuse of the license or discontinuance of the operation or
conduct of the licensed establishment, business or activity. (Ord. 80-52, 8-11-1980)
4-1-5-1: LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE:
Unless otherwise indicated or provided in this code, license and associated fees for the businesses, occupations, uses and activities are set
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 82/548
forth and required as follows:
BUSINESS LICENSE SCHEDULE OF FEES
Business License Classification Fee
Ambulance service, per ambulance $ 44.00
Amusements:
Jukeboxes or other musical devices 82.50
Public places of amusement:
Circus or sideshow, per day 110.00
Commercial playground or amusement park 550.00
Theater (motion picture or dramatic):
Theaters in a mall 220.00
Seating capacity 1 to 1,000 220.00
Seating capacity over 1,000 330.00
Public skating rink 550.00
Concerts of musical entertainment, per day 110.00
Animal care:
Kennel services 110.00
Grooming services 44.00
Auctioneers:
Per day 44.00
Per year 1,100.00
Bakeries and bakery vehicles:
Wholesale bakery 44.00
Retail bakery 44.00
Per delivery vehicle 16.50
Itinerant vendor of bakery products: 16.50
Per itinerant vendor delivery vehicle 16.50
Banking facility 44.00
Barbershops/salons: 44.00
For each chair more than 5 add 11.00
Billiard and pool halls, per table 82.50
Bowling alleys, per lane 27.50
Car wash 275.00
Carnivals, per day 110.00
Carters and expressmen:
For each vehicle - capacity not exceeding 3 tons 27.50
For each vehicle - capacity exceeding 3 tons 82.50
Catering services and establishments:
Service location of establishment 44.00
For each delivery vehicle 27.50
Chemical and paint stores (wholesale):
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 83/548
Paints and varnishes 275.00
Explosives, corrosive chemicals, abrasives and other hazardous chemicals 550.00
Cold storage establishments 44.00
Delicatessens 44.00
Driving schools:
Not more than 3 vehicles 44.00
More than 3 vehicles 82.50
Exterminators (fumigation) 44.00
Fire extinguisher service and repair 44.00
Food delivery vehicles and mobile food dispensers 44.00
Fruit and vegetable stores or stands 44.00
Funeral homes and undertaking establishments 110.00
Game rooms:
Less than 6 devices 200.00
Game room operator 300.00
Game rooms (mall/more than 6 devices) 1,000.00
Garages (public parking) 44.00
Hotels and motels, per accommodation unit 1.10
Itinerant merchants and transient vendors, per day 44.00
Junk dealers and junk peddlers:
Junk peddler 165.00
For each vehicle 165.00
Laboratories (nonmedical) 44.00
Laundry and dry cleaning establishments 44.00
Laundry and dry cleaning establishments (self-service/coin operated), per machine 5.50
Livery stable 44.00
Lumberyards and lumber storehouse 220.00
Machine shops 44.00
Massage establishments:
Original application 400.00
Renewal 200.00
Motor fuel sales, per hose 5.50
Motor vehicle dealers:
Gross floor and/or lot area in square feet:
0 - 20,000 55.00
20,001 - 39,000 110.00
39,001 - 70,000 165.00
70,001 - 100,000 220.00
100,001 and over 275.00
Motor vehicle repair establishments:
Not more than 3 persons engaged 165.00
Each additional person 44.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 84/548
Nursery school/daycare center 55.00
Peddlers:
Operating from a pack, basket, wagon cart (per day) 44.00
Operating from a motor vehicle (per day) 44.00
Printing shops 44.00
Radio and television sales and service 55.00
Restaurants:
Gross floor area in square feet:
0 - 1,000 55.00
1,001 - 2,000 82.50
2,001 - 4,000 110.00
4,001 - 6,000 220.00
6,001 - 8,000 330.00
8,001 - 10,000 440.00
10,001 - 15,000 550.00
15,001 and over 660.00
Retailers:
Gross floor area in square feet:
0 - 2,500 55.00
2,501 - 10,000 110.00
10,001 - 20,000 220.00
20,001 - 30,000 330.00
30,001 - 50,000 550.00
50,001 and over 825.00
Scavengers 165.00
Solid fuel and fuel oil dealers 44.00
Taxicabs and limousines: 44.00
For each vehicle 27.50
For each operator 5.50
Ticket sellers:
Theatricals, shows, amusements, athletic events and other exhibitions dealing from a place other than a theater or location
where the show, event or exhibit is given
82.50
Tobacco dealers:
Wholesale 330.00
Vending, per machine 44.00
Nonvending machines (OTC) 55.00
Vending machines, coin operated 44.00
(Ord. 2009-43, 10-26-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
4-1-6: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
Upon receipt of any application for a license or permit, within forty eight (48) hours thereafter, the Village Clerk shall refer such application to the
Building Commissioner and other appropriate officials of the Village, and shall notify the Fire Chief of the Bloomingdale Fire Protection District,
the Chief of Police, and the DuPage County Health Department, where inspection or investigation by their respective offices is required by
statute or ordinance, or is warranted by the circumstances. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall file a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 85/548
report thereon within ten (10) days after receipt of such application. The Village Clerk shall be charged with the duty to assure the timely filing of
such reports. Upon receipt of all related investigative reports, the Village Clerk shall forward such reports, together with the application, to the
Village Administrator for approval. (Ord. 80-52, 8-11-1980; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
4-1-7: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
A. Denial: If, after due consideration of the information contained within the application and after due consideration of the related investigative
reports, the applicant's character, business responsibility, or other matters concerning the application are found to be unsatisfactory, the
Village Administrator shall disapprove such application, indicating the reasons therefor in writing. Thereupon, the Village Clerk shall be
directed to promptly notify the applicant that his application is disapproved, giving the reasons therefor, and that no license or permit shall be
issued.
B. Approval: If, after due consideration of the information contained within the application and after due consideration of the related investigative
reports, the applicant's character, business responsibility, and other matters concerning the application are found to be satisfactory, the
license or permit shall be approved by the Village Administrator, and the Village Clerk shall be directed to promptly notify the applicant that
such application is approved. Thereupon, the license or permit may be issued by the Village Clerk upon payment of the appropriate fee. No
business license or permit, whether new or renewal, shall be issued, nor shall such license or permit be valid, without express approval of
the Village Administrator. (Ord. 80-52, 8-11-1980)
4-1-8: BUSINESS VEHICLE STICKER:
Whenever the number of vehicles used is the basis, in whole or in part, for a license fee, the Village Clerk shall furnish the licensee with a tag or
sticker for each vehicle covered by the license, and such tag or sticker shall be posted or affixed in a conspicuous place on each such vehicle.
(Ord. 80-52, 8-11-1980)
4-1-9: TERM OF LICENSE; RENEWALS:
A. All annual licenses shall be operative and the license year for the Village shall commence on May 1 of each year and shall terminate on April
30 of the following year, where no provision to the contrary is made.
B. The village clerk shall notify all licensees in the village of the time of expiration of the license held by the licensee (if an annual) three (3)
weeks prior to the date of such expiration. Provided, however, that a failure to make such notification or the failure of the licensee to receive
it shall not excuse the licensee from the obligation to obtain a new license, or a renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in an action based
upon operation without a license. (Ord. 80-52, 8-11-1980)
4-1-10: POSTING LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of every person conducting a licensed business in the village to keep his license posted at all times in a prominent place on
the premises used for such business. (Ord. 80-52, 8-11-1980)
4-1-11: LOCATION:
A. Requirements And Restrictions: No license for the operation of a business or establishment in the village shall be construed to permit the
operation of a licensed business or establishment in more than one location in the village, and a separate license shall be required for each
location of a licensed establishment. For the purposes of this subsection, the existence of a single location shall be evidenced by the fact
that all buildings containing the principal or accessory uses shall be connected or shall be located on the same lot or parcel, shall be
operated and managed by the same person or owner, and shall be an establishment with the same classification.
B. Change Of Location: The location of any licensed business or occupation, or the location of any permitted act, may be changed; provided,
that ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the village clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary; provided, however, that there
shall be compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the village. (Ord. 80-52, 8-11-1980)
4-1-12: BUILDING AND PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
A. No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall be issued for any purpose or activity, if the premises and
building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with all ordinances and regulations of the village. (Ord. 80-52, 8-11-1980)
B. No business license is to be issued without an approved field inspection report for the business premises. (Ord. 2009-43, 10-26-2009, eff. 1-
1-2010)
4-1-13: NUISANCE BUSINESSES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 86/548
A. Prohibited Generally:
1. No business or establishment, whether or not licensed, shall be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in fact.
2. No building, vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises, or parts thereof, shall be used, kept, maintained, or operated in connection with any
business or establishment so as to constitute a nuisance, or in such a manner that it is dangerous to life or detrimental to health.
B. Unsafe Or Unhealthy Business:
1. No building or structure, utilized, constructed, or maintained in connection with any business or occupation, shall evidence an unsanitary,
unsafe, or dangerous condition.
2. No substance, matter, or thing of any kind whatever, which shall be dangerous or detrimental to health, shall be allowed to exist in
connection with any business or occupation, or be used in any work or labor performed in the village.
C. Refuse Disposal1:
1. Containers:
a. Required: The occupant of every building, structure, or premises used or maintained in connection with any business or occupation
shall provide and maintain in good condition and repair a sufficient number of refuse containers for the temporary storage of all refuse
which may accumulate between collections.
b. Specifications: The standard refuse container required by this section shall be a receptacle of not less than twenty (20) nor more than
thirty two (32) gallons' capacity, of impervious material and sturdy construction, with a tightfitting cover, and equipped with handles
properly placed to facilitate handling.
2. Removal Of Refuse:
a. Required: It shall be the duty of the occupant of every building, structure or premises used or maintained in connection with any
business or occupation to cause to be removed, at his own cost and expense, at least once each week, all refuse produced therein.
b. Removal Of Restaurant Garbage: Every person owning or controlling any hotel, restaurant, cafe, or retail food establishment where
more than thirty two (32) gallons of refuse is normally produced weekly shall cause all garbage to be placed in sanitary refuse
containers and shall cause all substances deposited in such containers to be removed daily from his premises and to be disposed of at
his own expense. (Ord. 80-52, 8-11-1980)
4-1-14: WORKING CONDITIONS:
A. General Health And Sanitation Requirements:
1. No owner, lessee, manager, or superintendent of any store, factory, workshop, or other place where persons are employed shall cause or
permit such place, or any room or part thereof, to be overcrowded or inadequate or faulty in respect to light, ventilation, heat, or
cleanliness.
2. All such places of employment shall be kept in a clean condition, free from the effluvia of a sewer, drain, privy, stable, or other nuisance;
also, as far as practicable, from all gases, vapors, dust, or other impurities generated by manufacturing processes or otherwise which are
injurious to health. Sufficient and separate washrooms for male and female employees shall be provided, and such washrooms shall be
properly ventilated.
B. Heat:
1. It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling the heating plant which furnishes heat to any factory or workshop to maintain a
temperature within such factory or workshop of not less than sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F) without such undue restriction of
ventilation as to interfere with proper sanitary conditions therein; provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply to any factory or
workshop where the business conducted therein is of such a nature that a higher or lower temperature than sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit
(68°F) is necessary or expedient for the work or manufacturing processes of such business.
2. It shall be the duty of any person owning or controlling the heating plant which furnishes heat to any office, store, or other place of
employment to maintain a temperature therein of not less than sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F) without such undue restriction of
ventilation as to interfere with proper sanitary conditions therein, between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
from October 1 of each year to June 1 of the succeeding year, Sundays and legal holidays excepted.
C. Inspections: The DuPage County health department and the building and zoning official of the village shall visit or cause to be visited all such
places of employment in the village as often as they shall deem necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this section, and to
have such arrangements made as may be deemed necessary for the health and safety of the employees. (Ord. 80-52, 8-11-1980)
4-1-15: INSPECTIONS AND ANALYSES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 87/548
A. Inspections:
1. It shall be the duty of the building and zoning official to inspect or cause to be inspected from time to time all businesses, firms, and
establishments licensed by the village in order to determine and assure compliance with the provisions of applicable ordinances,
regulations, and statutes. The building and zoning official shall engage the services of the police department, fire protection district or any
and all other departments of the village, county and state, as the case may be. Inspections shall be conducted for the purpose of, but shall
not be limited to, facilitating the processing of applications for renewal of licenses and permits. (Ord. 80-52, 8-11-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
2. Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for
or required by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of any ordinance or regulation of the
village, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to admit thereto for the
purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of the village who is duly authorized to make such inspection at any reasonable
time that such admission or entry is requested.
B. Analyses: Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of any
ordinance or regulation, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to give to
any duly authorized officer or employee of the village requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such
analysis upon official request.
C. Failure To Permit Inspections And Analyses: In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the village president may revoke the
license of any owner or operator of a licensed business in the village who refuses to permit any duly authorized officer or employee to make
such inspection or to take an adequate sample of said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance
of his duties; provided, however, that no license shall be subject to revocation for such cause unless such officer or employee has been
refused permission to enter upon the premises in the name of the village after first having presented a warrant authorizing such entry. (Ord.
80-52, 8-11-1980)
4-1-16: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Except as otherwise provided in this title:
A. Summary Suspension:
1. When the conduct or operation of any business or establishment, whether or not licensed, shall constitute a nuisance in fact and a clear
and present danger to the public health, safety or general welfare, the village president shall be authorized to summarily order the
cessation of business, the closing of the premises, and the suspension of any license or permit for a period not to exceed ten (10) days.
2. Within five (5) days after he has so acted, the village president shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the
license or permit should be revoked.
B. Revocation Of Licenses And Permits:
1. Grounds: Licenses and permits issued under the ordinances of the village, unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the village
president after notice and hearing as provided in subsection B3 of this section for any of the following causes:
a. Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for the license or permit;
b. Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the license or
permit, or the premises occupied;
c. Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
d. Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty owing to the village;
e. Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling, or any interference with a duly authorized village officer or employee while in the
performance of his duties in making such inspections, as provided in section 4-1-15 of this chapter.
2. Additional Sanctions: Such revocation, if ordered, shall not exclude prosecution and imposition of any other penalties provided for the
violation of other applicable ordinances of the village.
3. Hearing:
a. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license or permit shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint
and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail (return receipt requested) to the licensee or permittee
at his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. (Ord. 80-52, 8-11-1980)
b. At the hearing, the village prosecutor shall present the complaint and shall represent the village. The licensee or permittee shall be
permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross examine witnesses. The village president shall preside and
shall render the decision. (Ord. 80-52, 8-11-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
4-1-17: APPEALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 88/548
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the village administrator in regard to the denial of an application for a business license, as provided in
section 4-1-7 of this chapter, or in connection with the revocation of a license or permit, as provided in section 4-1-16 of this chapter, shall have
the right to appeal to the board of trustees. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the village clerk, within ten (10) days after notice of a denial
of an application or a revocation of a license or permit, a written statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The
board of trustees shall thereupon set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant
or licensee or permittee in the same manner as provided in section 4-1-16 of this chapter. The decision of the board of trustees on such appeal
shall be final. (Ord. 80-52, 8-11-1980)
4-1-18: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this chapter, or operating a business within the village for which a business
license is required by this chapter, shall be liable for a penalty in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of any unpaid license fee and, in
addition, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2009-43, 10-26-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
4-2-1: VILLAGE POLICY:
A. It is the policy of the village to limit the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail primarily to the sale in its original package or by restaurants, lounges,
organized clubs, recreational facilities, or hotels. It is not deemed conducive to the promotion of this public policy to allow the sale of
alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption on the premises where such sale is the sole or primary business to be conducted within the village.
B. Further, it is the policy of the village to limit the purchase, consumption, or possession of alcoholic liquor to persons of the age of twenty one
(21) years or older; and to prevent intoxication, disorderly conduct, trespasses, unruly disturbances at public or private assemblies, traffic
accidents, and similar conduct that often results from the purchase, consumption or possession of alcoholic liquor by persons under the
lawful age. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except where otherwise provided herein, all words and phrases used in this chapter which are defined in the liquor control act of 1934, an act
relating to alcoholic liquors, approved January 31, 1934, as amended1, shall have the meanings accorded to such words and phrases in said
act. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
4-2-3: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
A. Village President Serve As: The village president is hereby designated as local liquor control commissioner of the village and is charged with
the administration of the applicable provisions of the Illinois liquor control act2, and the provisions of this chapter, as well as such other
ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted from time to time by the village.
B. Powers And Duties:
1. As local liquor control commissioner, the village president may appoint a person or persons, or any committee or other agency, to assist in
the exercise of powers and the performance of the duties as provided by law for local liquor control commissioners.
2. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following powers and duties with respect to local liquor licenses, in addition to any
other powers and duties established by law:
a. To grant and/or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or to revoke for cause all local licenses issued to persons or entities for
premises within the Village.
b. To receive complaint(s) from any citizen within the Village that any provision of State law or of this chapter has been or is being violated
and to act upon such complaint(s) in the manner provided by law.
c. To receive local license fees and deposit same to the credit of the Village.
d. To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom
a citation proceeding has been instituted by the State of Illinois Liquor Control Commission; to examine, or cause to be examined, the
books and records of any such applicant or licensee and to hear testimony and take evidence for his information in the performance of
his duties, and for such purposes, to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this State. For the purpose of obtaining any
of the information desired by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner under this subsection, he may authorize his agent to act on his
behalf.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 89/548
e. To order, by issuance of a written order, any licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee an
opportunity to be heard during that period, if the Local Liquor Control Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation
of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the Village, except if such licensee shall also be engaged in the
conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business or
businesses. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
C. Qualified Appointee: The Village President at his/her discretion may appoint a qualified individual to serve in his/her place as the Liquor
Control Commissioner with advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, pursuant to the following:
1. The appointment shall be for a one-year period,
2. The appointee shall be an attorney with an active license to practice law in the State of Illinois,
3. The appointee shall not legally represent liquor license applicants or holders before the Village of Bloomingdale or before an adjacent
jurisdiction,
4. The appointee shall not have an interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor, and
5. The appointee shall not be appointed to a term to exceed the term of the Village President. (Ord. 2018-19, 4-23-2018)
4-2-4: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to manufacture, bottle, blend, sell, barter, transport, deliver, furnish, or give away any
alcoholic liquor for beverage purposes without first having been issued a license for such purpose by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner;
provided, however, nothing herein contained shall prevent the possession and transportation of alcoholic liquor for the personal use of the
possessor, his family and guests, nor prevent the making of wine, cider or other alcoholic liquor by a person from fruits, vegetables or grains, or
the products thereof, by simple fermentation and without distillation, if it is made solely for the use of the maker, his family and guests; and
provided further, that nothing herein contained shall prevent any duly licensed practicing physician or dentist from possessing or using alcoholic
liquor for the treatment of bona fide patients of a hospital or other institution; and provided further, that any drugstore employing a licensed
pharmacist may possess and use alcoholic liquors in the concoction of prescriptions of duly licensed physicians; and provided further, that the
possession and dispension of wine by an authorized representative of any church for the purpose of conducting any bona fide rite or religious
ceremony conducted by such church shall not be prohibited by this chapter. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
4-2-5: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
No retail liquor dealer's license shall be issued, renewed, or continued in existence for:
A. A person who is not a resident of the Village.
B. A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides.
C. A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
D. A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or State law, unless the Local Liquor Control Commissioner determines that
such person has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering matters set forth in such person's application and
the Commissioner's investigation. The burden of proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant.
E. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a house of ill fame.
F. A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
G. A person whose license issued under the Illinois Liquor Control Act or this chapter has been revoked for cause.
H. A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
I. A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof, or any limited partnership thereof, owning more than five percent (5%) of the aggregate
limited partnership interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason.
J. A corporation or limited liability company, if any member, officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the
aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason
other than citizenship and residence within the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 90/548
K. A corporation or limited liability company unless it is incorporated or organized in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation or foreign limited
liability company which is qualified under the business corporation act of 1983 or the limited liability company act to transact business in
Illinois.
L. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications
required by the licensee.
M. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic
liquor, subsequent to the effective date of the local liquor control act or has forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any
such violation.
N. A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued.
O. Any law enforcing public official, including the local liquor control commissioner, the president of the village board of trustees or any member
of a village board of trustees, and no such official shall have a direct interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor;
except, that a license may be granted to such official in relation to premises that is not located within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of
that official if the issuance of such license is approved by the state liquor control commission; and except, that a license may be granted to
any member of the village board of trustees in relation to premises that is located within the village if: 1) the sale of alcoholic liquor pursuant
to the license is incidental to the selling of food; 2) the issuance of the license is approved by the state commission; 3) the issuance of the
license is in accordance with all applicable local ordinances; and 4) the official granted a license does not vote on alcoholic liquor issues
pending before the board to which the license holder is elected. Notwithstanding any provision of this subsection to the contrary, a member
of the village board of trustees other than the president may have a direct interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor
as long as he or she is not a law enforcing public official or the village board president. To prevent any conflict of interest, the elected official
with the direct interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor cannot participate in any meetings, hearings, or decisions
on matters impacting the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor.
P. A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee.
Q. A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any of the subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11) of 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/28-1, or as proscribed by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-3, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as proscribed
by a statute replacing any of the aforesaid statutory provisions.
R. A person or entity to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government, unless the person or entity is eligible to be
issued a license under the raffles act3 or the Illinois pull tabs and jar games act4.
S. A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use or consumption on his or her licensed retail premises who does not have liquor liability
insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at least equal to the maximum liability amounts set out in 235 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/6-21, subsection (a). (2012 Code)
4-2-6: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. Contents: Written application for a retail liquor dealer's license shall be addressed to the local liquor control commissioner and filed with the
village clerk, signed by the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if the applicant shall be a corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and
shall contain the statements and information as set forth in this subsection. For the purposes of the requirements set forth in this section, the
term "applicant", as used in this subsection, shall include any and all persons, including corporations, required to be identified in subsection
A1 of this section.
1. For all applicants (including partners, stockholders, managers, agents and bartenders as set forth below), the full name, including middle
initial, date of birth, home and work addresses and home and work phone numbers, and social security numbers; in the case of a
partnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation, the date of incorporation, the state of
incorporation, and if such state be other than Illinois, upon which the corporation was certified as a foreign corporation entitled to conduct
business in the state of Illinois, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, the names and addresses of all stockholders if the
total number of stockholders is twenty (20) or less, but if the total number of stockholders is more than twenty (20), only those
stockholders owning more than a five percent (5%) interest in the corporation shall be required to be listed; in all cases, the names of and
information required in this section and section 4-2-5 of this chapter for any and all managers or agents conducting the business and
bartenders.
2. Citizenship of applicant and place of birth; and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of naturalization.
3. Character of business of the applicant; and in the case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
4. Length of time the applicant has been in business of that character; or in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was issued,
and a copy of the articles of incorporation.
5. Amount and nature of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time application is made.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 91/548
6. Location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license.
7. Statement whether or not any applicant has made application for a similar or other license on premises other than that described in the
application and the disposition of such other application.
8. Statement whether or not any applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or is otherwise disqualified to receive a license by reason of
any matter or thing contained in this chapter or any other ordinance of the village, or contained in the laws of the state of Illinois.
9. Statement whether or not any applicant's previous license issued by any state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government has
been revoked and the reasons therefor.
10. Statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state of Illinois, or of the United States, or any ordinance of the village
in the conduct of his place of business.
11. Evidence that the applicant has in force the insurance required by statute and this chapter. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
B. Form; Review; Compliance: Applications for a retail liquor dealer's license shall be on a form consistent with the terms of this chapter and
available from the village clerk. A copy of every completed application for a retail liquor dealer's license shall be forwarded by the village
clerk, upon receipt, to the local liquor control commissioner and to the village administrator and the police department for their review, the
results of which shall be promptly forwarded to the local liquor control commissioner. No license shall be issued of any class by the local
liquor control commissioner unless the application complies with all requirements of this chapter and the laws of the state of Illinois.
C. Service Fee; Legal, Planning And Consultant Fees: In the event that an applicant seeks a new liquor license classification or an amendment
to an existing classification, the applicant shall pay a five hundred dollar ($500.00) service fee. The applicant is further responsible for any
consultant review fees incurred by the village in excess of the initial service fee. No consideration shall be given to a new application for a
new liquor license classification or amendment to an existing classification until such service fee is paid, and no license shall be granted to
the applicant upon approval of the classification or amendment until such time as the applicant has paid all legal, planning and consulting
fees. (Ord. 2009-35, 9-29-2009)
4-2-6-1: APPLICATION FEE:
Each application for a new liquor license shall be accompanied by an application fee in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to cover
administrative costs in the review of said initial application. There shall be no application fee due for license classes C and T and a Family Fest
supplemental license. (Ord. 2009-35, 9-29-2009)
4-2-7: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
No license shall be issued hereunder unless the applicant shall file with his application a certificate by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the state of Illinois, certifying that the applicant has in force and in effect insurance sufficient to cover the limits of liability established
by 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-21 for the full term of the license period, and any other statutory requirement or requirements under local
ordinances. Such evidence shall be submitted yearly for license renewal, and the insurance shall be kept in effect constantly during the
existence of the license. Each such policy of insurance shall contain a provision requiring thirty (30) days' prior notice to the local liquor control
commissioner before it can be canceled by the insurance company, and that provision shall be indicated on all certificates of insurance required
herein. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
4-2-8: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES; FEES:
There shall be the following classes of licenses with the respective fees as indicated:
A. Class P, Packaged Liquor Sales: A class P license shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in sealed packages but not for consumption
on the premises where sold.
1. P-1 License: Incidental sales, where the retail sale of alcoholic liquor is incidental to the sale of any other goods and products. Such
licenses shall only be issued to business establishments with a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area; provided, that
the maximum area dedicated to the sale of alcoholic liquor shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total floor area. The retail sale of
alcoholic liquor ordered by telephone, facsimile or other similar method and delivered, mailed or shipped to the purchaser or any other
party is prohibited, except under a separate approval process and payment of an additional fee as noted in subsection A4a of this section.
The annual fee for such license shall be one thousand seven hundred fifty dollars ($1,750.00).
2. P-2 License: Primary sales, where the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in sealed packages is not incidental to the sale of any other goods or
products, subject to any and all conditions set forth in any special use permit ordinances pertaining to the location. The annual fee for such
license is one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a business establishment with a maximum floor area below eight thousand
(8,000) square feet, and two thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($2,250.00) for a business establishment with a maximum floor area of
eight thousand (8,000) square feet or greater. The retail sale of alcoholic liquor ordered by telephone, facsimile or other similar method,
delivered, mailed or shipped to the purchaser or any other party is prohibited, except where separate approval and additional fees have
been secured as noted in subsection A4a of this section.
3. P-3 License: Package sales allowed as an adjunct to a grocery establishment wherein the area set aside for groceries is a minimum of
two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of floor space. The preliminary purpose of the grocery establishment being the sale of food
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 92/548
and food items with the area set aside for liquor sales not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet of total floor area which may include
refrigerated space and/or total floor area. The sale of individual beer can and/or bottle is prohibited as is any sampling for purposes of
marketing the sale of wine or beer for off premises consumption. The advertisement of beer and wine sales on windows and/or exterior
signage is prohibited. The annual fee for such license is one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). (Ord. 2015-51, 12-7-2015)
4. Additional Services, Limitations And Fees:
a. Telephone And Internet Sales: Telephone and internet sales of alcoholic liquor in sealed packages for consumption off the premises
shall be permitted only after obtaining a driver's license number or verifying that such license number is currently on file establishing that
the person placing the order is twenty one (21) years of age or older. The liquor licensee shall have full responsibility for proof of age as
with any other type of transaction involving the sale of alcoholic liquor. Deliveries of alcoholic liquor is limited to the use of United Parcel
Service or similar entity, and all packages must have a label requiring a signature, upon delivery, of a person twenty one (21) years of
age or older, and deliveries may only be accepted by persons twenty one (21) years of age or older. A written record shall be made at
the time of delivery showing that delivery was made to a person twenty one (21) years of age or older. Said records shall be maintained
for a period of two (2) years for village auditing purposes. Direct delivery utilizing the employees or other agents of the licensee shall be
prohibited, except when delivery is to another employee of the licensee. The additional annual fee for this additional service shall be
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
b. Sampling: For purposes of marketing the sale of wine, wine coolers or premium beers for off premises consumption, the holder of a
valid class P liquor license may offer for consumption on the licensed premises wine, wine coolers, or premium beer samplings, not to
exceed two (2) one-ounce samples per patron during any business day. Sampling distribution for P-1 licensees shall be conducted
within or immediately adjacent to an area containing wine and/or beer for retail sale and shall be no closer than fifteen feet (15') from the
closest interior edge of any checkout lane. A person otherwise qualified under this section to deliver wine and beer shall be present and
deliver all samples to potential customers. (Ord. 2009-35, 9-29-2009; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2015-51, 12-7-2015)
B. Class D, Dining: A class D license permits the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold and not for
resale in any form. Such licenses shall only be issued to dining establishments where the service of alcoholic beverages is ancillary and
incidental to service of food. (Ord. 2017-11, 3-27-2017)
1. D-1, Beer And Wine Only: Sale in the original package for consumption off the premises is prohibited. Such licenses shall only be issued
to a dining establishment with ten (10) to one hundred forty (140) seats; seats in excess of one hundred forty (140) (excluding outdoor
seating) are subject to additional fees as noted in subsection B3a(1) of this section. The annual fee for such license shall be one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00).
2. D-2, Full Liquor Service: Sale in the original package for consumption off the premises is prohibited, except under recorking permission
noted in subsection B3b of this section. Such licenses shall only be issued to dining establishments with ten (10) to one hundred forty
(140) seats (excluding outdoor seating); seats in excess of one hundred forty (140) (excluding outdoor seating) are subject to additional
fees as noted in subsection B3a(1) of this section. The annual fee for such license shall be one thousand seven hundred fifty dollars
($1,750.00). Dining establishments with a special use permit for amusement games are subject to an additional fee as noted under
subsection B3a(4) of this section. (Ord. 2009-35, 9-29-2009; amd. 2012 Code)
a. BP, Brewpub: A restaurant-brewery that sells its beer on site. The beer is brewed primarily for sale in the restaurant and bar. The beer is
often dispensed directly from the brewery's storage tanks. Where permitted by the establishment's liquor license, the brewpub may be
permitted to sell beer that is produced and packaged in a sealed container on site, "to go". Such licenses shall only be issued to a dining
establishment with ten (10) to one hundred forty (140) seats; seats in excess of one hundred forty (140) (excluding outdoor seating) are
subject to additional fees as noted in subsection B3a(1) of this section. The annual fee for such license shall be one thousand seven
hundred fifty dollars ($1,750.00). Brewpubs are required to meet all applicable federal and state licensing standards. (Ord. 2017-11, 3-
27-2017)
3. Additional Services, Limitations And Fees:
a. Additional License Fees:
(1) Dining establishments with a dining area in excess of one hundred forty (140) seats (excluding outdoor seating) are subject to an
additional license fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
(2) Dining establishments with a D-2 full liquor license may request extended closing hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M., Monday through
Friday, and two o'clock (2:00) A.M., Saturday and Sunday, for an additional license fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(3) Dining establishments with full liquor and dining area in excess of one hundred forty (140) seats (excluding outdoor seating) may
request extended closing hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M., Monday through Friday, and three o'clock (3:00) A.M., Saturday and
Sunday, for an additional license fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
(4) Dining establishments with full liquor and a special use permit for amusement devices are required to pay an additional license fee of
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
(5) Dining establishments with full liquor and a special use permit for live entertainment and/or dancing (excluding strolling musicians
and smaller musical ensembles) are required to pay an additional license fee of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 2014-14,
3-24-2014)
b. Sealing And Removal Of Open Wine Bottles From Restaurants; Recorking: Dining establishments with a class D liquor license may
permit a patron to remove one unsealed and partially consumed bottle of wine for off premises consumption, provided said patron
purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine with the meal on the restaurant premises. The licensee shall provide a
dated receipt for the bottle of wine to the patron. The partially consumed bottle of wine must be securely sealed by the licensee prior to
removal from the premises and placed in a transparent, onetime use, tamperproof bag.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 93/548
c. Bring Your Own Bottle "BYOB": Patrons of dining establishments are prohibited from bringing in their own bottles of alcoholic beverages
for consumption on dining establishment premises without a class D-2 liquor license. Patrons are permitted to bring a bottle of wine into
dining establishments with a class D-2 liquor license, subject to the approval and any applicable "corking fee" of the class D-2 dining
establishment, and provided said wine bottle is opened by and served by waitstaff in accordance with this chapter.
C. Class G, Golf Course And Clubhouse: A class G license permits the retail sale of liquor for consumption only on the premises where sold in
conjunction with the operation of a golf course and clubhouse. The annual fee for such license shall be two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
D. Class T, Temporary: A class T license permits the temporary retail sale of beer, wine and wine coolers for consumption only on the premises
where sold, and not for resale in any form, to be issued for temporary stands, booths and counters such as used at picnics, celebrations and
the like, with specific locations designated on the license. Such licenses shall only be issued to civic, patriotic, fraternal, educational,
religious or benevolent organizations. There shall be no fee for a class T liquor license.
The class T license for Family Fest is a supplemental license available only to village business establishments in good standing holding a
class D liquor license. The supplemental license shall provide a certificate of insurance of liquor liability (dramshop) coverage, specifically
referencing the Family Fest, its location and dates, and naming the village of Bloomingdale as an "additional insured" for such coverage. The
supplemental license shall be considered part of the regular, current liquor license. Any and all violations of this chapter involving the sale of
liquor at the Family Fest pursuant to this supplemental license shall also accrue to the primary license itself, subjecting the primary license to
suspension or revocation as provided in section 4-2-27 of this chapter.
E. Class C, Churches, Civic Groups And Clubs: A class C license permits the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the premises
of churches, not for profit civic groups or organized clubs, such sales to be made only to members of said church, civic group or club and
their guests. The annual fee for such license shall be based on the number of members in place at the time of issuance, as follows, and shall
be subject to change upon renewal of such license:
Churches and civic groups $ 0.00
Clubs 500 members or less 500.00
Clubs over 500 members 1,000.00
The number of members shall be furnished by a sworn statement by an officer of the club, indicating the number of members in good
standing at the time of application, or at the time of renewal of said license. If, during the term of the license, the membership decreases to
a lower fee, there shall be no refund of license fees paid for that year. No class C license shall be issued until it has been determined by
the local liquor control commissioner that the entity applying for the license is organized for some purpose or object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 2009-35, 9-29-2009; amd. 2012 Code)
F. Class H, Hotel: A class H license permits the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the premises where sold, where such
establishment is located within a hotel or under separate ownership within a resort and is limited to a single location within the facility. A
class H license shall also permit the retail sale of packaged beer and wine at the front hotel reception desk. All packaged beer and wine shall
be contained within an enclosed area not to exceed thirty five (35) cubic feet, with said inventory and sale under direct and constant
supervision of an employee of the hotel who is twenty one (21) years of age and BASSET certified. All beer and wine inventory must be
properly secured when not under direct supervision. The annual fee for such license shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a lounge
with a maximum seating capacity of fifty (50) persons, and one thousand seven hundred fifty dollars ($1,750.00) for a lounge with a seating
capacity in excess of fifty (50) persons. (Ord. 2013-10, 2-11-2013)
G. Class R, Resort: A class R license permits the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption at more than one location on the premises within
the resort facility, including, but not limited to: golf course, restaurants, banquet facilities, room service, and in room minibars. A class R
license shall also permit the retail sale of wine in sealed bottles within the resort, resort restaurants and pro shop, for consumption either on
or off the premises where sold. Off site promotion of said packaged wine sales is strictly prohibited. The annual license fee shall be the sum
of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), plus the sum of six hundred dollars ($600.00) for each principal location upon the premises from which
any alcoholic liquor is sold at retail. (Ord. 2009-35, 9-29-2009; amd. 2012 Code)
H. Class O, Off Premises Liquor Sales: A class O license permits the off premises retail sale of alcoholic liquor in connection with the operation
of a catering business. The sale of alcoholic liquor shall be made in conjunction with the catering of prepared foods for private functions and
for consumption only on the premises where the food is catered (except where permitted in subsection H4 of this section). The sale of
alcoholic liquor shall be incidental to the food service (except where permitted in subsection H4 of this section) and if the catered event does
not qualify as a private function, a class T temporary liquor license shall also be required for the location of the catered event. No cash bar
shall be permitted (except where permitted in subsection H4 of this section). Permitted hours: eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. Monday through
Friday, eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. Saturday and Sunday to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight Sunday through Thursday, one o'clock (1:00) A.M.
Friday and Saturday. The fee for such license shall be as follows:
1. Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for catering business headquartered in the village that also holds a class D or G village liquor license. The
initial application fee is waived, provided the ownership and management is consistent with their class D or G village liquor license.
2. One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for catering business headquartered in the village without a class D or G village liquor license.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 94/548
3. Two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for a catering business not headquartered in the village. In addition to complying with all other
application requirements, the catering business must furnish a copy of both their state of Illinois and municipal catering liquor license. The
application fee is waived provided the issuing municipality performed proper background checks on the licensee and manager.
4. One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a catering business with an exclusive agreement with Scottish Rite to sell and serve alcoholic liquor
for consumption on their premises at 383 East Lake Street, Bloomingdale, Illinois. The initial application fee is waived, if both the catering
business ownership and management is consistent with a current class D or G village liquor license. (Ord. 2012-10, 2-13-2012)
I. Class E, Entertainment: A class E entertainment license permits the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where
sold and not for resale in any form. Sale in the original package for consumption off the premises is prohibited. Such licenses shall only be
issued to establishments with a total floor area equal to or greater than thirty five thousand (35,000) square feet, with a special use permit for
game rooms and/or live entertainment, and where the service of alcoholic beverages is ancillary and incidental to entertainment services.
1. E-1, beer and wine only: The annual fee for such license shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
2. E-2, full liquor service: The annual fee for such license shall be three thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($3,250.00). (Ord. 2014-04, 1-27-
2014)
J. Class V, Video Gaming: A class V video gaming supplemental license permits the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises where sold and not for resale in any form, plus the operation of video gaming terminals (VGT) subject to the following conditions:
1. Applications for a supplemental class V video gaming supplemental license shall only be accepted from establishments "in good standing"
with the village with a class D-2 full liquor service, class H hotel, or class R resort liquor license.
2. A class V video gaming license shall only be issued to establishments where both the service of alcoholic liquor and video gaming is
ancillary and incidental, and when the establishment has been authorized to operate video gaming terminals (VGT) by a license issued by
the state of Illinois gaming board pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Gaming Act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq.
3. A license fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per video gaming terminal (VGT) shall be charged to all Class V supplemental licenses in
addition to any and all applicable Class D-2 full liquor service, Class H hotel, or Class R resort license fees.
4. The initial application fee, as outlined in section 4-2-6-1 of this chapter, shall be waived for a Class V license application.
5. Location, screening and supervision requirements set forth in subsection 4-2-18D of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-51, 12-7-2015)
K. Class GR, Grocery/Retailer: A Class GR shall authorize the retail sale of packaged alcoholic liquors for consumption off the premises and the
sale of spirits, beer, wine and sake for consumption on the premises as an incidental part of a grocery store that has a minimum gross floor
area of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. Class GR licenses shall be subject to the following conditions and limitations for the sale of
alcohol, in original packages, unopened only as follows:
1. Not more than ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area shall be devoted to the sale of liquor products.
2. Alcohol sold in original packages and intended for off premises consumption shall not be opened or consumed on the premises or in any
designated seating/serving area.
3. Wine/beer tasting shall be permitted on such premises in accordance with State law.
4. The sale of liquor intended for consumption on the premises shall be limited to individual servings of spirits, beer, wine or sake.
5. The sale of spirits, beer, wine or sake, for consumption on the premises, shall be served only in a designated seating/serving area, which
includes an area where food is prepared and regularly served on the premises. Such food shall include hot or cold sandwiches,
appetizers, tapas, sushi, baked goods or other similar foods.
6. The consumption of spirits, beer, wine and sake on the premises shall be permitted in the designated seating/serving area as well as the
shopping areas throughout the premises; however, the licensee shall mark, with conspicuous signage, the area past which consumption of
spirits, beer, wine and sake is no longer permitted.
7. The designated seating/serving area for customers consuming spirits, beer, wine or sake on the premises shall be limited to five percent
(5%) of the gross floor area.
8. It is intended that the service of spirits, beer, wine and sake is merely adjunct to the operation of a grocery store and that the facility shall
not be advertised or otherwise held out to be a drinking establishment.
9. Hours for the sale of packaged alcoholic liquor, for consumption off the premises shall be in accordance with this Code but in no case
shall the sale of spirits, beer, wine or sake take place outside of the normal business hours of the grocery store.
10. The establishment does not engage in the retail sale of goods outside of groceries such as, but not limited to, clothing, shoes, home
goods, electronics, and sporting goods.
11. The annual fee for such license shall be two thousand seven hundred fifty dollars ($2,750.00). (Ord. 2017-11, 3-27-2017)
L. Class MB, Microbrewery: A business establishment where malt beverages of alcoholic content are produced for distribution, retail or
wholesale, on or off premises, with a capacity of less than fifteen thousand (15,000) U.S. barrels of beer per calendar year. The
establishment may include, as an ancillary use, an onsite taste testing area and other uses such as a restaurant or tavern as permitted by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 95/548
the Village of Bloomingdale zoning ordinance and/or Liquor Commissioner. Such licenses shall only be issued to an establishment of at least
three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet with at least seven hundred (700) square feet dedicated to the specific purpose of brewing
malt beverages of alcoholic content. The annual fee for such license shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Microbreweries
are required to meet all applicable Federal and State licensing standards and laws. (Ord. 2018-15, 4-23-2018)
M. Class MT, Movie Theater: A Class MT movie theater license permits the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises
where sold and not for resale in any form. Sale in the original package for consumption off the premises is prohibited. Such licenses shall
only be issued to establishments with a total floor area equal to or greater than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet, with the primary purpose
of showing films with a minimum of sixteen (16) individual theaters, and where the service of alcoholic beverages is ancillary and incidental
to movie theater.
1. MT-1, beer and wine only: The annual fee for such license shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
2. MT-2, full liquor service: The annual fee for such license shall be three thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($3,250.00). (Ord. 2017-11, 3-
27-2017)
4-2-9: PAYMENT, DISPOSITION AND PRORATION OF FEES:
All required application fees shall be paid to the village clerk at the time the application is filed, and shall be forthwith turned over to the village
finance director-treasurer. In the event the license applied for is denied, any license fee paid shall be returned to the applicant; if the license is
granted, then the license fee shall be deposited in the general corporate fund or in such other fund as shall have been designated by the
president and board of trustees by proper action. There shall be no refund of fees paid for any license that is used for less than the one year
period. Initial license fees shall be prorated on a quarterly basis. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003; amd. 2012 Code)
4-2-10: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
The total number of all licenses issued for each class in force at any one time shall not exceed the number as established by the board of
trustees from time to time by ordinance, as set forth on exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003; amd.
Ord. 2014-04, 1-27-2014)
4-2-11: TERM OF LICENSE:
Each retail liquor dealer's license issued hereunder shall expire on December 31 following the issuance thereof; provided, however, that a class
T license shall be valid for the dates and times specified on the license. The normal licensing period shall be from January 1 through December
31 of each year, unless a license is issued or terminated at some other time during the year for individual circumstances. (Ord. 2009-35, 9-29-
2009)
4-2-12: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
A. A retail liquor dealer's license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for a period not to exceed one year after issuance (unless sooner
revoked or terminated as herein provided), and shall not constitute property; nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment, or execution;
nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated.
B. The license shall cease and terminate upon the death of the licensee and shall not descend by the laws of the state or intestate succession;
provided, however, that the executor or administrator of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt
licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor under the order of a court of competent jurisdiction, may exercise the
privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy, until the
expiration of such license, but in no event for a period longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee.
The executor or administrator of the estate or a business representative of any deceased owner, partner, or shareholder owning five percent
(5%) or more of a licensed business shall immediately notify in writing the local liquor control commissioner of such death and indicate what
changes in ownership and/or management will result from the death. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
4-2-13: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every licensee shall cause his license or licenses to be framed and hung in plain view of the public in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
4-2-14: CHANGE OF LOCATION OR OWNERSHIP:
A. Location Change: A license issued hereunder shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application and
license. Such location may be changed only when and upon written authorization to make such change shall be issued by the local liquor
control commissioner. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location complies with the provisions and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 96/548
regulations of section 4-2-18 of this chapter and applicable zoning regulations. A request for change of location shall be sent to the village
administrator. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
B. Ownership Change: Any change of officers, directors, stockholders with more than five percent (5%) interest in the corporation, or manager
must be approved pursuant to section 4-2-5 or 4-2-6 of this chapter. The licensee shall file the required documents with the village clerk not
later than the effective date of the proposed change, along with a one hundred dollar ($100.00) change review fee. Any such change shall
be subject to the final approval of the local liquor control commissioner as provided in this chapter. Any change in ownership of the licensee,
which shall herein mean a controlling interest in any legal entity, or if an individual or partnership, a different individual or a change in the
partners, shall be treated as an application for a new license. (Ord. 2009-35, 9-29-2009)
4-2-15: RENEWAL OF LICENSE; LATE FILING FEE:
A. Any licensee may apply for the renewal of his license at the expiration thereof; provided, that he is then qualified to receive a license, and the
premises for which such renewal license is sought is suitable for such purpose; provided further, that such renewal privilege shall not be
construed as a vested right which shall limit or prevent the decreasing of the number of licenses to be issued within the village.
B. All applications for renewal and payment of the annual license fee shall be submitted to the village clerk not later than November 30 of each
year. Such applications shall be made and processed in the manner provided in sections 4-2-5, 4-2-6, 4-2-7 and 4-2-11 of this chapter, and
all requirements of those sections must be met yearly for renewal. The local liquor control commissioner may authorize the use of shorter
forms for license renewal for licensees to indicate only any changes in the information submitted for the previous year. For any renewal
application submitted after December 15, there shall be a twenty percent (20%) surcharge added to the basic license fee. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-
27-2003)
4-2-16: HOURS OF OPERATION:
A. No alcoholic liquor shall be consumed in or on any premises for which a liquor license has been issued during any period of time during
which this chapter prohibits the sale of alcoholic liquor. All alcoholic liquor which is served during those hours when the serving of alcoholic
liquor is permitted but which is not consumed must be removed from all tables, counters and serving surface areas within fifteen (15)
minutes after the permitted hours end. Only employees of a licensee actually engaged in cleaning up the premises or other job activities
shall be allowed to remain on the premises after closing hours. The following schedule delineates the permitted hours that alcoholic
beverages can be served on the licensed premises, by liquor class: (Ord. 2009-35, 9-29-2009; amd. 2012 Code)
BP, Brewpub - full liquor service:
Sunday - Thursday 10:00
A.M.
1:00 A.M. Monday - Friday
Friday - Saturday 10:00
A.M.
2:00 A.M. Saturday and Sunday
C, Churches, civic groups and clubs:
Sunday - Saturday 11:00
A.M.
12:00 midnight
D-1, Dining - beer and wine:
Sunday - Thursday 11:00
A.M.
12:00 midnight
Friday 11:00
A.M.
1:00 A.M. Saturday
Saturday 11:00
A.M.
1:00 A.M. Sunday
D-2, Dining - full liquor service:
Monday - Thursday 11:00
A.M.
12:00 midnight
Liquor Class Open Close
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 97/548
Friday 11:00
A.M.
1:00 A.M. Saturday
Saturday 8:00
A.M.
1:00 A.M. Sunday
Sunday 8:00
A.M.
12:00 midnight
Later closing hours available subject to additional fees noted in subsections
4-2-8B3a(2) and B3a(3) of this chapter
D-2, Dining - full liquor service with 1 hour
late close:
Monday - Thursday 11:00
A.M.
1:00 A.M. Tuesday - Friday
Friday 11:00
A.M.
2:00 A.M. Saturday
Saturday 8:00
A.M.
2:00 A.M. Sunday
Sunday 8:00
A.M.
1:00 A.M. Monday
D-2, Dining - full liquor service with 2 hour
late close (140+ seats):
Monday - Thursday 11:00
A.M.
2:00 A.M. Tuesday - Friday
Friday 11:00
A.M.
3:00 A.M. Saturday
Saturday 8:00
A.M.
3:00 A.M. Sunday
Sunday 8:00
A.M.
2:00 A.M. Monday
E, Entertainment:
Sunday - Saturday 10:00
A.M.
2:00 A.M. Monday - Sunday
G, Golf course and clubhouse:
Sunday - Thursday 7:00
A.M.
1:00 A.M. Monday - Friday*
Friday 7:00
A.M.
2:00 A.M. Saturday*
Saturday 7:00
A.M.
2:00 A.M. Sunday*
*Service on the golf course stops at dusk
GR, Grocery store:
Sunday - Saturday 7:00
A.M.
12:00 midnight (off premises same as P-1 license)
Sunday - Saturday 11:00
A.M.
10:00 P.M. (on premises)
Liquor Class Open Close
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 98/548
H, Hotel:
Sunday - Saturday 5:00
P.M.
10:30 P.M.
R resort service hours apply for lounges located within a resort
MB, Microbrewery:
Monday - Thursday 11:00
A.M.
12:00 midnight
Friday 11:00
A.M.
1:00 A.M. Saturday
Saturday 8:00
A.M.
1:00 A.M. Sunday
Sunday 8:00
A.M.
12:00 midnight
MT, Movie theater - full liquor service:
Monday - Thursday 11:00
A.M.
12:00 midnight
Friday 11:00
A.M.
1:00 A.M. Saturday
Saturday 11:00
A.M.
1:00 A.M. Sunday
Sunday 11:00
A.M.
12:00 midnight
P-1, Packaged liquor - incidental sales:
Sunday - Saturday 7:00
A.M.
12:00 midnight
P-2, Packaged liquor - primary sales:
Sunday - Saturday 9:00
A.M.
10:00 P.M.
P-3, Packaged liquor - incidental sales:
Sunday - Saturday 7:00
A.M.
12:00 midnight (same as the P-1 license)
R, Resort:
Sunday - Thursday 7:00
A.M.
2:00 A.M. Monday - Friday*
Friday 7:00
A.M.
3:00 A.M. Saturday*
Saturday 7:00
A.M.
3:00 A.M. Sunday*
*Service on the golf course stops at dusk
T, Temporary:
Liquor Class Open Close
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 99/548
Sunday - Saturday 7:00
A.M.
12:00 midnight
Not to precede or exceed posted event hours
V, Video gaming Subject to the hours of the primary Class D-2 full liquor service, H hotel or R resort
liquor license
(Ord. 2009-35, 9-29-2009; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-04, 1-27-2014; Ord. 2014-11, 2-24-2014; Ord. 2014-14, 3-24-2014; Ord. 2015-51,
12-7-2015; Ord. 2016-30, 8-8-2016; Ord. 2017-11, 3-27-2017; Ord. 2018-15, 4-23-2018)
B. On January 1 (New Year's Day morning), closing hours for all classes, with the exception of Classes C and T, shall be extended for one hour,
provided no establishment serves after three o'clock (3:00) A.M. No establishment with a liquor license shall be affected by the time change
that occurs with daylight saving time. For purposes of this chapter, liquor establishments are to treat the time change as having no effect on
business hours. Liquor establishments shall not remain open for an additional hour in the fall season when clocks fall back from two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) A.M., and will not lose an hour in the spring season when clocks spring forward from two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
to three o'clock (3:00) A.M. (Ord. 2009-35, 9-29-2009; amd. 2012 Code)
4-2-17: HAPPY HOURS PROHIBITED:
A. All retail licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served or consumed on the licensed
premises.
B. No retail licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall:
1. Sell, offer to sell, or serve any drink of alcoholic liquor to any person on any one date at a reduced price other than that charged other
purchasers of drinks on that day where such reduced price is a promotion to encourage consumption of alcoholic liquor, or where pricing
is such that it encourages excessive consumption of alcoholic liquor as determined by the liquor control commissioner, except as
authorized in subsection C7 of this section.
2. Serve two (2) or more drinks at any one time to one person for consumption by that one person, except for conducting product sampling
or selling of wine or beer flights or delivering of beer by the pitcher, or wine by the bottle or carafe, as provided in subsection C of this
section.
3. Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price,
except at private functions not open to the public.
4. Deliver alcoholic beverages to patrons free of charge, except at private functions not open to the public.
5. Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink or the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor without increasing proportionately the
price regularly charged for such drink on that day.
6. Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of
alcoholic liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises.
7. Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed premises, any of the above prohibited practices.
C. The prohibited practices in this section shall not prohibit licensees from:
1. Offering free food or entertainment (with proper permit and zoning) at any time;
2. Including a drink as part of a meal or hotel services package;
3. Offering free wine or beer tasting;
4. Offering room service to registered guests in hotels licensed for such service;
5. Negotiating drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract between a hotel or multiuse establishment and another group for the holding of
any function, meeting, convention or trade show;
6. Selling pitchers (or the equivalent including, but not limited to, buckets), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in
such manner, or selling bottles of spirits, and delivered to two (2) or more persons at one time;
7. Increasing prices of drinks of alcoholic liquor in lieu of, in whole or in part, a cover charge to offset the cost of special entertainment not
regularly scheduled; or
8. Selling of a wine or beer flight to one person, not to exceed a total of twelve (12) ounces. (Ord. 2015-51, 12-7-2015)
Liquor Class Open Close
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 100/548
4-2-18: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. Restrictions: No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school other
than an institution of higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children, or any military or
naval station; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants,
food shops or other places where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on, nor to the renewal of a license for the
sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within one hundred feet (100') of any church or school where the church or school has been
established within such one hundred feet (100') since the issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the distance of one
hundred feet (100') shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used for worship services or educational programs and not to
property boundaries. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Majority Of Customers Under Twenty One: No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor, except wine
and beer, at any store or other place of business where the majority of customers are under the age of twenty one (21) years, or where the
principal business transacted consists of schoolbooks, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for anyone under the age of twenty one (21)
years.
C. Where Consumption Occurs: Except as specifically authorized in the granting of a license concerning the location of facilities for service and
consumption of alcoholic beverages, and applicable special use permits, all service and consumption of alcoholic beverages subject to the
provisions of this chapter shall occur only inside a building of a licensed premises. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
D. Location, Screening And Supervision: Video gaming terminals shall be situated in an area restricted to patrons twenty one (21) years of age
or older. Said area shall be under direct and constant supervision of an employee of the establishment who is twenty one (21) years of age
or older and BASSET certified. The video gaming area shall be screened from view by patrons who are less than twenty one (21) years of
age. (Ord. 2014-11, 2-24-2014)
4-2-19: CLEAR VIEW OF PREMISES; LIGHTING:
A. In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor is licensed under class P, no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be
permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside such premises which shall prevent a clear view into the
interior of such licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times; and no booth, screen, partition, or other obstruction nor any
arrangement of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such premises which shall prevent a clear view of the entire
interior from the street, road or sidewalk. All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption on the premises shall be continuously lighted during
business hours by natural light or artificial white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In case the view
into any such licensed premises required by this subsection shall be wilfully obscured by the licensee or by him wilfully permitted to be
obscured or in any manner obstructed, then such license shall be subject to revocation in the manner herein provided. In order to enforce
the provisions of this subsection, the local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to require the filing with him of plans, drawings
and photographs showing the clearance of the view as required in this subsection. (Ord. 2009-35, 9-29-2009)
B. Notwithstanding any other ordinance of the village, every parking lot of a licensed premises shall be adequately lighted at night so that police
officers, other law enforcement officers and members of the public can adequately view the area for security purposes. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-
27-2003)
4-2-20: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
A. Premises: All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for the storage of such liquor for sale shall be kept in full compliance with
applicable laws regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
B. Employees: It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is
a carrier of, any contagious, infectious or sexually transmitted disease; and it shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or is a
carrier of such disease to work in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor.
(Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003; amd. 2012 Code)
4-2-21: SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor dealer's license to sell, deliver, or give away, or to allow others to sell, deliver or give away,
any alcoholic liquor to an intoxicated person. (Ord. 2005-17, 4-11-2005)
4-2-22: MINORS:
A. Purchase, Possession, Consumption Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to purchase,
obtain, possess or consume, except as provided under subsection F of this section, any alcoholic liquor in the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 101/548
B. Misrepresentation Of Age:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any tavern
or other place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold.
2. It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, for the purpose of buying, accepting, or receiving alcoholic liquor from
a liquor licensee of the village, to represent that he is twenty one (21) years of age or over, or to present, offer, or possess any false or
fraudulent written, printed, or photostat evidence of age or identity, or such identification which is not his own.
C. Signs Posted: In every tavern or other place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold, there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent
place a printed card which shall be supplied by the village clerk, which card shall read substantially as follows: (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
WARNING TO MINORS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 YEARS
Any person under the age of 21 years who, for the purpose of buying, accepting or receiving alcoholic liquor from a liquor licensee of
the Village, represents that he is 21 years of age or over, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of the Village Code.
(Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003; amd. 2012 Code)
D. Presence On Premises: It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor dealer's license, or his or her agent or employee, to suffer or
permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to sit or stand at a bar counter or the location at or from which a bartender actually
prepares or serves alcoholic drinks; provided, that this subsection shall not apply to any such person who is accompanied by his or her
parent or legal guardian.
E. Sales, Providing To, Permitting Consumption: It shall be unlawful to sell, give or deliver, except as provided in subsections F2 and F3 of this
section, alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years; and it shall be unlawful for a licensee, his agents, or another
person knowingly to allow a person under the age of twenty one (21) years to consume alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
F. Employment:
1. No person who is under the age of twenty one (21) years shall perform service as a bartender or draw, mix or pour (including wine pouring
at tables) any alcoholic liquor within any premises for which a retail liquor license has been issued, except as provided in subsection F3 of
this section.
2. No person who is under the age of nineteen (19) years shall serve any alcoholic liquor as a waiter or waitress within any premises for
which a retail liquor license has been issued.
3. Nothing contained in subsections F1 and F2 of this section shall be construed to prohibit persons of the age of nineteen (19) years or
older from pouring, mixing or adding a nonalcoholic beverage to a prepoured or mixed alcoholic liquor beverage; provided such act by a
person of the age of nineteen (19) years or older is performed as an incidental act to such person's employment as a waiter or waitress
whose primary function is limited to serving food and beverage within premises for which a retail liquor license has been issued; and
provided further, that such act does not constitute tending a bar.
4. No person who is under the age of twenty one (21) years shall sell packaged liquor at a retail establishment for which a packaged liquor
license has been issued. (Ord. 2008-47, 10-15-2008, eff. 1-1-2009)
G. Violations:
1. It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian to permit his child or a person under his custody, supervision and control to violate any
provisions of this section. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
2. In addition to all other fines and penalties, the local liquor control commissioner may suspend or revoke the retail liquor dealer's license for
any violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003; amd. 2012 Code)
4-2-22-1: RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS OR GUARDIAN:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the following stated meanings:
INTENTIONALLY: A person acts "intentionally" when he has the conscious objective to accomplish a result or engage in the conduct that he
is in fact performing.
KNOWINGLY: A person acts "knowingly" when he is consciously aware of the nature or attendant circumstances of his conduct.
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a circuit court of the state, but does not include a person
appointed guardian or given custody under the juvenile court act.
MINOR: Any unemancipated person over seven (7) years of age but not yet twenty one (21) years of age.
NEGLIGENTLY: A person acts "negligently" when he fails to be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or that a
result will follow and where such failure constitutes a substantial deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 102/548
exercise in the situation.
PARENTS: Includes the father and mother of a minor child, whether by birth or adoption, or shall be deemed the parent having legal custody
of the minor in the event the parents are divorced or separated. The "parent", as used in this section, also shall be deemed to mean "legal
guardian".
RECKLESSLY: A person acts "recklessly" when he consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or
that a result will follow and where such disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would
exercise in the situation. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Responsibility For Minors:
1. No parent shall give or deliver alcoholic liquor to his or her minor child for the minor's consumption unless the consumption of alcoholic
liquor by such minor is in the performance of a religious service or ceremony under the direction, supervision and approval of the parent of
such minor in the privacy of a home or established religious building.
2. No parent shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or negligently give or deliver alcoholic liquor to, or permit the possession of alcoholic
liquor by, his or her minor child, or any other person under the age of twenty one (21), unless such minor or person under the age of
twenty one (21) is making a delivery of such alcoholic liquor pursuant to order of his parent, in pursuance of his employment or otherwise
as allowed by subsection B1 of this section.
3. No parent shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or negligently give, deliver, invite or permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor by any
minor on or about any premises owned, leased or controlled by such parent except as otherwise allowed by subsection B1 of this section.
4. Parents shall restrain or prevent their minor children from consuming alcoholic liquor where the parent knows or, in the exercise of
ordinary care, should know of a substantial probability that his or her minor child is consuming or will consume alcoholic liquor under
circumstances which would violate the provisions of this section, the Illinois liquor control act, or any other ordinances or statutes.
5. Parents who know, or in the exercise of ordinary care should know, of a substantial probability that their minor child has consumed, is
consuming or will consume alcoholic liquor in violation of this section, the Illinois liquor control act, or any other ordinances, statutes or
amendments thereto shall restrain or prevent their minor child from operating or driving a motor vehicle on the public streets and ways of
the village in violation of any ordinance, law or statute.
6. Parents who know, or in the exercise of ordinary care should know, of a substantial probability that their minor child has consumed or will
consume alcoholic liquor in violation of this section, the Illinois liquor control act, or any other ordinances, statutes or amendments thereto
shall restrain or prevent their minor child from committing acts which constitute vandalism, theft, disorderly conduct, the unjustifiable use of
force, or the violation of any ordinance, law or statute. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
4-2-23: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
A. Disorderly Conduct And Violations Of Law:
1. All licensees hereunder shall have the affirmative duty of reporting to the on duty radio dispatcher of the Bloomingdale police department
any and all incidents of disorderly conduct or any and all criminal violations or violations of this chapter which take place within or upon
premises for which a liquor license has been issued pursuant to this chapter immediately upon observance or notification of the incident.
The licensee, employee or agent making a report of an incident shall identify himself or herself to the police dispatcher and state the
nature of the incident.
2. For purposes of this chapter, "disorderly conduct", as used herein, shall mean such act or behavior of any person which, in any
unreasonable manner, alarms or disturbs another or provokes a breach of the peace within or upon such premises. Failure to report to the
police, as herein provided, shall be deemed sufficient cause to suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-
2003)
B. Gambling And Violations Of Law: It shall be unlawful for a licensee to permit, or to fail to prevent when reasonably apparent, any "gambling",
as defined in state law, or any other violations of state law or ordinances of the village occurring in or upon the licensed premises, except for
video gaming as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 2014-11, 2-24-2014)
C. Nude Dancing And Sexually Provocative Conduct: The following kinds of conduct on premises in the village licensed to sell alcoholic liquor
are prohibited:
1. The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, or flagellation or any
sexual acts which are prohibited by law.
2. The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals.
3. The actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva, genitals, or female breasts below the top of the areola.
4. The permitting by a licensee of any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes to public view any portion of his or
her genitals, anus, pubic hair or female breasts below the top of areola.
5. The performance of topless and/or bottomless dancing, go-go dancing, stripping, lingerie or bathing suit fashion shows, or similar
entertainment where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on activities or anatomical areas described in
subsections C1, C2 and C3 of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 103/548
6. The displaying of films or pictures depicting acts, a live performance of which is prohibited by the regulations stated in this subsection.
D. Telephone Sales And Deliveries: The retail sale of alcoholic liquor ordered by telephone, facsimile or other similar method to be delivered,
mailed or shipped to the purchaser or any other party is prohibited except for licensees holding a license which specifically allows for
telephone sales and deliveries under certain conditions. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
4-2-24: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
A. The local liquor control commissioner is hereby authorized to enter and empowered to authorize a law enforcement or health officer to enter
at any time upon any building or premises licensed hereunder, except for residential or dwelling portions of such buildings, to determine
whether or not the provisions of the Illinois liquor control act and this chapter and any rules or regulations promulgated by the local liquor
control commissioner are being complied with, as authorized by 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-4 and 5/10-8 et seq., and all such entry
and actions shall conform to the above stated statutory requirements and any subsequent amendments thereto.
B. It shall be unlawful to refuse to grant the admittance to the premises for which any license has been issued, at any time, upon verbal request
of the liquor control commissioner or any police officer or health officer authorized by him, of the village, for the purpose of determining
whether or not the Illinois liquor control act or the provisions of this chapter are being violated, including section 4-2-22 of this chapter, by
way of periodic liquor compliance checks, pursuant to the powers granted by subsection A of this section and by 235 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/10-8 et seq. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
4-2-25: EXAMINATION OF BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to examine or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local license or
for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served as provided by statute, and to examine or
cause to be examined the books and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof for his information in the
performance of his duties; and for such purpose, to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of the state. For the purpose of
obtaining any of the information desired by the local liquor control commissioner under this section, he may authorize his agent to act on his
behalf, as provided by statute. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
4-2-26: RECORDS AND NOTICES:
The village clerk shall keep a complete record of all retail liquor dealers' licenses issued and shall furnish copies thereof to the police
department, village administrator and the board of trustees. Upon revocation or suspension of any license, the village clerk shall immediately
give written notice thereof to the police department, village administrator and the president and board of trustees. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
4-2-27: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; FINES; APPEALS:
A. Revocation Or Suspension Authorized: The local liquor control commissioner may suspend or revoke any liquor dealer's license for any
violation of any provisions of this chapter or for any violation of any state or federal law pertaining to alcoholic liquor, as provided and in the
manner provided by statute.
B. Fines: In addition to the suspension, the local liquor control commissioner may levy a fine on the licensee for such violations. The fine
imposed shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a first violation within a twelve (12) month period, one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) for a second violation within a twelve (12) month period, and two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a third or
subsequent violation within a twelve (12) month period. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Not
more than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) in fines under this section may be imposed against any licensee during the period of his
license. Proceeds from such fines shall be paid into the general corporate fund.
C. Notice Of Hearings: Notice of hearings regarding such suspension or revocation shall be sent to the police department, village administrator,
and the president and board of trustees.
D. Compliance With Statute: The citations of violations, notice of hearings, conduct of hearings and decisions thereon shall be as provided by
statute at 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-9.
E. Appeals: The appeal of any decision of the local liquor control commissioner shall be limited to a review of the official record of proceedings
of such local liquor control commissioner. (Ord. 2009-35, 9-29-2009)
4-2-28: RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE FOR EMPLOYEE ACTIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the actions or inactions of any employee, agent or representative of a licensee shall be directly imputed to the
licensee, who shall be directly responsible for such actions or inactions. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 104/548
4-2-29: INSTRUCTIONAL PROGRAM FOR PERSONNEL; ATTENDANCE REQUIRED:
A. The completion of a state certified beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and training (BASSET) program is required for all persons
who sell or serve alcoholic beverages, all management personnel working on the premises and anyone whose job description entails the
checking of identification for the purchase of alcoholic beverages, pursuant to that license. (Ord. 2013-32, 10-14-2013)
B. A "state certified BASSET training program" shall be defined as a BASSET program licensed by the state of Illinois liquor control commission
(ILCC) as required by 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-12(11.1) and 5/6-27 and title 77 of the Illinois administrative code, chapter XVI, part
3500. All licensed BASSET providers shall be required to have on file all licenses and certificates to prove current qualifications and provide
a certificate of course completion and a card (a picture type identification is optional) to participants as proof of completion.
C. Any new owner, employee, or agent requiring BASSET training shall, within ninety (90) days from the beginning of their employment with the
licensee, complete an ILCC BASSET approved seller/server training program and shall, until completion of the BASSET program, work
under the supervision of a person who has completed BASSET training.
D. Any new manager who has not completed classroom ILCC BASSET seller/server training within the prior twelve (12) months shall complete
BASSET seller/server training from the Bloomingdale police department at the first available training session, not to exceed ninety (90) days
from the beginning of their employment with the licensee and shall, until completion of the BASSET program, work under the supervision of
a person who has completed BASSET training. (Ord. 2013-11, 2-11-2013; amd. Ord. 2013-32, 10-14-2013)
E. A photocopy of the certificate of completion for all owners, managers, employees, or agents required by this section to have BASSET training
shall be maintained by the establishment in a manner that will allow inspection, upon demand, by any designee of both the state or local
liquor control authorities.
F. The village and establishments must honor all state of Illinois liquor control commission (ILCC) BASSET approved programs.
G. Failure of an owner, manager, or employee to attend a BASSET training program, when specifically required by the local liquor control
commissioner, shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003; amd. Ord. 2013-32, 10-14-2013)
4-2-30: PENALTY:
In addition to any other sanctions and remedies provided by statute, any person, firm or corporation who shall be convicted of violating any
provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 2003-40, 10-27-2003; amd. 2012
Code)
Chapter 3
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine, game, table or other device designed, intended, displayed or kept as an amusement game or test of skill
and for the playing of which a charge is made. The term amusement device, when used in this chapter, shall include, but not be limited to,
devices commonly known as pinball machines, shuffleboards, bowling machines and coin operated games of skill but shall not include
regulation bowling alleys or pool or billiard tables. Amusement devices shall include any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug,
token, plate or disk, or the use of which is made available for any valuable consideration, may be operated by the public generally for use as a
game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score. The term shall include such devices as marble machines, electronic
games, skill ball, mechanical grab machines and all games, operations, or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be
indicated.
ATTENDANT: Any person acting for and in behalf of an operator or game room licensee.
GAME ROOM: Any premises in which three (3) or more amusement devices are operated for commercial purposes.
GAME ROOM LICENSEE: Any person, firm, corporation or association in immediate control of premises, including any owner or lessee thereof,
within or upon which three (3) or more amusement devices are operated for commercial purposes.
OPERATOR: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association engaged in the business of distributing, placing, leasing or selling
amusement devices, as defined in this section, with an agreement to maintain, service or supply such amusement devices to any premises
located within the village where such amusement devices are operated for commercial purposes. The term "commercial purposes", wherever
appearing within this chapter, shall have its generally understood meaning and shall include, without limitation, an intent to operate amusement
devices for gain or profit.
PERSON: Shall include the following: any person, firm or corporation or association which owns or leases any amusement device; the person,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 105/548
firm, corporation or association in whose place of business any such device is placed for use by the public; and the person, firm, corporation or
association having control over such device. (Ord. 93-43, 8-9-1993; amd. Ord. 98-13, 4-13-1998; 2012 Code)
4-3-2: AMUSEMENT DEVICE TAX:
A. An annual tax for each calendar year is hereby imposed upon all amusement devices operated for commercial purposes within the village.
The amount of said tax is one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per device for first ten (10) devices, and seventy five dollars ($75.00) per
machine for each amusement device in excess of ten (10) located on the licensed premises payable annually. (Ord. 2014-50, 11-10-2014)
B. The amusement device tax shall be paid by the owner of such device to the village finance director-treasurer. The village finance directortreasurer
shall issue, as evidence of the payment of the tax, a self-voiding adhesive tax emblem to be placed on each device. Such emblem
shall bear the words "Village of Bloomingdale - Amusement Device Tax" and such other wording as may be prescribed by the finance
director-treasurer. It shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate said tax emblem during the year for which it was issued. (Ord. 93-43, 8-9-
1993; amd. 2012 Code)
C. It shall be unlawful for the owner or lessee of any premises or person in control of such premises to permit the installation or use of
amusement devices within the village for commercial purposes unless the tax has been paid and is evidenced by a tax emblem affixed to the
amusement device. Each such device shall be plainly labeled with the name, address and telephone number of its owner. (Ord. 93-43, 8-9-
1993)
4-3-3: OPERATOR'S LICENSE:
A. License Required: No one shall engage in the business of being an operator of amusement devices without having first obtained a license
therefor.
B. Application For License: An application for an amusement device operator's license shall be made in conformance with the general business
application requirements of this code1.
C. License Fee: The license fee for an amusement device operator's license shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each license year and
shall not be prorated. (Ord. 93-43, 8-9-1993)
D. Investigation Of Applicant; Approval Or Denial: The application for an amusement device operator's license shall be referred to the chief of
police for investigation and verification of the facts stated therein and the business methods of the operator. Unless the chief of police shall
find that the operator has been convicted of a felony, or that he has violated any law or ordinance imposing any tax, or if either the owner or
operator has employed illegal measures to promote the use of his amusement devices, or that the place where said amusement device is to
be used is not qualified under the provisions of this chapter, he shall return the application to the finance director-treasurer with his approval;
otherwise, he shall return it with a statement of his reasons for refusing to approve the application. (Ord. 93-43, 8-9-1993; amd. 2012 Code)
E. Operators That Are Game Rooms: Where the operator is also a game room licensee, the operator shall, in each instance, apply for a game
room license and shall not be required to also apply for an operator's license unless such applicant is an operator for a game room other
than one for which he is the licensee. (Ord. 93-43, 8-9-1993)
4-3-4: GAME ROOMS:
A. License Required; Fees: No one shall operate a "game room", as defined in section 4-3-1 of this chapter, without having first obtained a
license therefor. The license fee for a "game room" shall be as provided in section 4-1-5-1 of this title and shall not be prorated. The game
room license fee shall be paid by the licensee to the finance director-treasurer. (Ord. 93-43, 8-9-1993; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Special Use Permit Required: No person shall receive a license pursuant to this chapter authorizing the operation of a "game room", as
defined in section 4-3-1 of this chapter, unless a special use permit has first been issued permitting the operation of a game room pursuant
to the terms and conditions of the zoning ordinances of the village. No special use permit shall be granted for the operation of a game room
and no license shall issue, except as an accessory use to a principal use of the premises for which the license and special use are sought. A
"principal use" is herein defined to mean any of the permitted or special uses, other than a game room, set forth under the village zoning
ordinance. (Ord. 93-43, 8-9-1993)
C. Game Rooms In Shopping Malls:
1. The provisions of subsection B of this section notwithstanding, a game room in an enclosed shopping mall of at least one million
(1,000,000) square feet may be the principal use of the premises.
2. In addition to the other provisions set forth in section 4-3-7 of this chapter pertaining to duties of licensees, the following provisions shall
apply to game rooms located in enclosed shopping malls of at least one million (1,000,000) square feet:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 106/548
a. Two (2) or more attendants/employees must be on duty at all times overseeing the operation - one at each end of the store. Attendants
must be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
b. The licensee is responsible for any costs associated with police calls for service and added mall security personnel needed because of
problems overflowing from the store into a common area or parking lot, as well as problems within the store itself.
c. The licensee shall restrict the wearing of gang colors, articles of clothes, signing and other forms of gang activity within the store.
d. No liquor may be consumed or sold within the facility licensed.
e. The village reserves the right to review terms and conditions of the lease to ensure that provisions relating to security are adequate.
f. All amusement devices must be properly licensed by the village and all fees paid before the game room facility may open for business.
g. The village retains the right to precondition a game room license upon adequate numbers and quality of security personnel.
h. Ingress and egress to a game room in an enclosed shopping mall with at least one million (1,000,000) square feet shall only be
available from the interior of the enclosed mall and not through the exterior of the enclosed mall. (Ord. 93-43, 8-9-1993; amd. 2012
Code)
D. Ineligibility For License: No license shall be issued hereunder if the applicant, or if a partnership or corporation, any officer, director, or
shareholder owning five percent (5%) or more of the shares of said corporation, or any member of the partnership, or any manager or agent
in charge of the premises has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving dishonesty or false statement.
E. Application For License:
1. Each application for a game room license shall contain the following information:
a. The name, address and phone number of the applicant.
b. Location of place of business.
c. Principal kind of business engaged in by applicant.
d. Statement of whether business will be conducted by a manager or agent, and the name, address and phone number of any such
manager or agent.
e. A diagram showing the number of amusement devices to be located on the premises, the location of each device on the premises, and
a description of each device.
f. If a corporation, set forth the following:
(1) Corporate name and address.
(2) Date and place of incorporation.
(3) Names and addresses of corporate officers and directors.
(4) Names and addresses of all persons or legal entities owning five percent (5%) or more of the corporation's stock.
g. If a partnership, set forth the following:
(1) Date and place when the partnership was formed.
(2) The names of all general partners.
(3) If a limited partnership, the names of all limited partners owning five percent (5%) or more interest in the partnership.
h. State whether any individual, partner, officer, or shareholder has ever been convicted of any criminal offense in any state or federal
court or has ever forfeited an appearance bond on a felony charge; if yes, state the offense.
i. If the business on the subject premises will be conducted by a manager or agent, state whether the manager or agent has ever been
convicted of any criminal offense in any state or federal court or has ever forfeited an appearance bond on a felony charge; if yes, state
the offense.
2. Applications for license shall be made out in duplicate, one copy being referred to the chief of police and the other copy to be referred to
the village administrator.
3. There is an application processing fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00), due and payable at the time the application for license is
submitted to the village.
F. Investigation Of Applicant; Issuance Or Denial Of License: The application shall be investigated by the chief of police and village
administrator in accordance with the provisions of section 4-1-6 of this title. The village administrator shall thereupon issue the license to the
applicant. If it is determined that the applicant does not qualify for a license, the applicant shall have the right of appeal pursuant to section
4-1-17 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 107/548
G. Number Of Licenses: There shall be no more than seven (7) game room licenses, in the aggregate, issued and outstanding at any one time.
(Ord. 93-43, 8-9-1993)
H. Location: No game room shall be located within five hundred feet (500') of any place of worship or school. (Ord. 93-43, 8-9-1993; amd. 2012
Code)
I. Floor Area Required Per Device: There shall be a maximum of one amusement device for each forty (40) square feet of floor area on the
premises, exclusive of aisles and exit areas. (Ord. 93-43, 8-9-1993)
4-3-5: DISCLOSURE STATEMENT:
Whenever any trustee of a trust or any beneficiary or beneficiaries of a trust make application for a license pursuant to the terms of this chapter,
such application shall identify each beneficiary of such trust, giving the respective names and addresses of each and their respective interest or
proportionate share of ownership. All such disclosure statements shall be filed and maintained for public inspection in the office of the village
clerk. (Ord. 93-43, 8-9-1993)
4-3-6: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSES:
A license issued hereunder shall not be transferable from person to person or place to place and shall be usable only at the place and by the
person designated in the license. The word "person", referred to herein, shall mean any natural person as well as partnership, corporation, firm
or association. (Ord. 93-43, 8-9-1993)
4-3-7: DUTIES OF LICENSEES:
A. Gambling Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to permit gambling on the premises. Any licensee or attendant who observes any gambling on the
premises, or has reasonable grounds to suspect that gambling is taking place, shall immediately cause the removal from the premises of
such persons as are involved in the gambling activity.
B. Attendant Required: The licensee or an attendant shall be on the premises at all times in which the business is open to the public and shall
be in such a position as to have a clear view of all the amusement devices and activity taking place on the premises.
C. Noise And Disturbances:
1. It shall be unlawful for the licensee hereunder to permit such noise, either by mechanical means or noise on the part of the patrons, which
shall cause a disturbance to the adjacent and surrounding uses as would cause the normal operation of said businesses to be damaged
or unreasonably disturbed.
2. All licensees or attendants hereunder shall have the affirmative duty to report to the police department any and all incidents of a
"disturbance of the peace", as defined and regulated in this code2, which takes place within the licensed premises or outside the premises
within one hundred feet (100') from the entrance, whether personally observed or upon observation or notification. Failure to report to the
police as herein provided shall be deemed sufficient cause to revoke the license issued hereunder.
D. Clean, Sanitary Premises: The licensee shall cause the premises to remain in a clean and sanitary condition at all times and shall place such
waste receptacles in and around the premises so as to accomplish the above.
E. Parking; Unobstructed Sidewalks: A licensee shall provide adequate and orderly parking for all bicycles and motor vehicles and shall keep
the storefront unobstructed so that the sidewalks are clear and open to pedestrian traffic.
F. Persons Under Influence Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any licensee or attendant to knowingly permit any individual under the influence of
alcohol or drugs on the premises where amusement devices are in use. (Ord. 93-43, 8-9-1993)
4-3-8: GAMBLING DEVICES PROHIBITED:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit the operation of any "gambling devices", as
defined in section 28-2 of the Illinois criminal code. Any such gambling device shall be seized by the police in accordance with section 28-5 of
the Illinois criminal code. (Ord. 93-43, 8-9-1993)
4-3-9: INSPECTIONS:
Each licensee shall permit inspection of any licensed premises during regular business hours by village officials to determine compliance with
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 108/548
the provisions of this code. (Ord. 93-43, 8-9-1993)
4-3-10: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES:
Every license issued under this chapter is subject to the right, which is hereby expressly reserved, of suspension or revocation of the same
should the licensee, directly or indirectly, permit the operation of any amusement device or game room contrary to the provisions of this chapter,
the ordinances of the village, or the laws of the state of Illinois. In addition, a license may be suspended or revoked for any of the grounds set
forth in section 4-1-16 of this title. The procedures for suspending and/or revoking any such license shall be in accordance with those provided
in section 4-1-16 of this title. Any revocation of the authorization or licenses issued in pursuance of the provisions of this chapter shall ipso facto
bar reinstatement of the same, or the granting of a new license, to any corporation, partnership, or individual shareholder, partner, or owner of
which was a shareholder, partner, or owner or a licensee whose license has heretofore been revoked, for a term of not less than one year
immediately following such revocation. (Ord. 93-43, 8-9-1993; amd. 2012 Code)
4-3-11: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a penalty in the amount of one hundred
percent (100%) of any unpaid fee and, in addition, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 93-43, 8-9-1993; amd.
2012 Code)
4-3-12: APPLICATION TO EXISTING BUSINESSES:
This chapter shall not be construed to extend to or affect any activity for which a permit or license was issued or application for permit or license
filed prior to the effective date hereof, except for fees not yet due or payable. (Ord. 98-13, 4-13-1998)
Chapter 4
RAFFLES
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
AUXILIARY OR AFFILIATES: Shall include an auxiliary or affiliate of a licensee.
BUSINESS: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial and civic interests of a community.
CHARITABLE: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those
eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
EDUCATIONAL: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by
methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented
in tax supported schools.
FRATERNAL: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members
and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would
be cared for by the government.
LABOR: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit
and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other
reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not for profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a
result of the operation.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in section 28-2(b) of the criminal code of 19611, conducted by an organization licensed under this chapter,
in which:
A. The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of
numbers or by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning chance; and
B. The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of
acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery; except, that the winning chance shall not be determined by the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 109/548
outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting contest.
RELIGIOUS: Any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS: An organization or association comprised of members of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses,
widows, or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the
general public in such a way as to confer a public benefit. (Ord. 2004-39, 7-26-2004)
4-4-2: LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; AUTHORITY TO ISSUE; JURISDICTION:
A. License And Compliance Required: No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a raffle without first having obtained a license pursuant to
this chapter. Each raffle must be authorized by a separate license, except as authorized by subsection 4-4-6B of this chapter, and must be
conducted in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
B. Authority To Issue Licenses: The village clerk or his/her designee (herein referred to as "village clerk") shall have the authority to issue
licenses for raffles subject to the limitations set forth in subsection 4-4-3A of this chapter.
C. Jurisdiction: A license issued by the village shall authorize the sale of raffle chances only within the borders of the village. (Ord. 2004-39, 7-
26-2004)
4-4-3: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE; INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
A. Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide nonprofit, religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational or veterans organizations that
operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before
making application for a license and which have had, during that entire five (5) year period, a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out
their objectives, or to a nonprofit fundraising organization that the licensing authority determines is organized for the sole purpose of
providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness,
disability, accident or disaster, or to political committees in accordance with the requirements set forth in 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes
15/8.1.
B. No raffle license shall be issued to:
1. Any person who has been convicted of a felony.
2. Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter.
3. Any person who is not of good moral character.
4. Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection B1, B2 or B3 of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest,
or in which such person is active or employed.
5. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection B1, B2, or B3 of this section is an officer, director, or employee, whether
compensated or not.
6. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection B1, B2 or B3 of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a
"raffle" as defined in section 4-4-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-39, 7-26-2004)
4-4-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. Application for a license shall be made in writing, no fewer than thirty (30) days before the intended sale of raffle chances, on forms provided
by the village clerk. Each license and application for license shall contain the following information:
1. The name and address of the applicant;
2. The area within the village in which the raffle chances will be sold and issued;
3. The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued;
4. The date, time, manner and location(s) of determining the winning chances;
5. A sworn statement attesting to the nonprofit character of the applicant signed by its presiding officer and secretary;
6. A copy of the applicant's articles of incorporation and/or charter; and
7. Such other information as the village clerk may require.
B. The village clerk shall act on a license application within thirty (30) days from the date of application. (Ord. 2004-39, 7-26-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 110/548
4-4-5: CLASSES OF LICENSES; FEES:
A. Classes And Fees Established: The fee for each license shall be as set forth in the following schedule:
1. Class A: Where the aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any raffle does not exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), no license fee
shall be required.
2. Class B: Where the aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any raffle is greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), the license fee
shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
B. Waiver For Class B: The fee for a class B raffle license may be waived by an affirmative vote of the board of trustees. (Ord. 2004-39, 7-26-
2004)
C. Payment And Disposition Of Fees: All fees for licenses required under this chapter shall be paid to the village clerk at the time of application
and shall be immediately turned over to the village finance director-treasurer. In the event the license for which applied is denied, the fee
shall be returned to the applicant; if the license is granted, the fee shall be deposited in the general fund or in such other fund designated by
the board of trustees. (Ord. 2004-39, 7-26-2004; amd. 2012 Code)
4-4-6: EFFECT OF LICENSE:
A. Each raffle license shall be valid for the duration of the contest as stated in the license application.
B. Each license issued under this chapter shall be valid for one raffle, or for multiple raffles as specified in the application, covering a period of
no more than one year, unless suspended or revoked for violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-39, 7-26-2004)
4-4-7: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles in the village is subject to the following:
A. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
B. No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
C. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle.
D. The maximum fee which may be charged for each raffle chance sold or issued shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), except as
modified pursuant to subsection 4-4-8C of this chapter.
E. A licensee may rent premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also
licensed under this chapter.
F. Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license, and winning chances may be determined only at those
locations specified on the license.
G. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the conducting of raffles or chances only with the permission of a parent or
guardian. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his parent or guardian. (Ord. 2004-39, 7-26-2004)
4-4-8: TICKETS AND PRIZES:
A. Tickets:
1. Each raffle ticket, chance or other raffle token shall state, on its face, the name and address of the licensee, the date or dates of the
drawings, and the prize or prizes to be awarded; provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply to any raffle in which prizes in
aggregate value under fifty dollars ($50.00) are awarded, or to any raffle in which raffle chances are sold only on the date of the drawing
during the event at which the drawing is to be conducted. No such ticket, chance or token shall be sold or issued more than two hundred
forty (240) days before the determination of the winning chance or chances.
2. If any raffle for which a license is issued under this chapter is canceled, or if any such raffle is not conducted on the date contained in the
application for license, the licensee shall refund all monies paid for any raffle chances issued or sold to the persons to whom such raffle
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 111/548
chances were issued or sold within forty five (45) days after the date on which the raffle was to be conducted or within forty five (45) days
after cancellation of the raffle, whichever is sooner.
B. Prizes: The maximum cash prize awarded in any raffle shall be one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); the maximum retail value of a
noncash prize awarded in any raffle shall be one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any
raffle shall not exceed two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00), except as modified pursuant to subsection C of this section.
C. Exceptions To Limits: Should the applicant wish to request either a higher dollar cost for each raffle chance and/or a higher individual or total
prize value, said request shall be referred to the board of trustees for consideration of such an exception. (Ord. 2004-39, 7-26-2004)
4-4-9: GAMBLING PROHIBITED:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the conducting or operating of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other
than a raffle as provided herein. (Ord. 2004-39, 7-26-2004)
4-4-10: RAFFLE MANAGER:
All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffle manager designated by the organization. The manager
shall provide a fidelity bond in the sum of an amount determined by the village in favor of the organization conditioned upon his honesty in the
performance of his duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the village not less than thirty (30) days prior to
its cancellation. The village administrator may waive this bond requirement when, due to the nature, past experience or competence of the
organization involved, the village administrator determines that such bond would be unnecessarily burdensome. The village administrator shall
give notice of such waiver to the village president and village board of trustees within five (5) days. Should the village administrator determine
that such a bond waiver should not be approved, the applicant may appeal said decision to the village board of trustees within fifteen (15) days.
(Ord. 2004-39, 7-26-2004; amd. 2012 Code)
4-4-11: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
A. Records Kept:
1. Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each
single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or
occasion shall be documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the purchased item or service or other
reason for the deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of
payment.
2. Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the department of
revenue of the state of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The person
who accounts for gross receipts, expense and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for
other revenues of the organization.
B. Reports Required: Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership
and to the village clerk its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required
in this section.
C. Preservation Of Records: Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3) years, and organizations shall make available
their records relating to operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places. (Ord. 2004-39, 7-26-2004)
4-4-12: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code. (Ord. 2004-39, 7-26-2004; amd. 2012 Code)
4-4-13: PUBLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The village clerk may publish rules and regulations consistent with this chapter or Illinois law governing the conduct of raffles licensed
hereunder. (Ord. 2004-39, 7-26-2004)
Chapter 5
VEHICLE SOLICITATION
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 112/548
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the indicated meanings unless a different meaning is clearly required by the context:
CHARITABLE: Shall mean and include the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic or fraternal,
either actual or purported.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE SOLICITATION: Shall mean and include any one or more of the following activities, not done for charitable purposes,
by a person on streets or highways within the village: The sale of, offer or attempt to sell to persons riding in or operating motor vehicles or
seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuff or services of any kind, character or description, for any kind
of consideration whatever.
CONTRIBUTION: Shall mean and include the words alms, food, clothing, money, subscriptions, property or donations under the guise of a loan
of money or property.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles; and the shoulders and rights of way contiguous to the
paved surface.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association or joint stock association, church, religious sect, religious
denomination, society, organization or league, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof.
RELIGIOUS AND RELIGION: Shall not mean and include the word "charitable" as defined in this section, but shall be given their commonly
accepted definitions.
RELIGIOUS OR CHARITABLE VEHICLE SOLICITATION: The oral or written request by a person on streets or highways within the village,
directly or indirectly, of persons operating or riding in vehicles, for money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea
or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will be used for a religious or "charitable" purpose
as those purposes are defined in this section. Religious or charitable vehicle solicitation shall also mean and include the following methods of
securing money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea or representation that it will be used for a religious or
"charitable" purpose as defined in this section. (Ord. 2004-21, 4-12-2004; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2012-43, 11-12-2012)
4-5-2: RELIGIOUS OR CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS:
4-5-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Every person desiring to engage in "religious or charitable vehicle solicitation", as defined in section 4-5-1 of this chapter, from persons in
vehicles on public roadways located in the village is hereby required to make written application for a solicitation permit as hereinafter provided
and obtain such permit prior to engaging in vehicle solicitation within the village. (Ord. 2004-21, 4-12-2004; amd. 2012 Code)
4-5-2-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A. Application for religious or charitable vehicle solicitation permits shall be made upon a form provided by, and shall be submitted to, the police
department, and shall include or be accompanied by the following:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the organization making the application and the name under which it intends to solicit
contributions, and if applicable, proof that the organization is engaged in a statewide fundraising activity. The soliciting organization shall
maintain names, addresses, telephone numbers and dates of birth in their files of all potential solicitors. (Ord. 2004-21, 4-12-2004; amd.
Ord. 2012-43, 11-12-2012)
2. The name, address and telephone number of the person in charge of solicitation in the village. (Ord. 2004-21, 4-12-2004)
3. Such additional information which the chief of police may from time to time require to verify that persons who will solicit contributions are
eligible for a permit under this chapter. (Ord. 2004-21, 4-12-2004; amd. Ord. 2012-43, 11-12-2012)
4. The dates and times of day such solicitations are to be made and the intersections in the village wherein such solicitation shall be
conducted at a particular time and day. (Ord. 2004-21, 4-12-2004)
5. If applicable, a written statement of recent date by the attorney general of Illinois that the organization is in compliance with the provisions
of an act to regulate solicitation and collection of funds for charitable purposes, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 460/2, as such statute may
hereafter be amended. (Ord. 2004-21, 4-12-2004; amd. 2012 Code)
6. A written statement from the internal revenue service that the organization is a tax exempt organization under the internal revenue code of
the United States, section 501(c)(3).
7. A certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in Illinois shall be provided to the village with the
application, insuring the solicitors and their organization for liability for damages of personal injury and property damage causally related to
an act of ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent. The certificate must state that it shall not be canceled during the period of solicitation
and will provide at least the following coverage:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 113/548
Personal injury $ 500,000.00 per person
1,000,000.00 per occurrence
Property damage 100,000.00
Nothing herein shall be construed to give permission to any solicitor to enter into traffic intersections for the purpose of soliciting in contravention
of any state or local ordinance prohibiting such intersection solicitation.
B. All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath. (Ord. 2004-21, 4-12-2004)
C. The chief of police shall cause to be kept in the police department offices an accurate record of every application received and acted upon,
together with all other information and data pertaining thereto, and copies of all vehicle solicitation permits issued under the provisions of this
chapter.
D. Any individual agency desiring to solicit on roadways shall be:
1. If applicable, registered with the Illinois attorney general as a charitable organization pursuant to subsection A5 of this section;
2. Liable for injuries to any person or property during the solicitation which is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of the soliciting
agent.
3. Required to verify that each solicitor is sixteen (16) years of age or more and wears a high visibility vest. (Ord. 2012-43, 11-12-2012)
4-5-2-3: NO PERMIT FEE REQUIRED:
No fee shall be charged for a vehicle solicitation permit for religious or charitable solicitation. (Ord. 2004-21, 4-12-2004)
4-5-2-4: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The chief of police, or an authorized designee, within five (5) business days of filing of the application, after consideration, investigation and
review of the application and all information obtained relative thereto, shall deny the application if the applicant is not entitled to a permit,
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or if the application does not contain all of the information and documentation as required herein.
Endorsement shall be made by the chief of police, or an authorized designee, on the application of the reason for the denial of the application. If
the applicant has complied with all the provisions of this chapter, the vehicle solicitation permit shall be issued forthwith and sent by the police
department to the applicant. (Ord. 2012-43, 11-12-2012)
4-5-2-5: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
A. Any religious or charitable vehicle solicitation permit issued hereunder shall be revoked by the chief of police, or an authorized designee if the
holder of the permit or anyone soliciting under the permit is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or has made a
false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a solicitation permit under the terms of this
chapter. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the chief of police, or an authorized designee to the
holder of the permit in person, or by U.S. mail, return receipt requested, addressed to his residence address set forth in the application. The
permit shall become null and void upon the first to occur of the following: (Ord. 2004-21, 4-12-2004; amd. Ord. 2012-43, 11-12-2012)
1. Actual notice of revocation shall be made by the village to the individual or organization.
2. Receipt of the return receipt of the mailed notice to the individual or organization, whether or not delivered to the permit holder personally,
shall be retained by the village. (Ord. 2004-21, 4-12-2004)
B. The chief of police, or an authorized designee may temporarily revoke or suspend a permit if public safety issues arise, such as an injury to
the public or a violation of state law or other village ordinances, after issuance of the permit which the chief of police reasonably believes
require suspension of solicitation.
C. The village administrator shall hear appeals on the denial of an application for a vehicle solicitation permit or the permanent or temporary
revocation of a permit by the chief of police. A written appeal must be filed in the office of the village administrator within twenty one (21)
days after the date of denial of the application or revocation of the permit by the chief of police.
D. The appealing party shall submit what documentation it desires to have the village administrator consider with the written appeal, and the
village administrator shall render a written decision within fourteen (14) days of the filing of the written appeal.
E. The village administrator shall not be bound by the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts of law but shall, in ascertaining the conditions
and practices involved in the decision appealed, take into account all reliable, probative and substantial evidence produced by the appealing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 114/548
party relating to the denial of the application or revocation of the permit. (Ord. 2012-43, 11-12-2012)
4-5-2-6: TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING:
It shall be unlawful to engage in religious or charitable vehicle solicitation on sidewalks, streets or highways within the village before the hour of
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and after the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. (Ord. 2012-43, 11-12-2012)
4-5-3: IDENTIFICATION OF SOLICITOR AND PERMITTEE:
A. All persons engaged in religious or charitable vehicle solicitation are required to wear identification on the exterior of their clothing identifying
them individually by name.
B. Every person engaged in religious or charitable vehicle solicitation for the permittee shall display in a visible place upon his person
information identifying the full name of the organization for which he is soliciting. (Ord. 2004-21, 4-12-2004; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2012-43,
11-12-2012)
4-5-4: PERSON IN CHARGE:
There must be a person in charge of the solicitation activity within the village limits who is present on site during the period of solicitation and
who has an operating cellular telephone with him at all times. The police department must be provided with the name of the person and the
cellular telephone number of that person. (Ord. 2004-21, 4-12-2004)
4-5-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any individual to solicit on any highway or street within the village without wearing highly visible clothing or garments.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to file an application for permit which contains false, misleading or untrue information.
C. Nothing contained in this chapter shall release or relieve any person from complying with any additional license requirement established by
the village.
D. No solicitor may knock on vehicles or their windows, nor obstruct or impede traffic.
E. Solicitors shall not attempt to solicit from operators of vehicles when a traffic signal is other than red or upon approach of a vehicle to a stop
sign. (Ord. 2004-21, 4-12-2004)
F. No "commercial vehicle solicitation", as defined in section 4-5-1 of this chapter, is permitted at any time within the village.
G. Religious or charitable vehicle solicitation on roadways will be permitted by the chief of police after receipt of a written application submitted
thirty (30) days prior to the day requested for such vehicle solicitation.
1. All such applications shall be filed with the police department.
2. This subsection applies to all streets and public roadways in the village.
H. Religious or charitable vehicle solicitation on roadways shall not be permitted except at intersections where all traffic is required to come to a
full stop, and at intersections listed in subsection I of this section.
I. Religious or charitable solicitation will not be allowed at any time on or adjacent to the following intersections because of safety concerns for
pedestrian and motor vehicle traffic at these locations:
Army Trail Road and Glen Ellyn Road.
Army Trail Road and Schmale Road.
Bloomingdale Road and Lake Street (U.S. Route 20).
Medinah Road and Lake Street (U.S. Route 20).
J. No solicitation shall be permitted at any time at a specific location if the roadway or the adjacent right of way is under construction or repair.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 115/548
K. All individuals conducting solicitation under authority of a permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall prominently display the
name of the organization for which they are soliciting upon their person so that it is clearly visible to the motoring public. (Ord. 2012-43, 11-
12-2012)
4-5-6: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Any citation issued hereunder
shall specify the section of this chapter which was allegedly violated. The burden of proof for such violations is by a preponderance of the
evidence. (Ord. 2004-21, 4-12-2004; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2012-43, 11-12-2012)
Chapter 5A
RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION
4-5A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words as used herein shall be construed to have the meaning herein ascribed thereto:
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Shall mean and include any person who has obtained a valid certificate of registration as hereinafter provided, and
which certificate is in the possession of the solicitor on his or her person while engaged in soliciting.
RESIDENCE: Shall mean and include every separate living unit occupied for dwelling purposes by one or more persons, contained within any
type of building or structure.
SOLICITING OR SOLICITATION: A. Shall mean and include any one or more of the following activities:
1. Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services, of any kind, character or description
whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; or
2. Seeking to obtain prospective customers for applications or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or character; or
3. Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publications; or
4. Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or
nonprofit association, organization, corporation, or project.
B. Soliciting or solicitation shall not include:
1. Any of the foregoing activities when undertaken by any person pursuant to a previous appointment or invitation from the property owner
or occupant of a residence; or
2. Canvassing or calling from house to house only for the purpose of communicating issues of general interest to the public, circulating
petitions concerning matters of public policy, taking surveys or opinion polls, campaigning for candidates for public office or public
questions, or communicating religious beliefs.
Due to the promotion of life, health and safety in residential areas, while the activities listed in subsections B1 and B2 of this definition
are generally not regulated, they are subject to the restrictions as listed in subsection 4-5A-6D of this chapter.
SOLICITOR: Any person who engages in solicitation. (Ord. 71-76, 9-8-1971; amd. Ord. 2012-43, 11-12-2012)
4-5A-2: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
Every person desiring to engage in "soliciting" as herein defined, from persons in residences within the village, is hereby required to make
written application for a certificate of registration as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 71-76, 9-8-1971; amd. Ord. 2012-43, 11-12-2012)
4-5A-3: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
A. Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a form provided by the chief of police and filed with the police department. The
applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 116/548
1. Name and address of present place of residence of the applicant;
2. Age of applicant;
3. Physical description of the applicant;
4. Name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association by whom the applicant is employed or represents; and the length of
time of such employment or representation;
5. A description of the product or subject matter of the soliciting in which the applicant will engage;
6. Period of time for which the certificate is applied;
7. The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for certificate under this chapter, if any;
8. Whether or not certificate of registration issued to the applicant under this chapter has ever been revoked;
9. Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter, or violating the ordinance of any other Illinois
municipality regulating soliciting within five (5) years of the date of the application;
10. Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the state of Illinois or any other state, or
under federal law within five (5) years of the date of the application;
11. Such additional information as the chief of police may deem necessary to process the application.
B. All statements made by the applicant under the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath.
C. The chief of police shall keep an accurate record of every application received and acted upon, together with all other information and data
pertaining thereto, and all certificates of registration issued under the provisions of this chapter, and of the denial of applications.
D. A certificate of registration will not be issued to any person in the following circumstances:
1. A person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the state of Illinois or any other state, within five (5)
years of the date of the application;
2. A person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under federal law, within five (5) years of the date of the application;
3. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, within five (5) years of the date of the application;
4. A person whose certificate of registration from the village has previously been revoked as herein provided, within five (5) years of the date
of the application; or
5. To a person who has ever been convicted of a sex offense as defined by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-0.1 et seq., or any other
equivalent law of any other state. (Ord. 2012-43, 11-12-2012)
4-5A-4: ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE:
A. The chief of police, within five (5) business days of filing of the application, after consideration, investigation and review of the application and
all information obtained relative thereto, shall deny the application if the applicant is not entitled to a certificate, pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, or if the application does not contain all of the information and documentation as required herein. Endorsement shall be made
by the chief of police, or an authorized designee, on the application of the reason for the denial of the application. If the applicant has
complied with all the provisions of this chapter, the certificate of registration shall be issued forthwith and sent by the police department to
the applicant.
B. Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by the chief of police if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter, or has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the
issuance of a certificate of registration under the terms of this chapter.
C. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the chief of police to the holder of the certificate in person or by
certified U.S. mail addressed to applicant's address set forth in the application.
D. The certificate of registration shall state the expiration date thereof.
E. The village administrator shall hear appeals on the denial of an application for a certificate of registration or the permanent or temporary
revocation of a certificate of registration by the chief of police. A written appeal must be filed in the office of the village administrator within
twenty one (21) days after the date of denial of the application or revocation of the certificate of registration by the chief of police.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 117/548
F. The appealing party shall submit what documentation it desires to have the village administrator consider with the written appeal, and the
village administrator shall render a written decision within fourteen (14) days of the filing of the written appeal.
G. The village administrator shall not be bound by the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts of law but shall, in ascertaining the conditions
and practices involved in the decision appealed, take into account all reliable, probative and substantial evidence produced by the appealing
party relating to the denial of the application or revocation of the certificate of registration. (Ord. 2012-43, 11-12-2012)
4-5A-5: NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING:
Every residential property owner or occupant of a residence desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by the regulations
pertaining to soliciting contained in this chapter, shall comply with the following directions:
A. Notice of the determination by the residential property owner or occupant of a residence of giving invitation to solicitors, or the refusal of
invitation to solicitors, to any residence, shall be given in the manner following:
A sign, no larger than is allowed by the village sign code herein, shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence,
indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words, as follows:
NO SOLICITORS INVITED
B. Such sign so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of the determination by the residential property owner or occupant of a
residence of the information contained thereon. (Ord. 2012-43, 11-12-2012)
4-5A-6: LIMITATIONS ON SOLICITING:
A. Invitations By Property Owner Or Occupant: The property owner or occupant of a residence in the village shall make the determination of
whether solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their residence.
B. Notice: It shall be the duty of every solicitor, upon going onto any premises in the village upon which a "residence" as herein defined is
located, to first examine the notice provided for in section 4-5A-5 of this chapter, if any is attached, and be governed by the statement
contained on the notice. If the notice states "Only Solicitors Registered In Bloomingdale Invited", then the solicitor not possessing a valid
certificate of registration as herein provided shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises; and if the notice states "No Solicitors
Invited", then the solicitor, whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
C. Requested Departure: Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully
depart from the premises when requested to do so by the property owner or occupant.
D. Dates And Times: It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the
doorbell upon or near any door, or rap or knock on any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of
the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing any audience with the occupant thereof and to "solicit", as defined in this
chapter, prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. CST of any weekday, or at any time on a Sunday or on a state or
federal holiday, or in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of section 4-5A-5 of this chapter.
E. Identification Badges: It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to fail to wear an identification badge on his or her outer garments that is visible at
all times. Such badge shall be issued by the police department, and shall contain the name of the peddler or solicitor, and the name of the
group or organization, if any, on whose behalf the peddler or solicitor is conducting activities that are regulated under this chapter.
F. Rescission Or Cancellation Of Sale: It shall be unlawful for any person who engages in soliciting to misrepresent the right of a buyer to
rescind or cancel a sale under the provisions of applicable law.
G. Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person who engages in soliciting to use any false plan, scheme or ruse; to cheat, deceive, or make
any fraudulent misrepresentation while acting as a solicitor in the village, whether through the company or organization or through an
employee or solicitor thereof. (Ord. 2012-43, 11-12-2012)
4-5A-7: FEES:
The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per solicitor for every solicitation request. (Ord. 2012-43, 11-
12-2012)
4-5A-8: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 118/548
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 71-76, 9-8-1971; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2012-43, 11-12-2012)
Chapter 6
TOBACCO PRODUCTS SALES
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
BUSINESS SELLING TOBACCO PRODUCTS: A retail establishment of any kind that is engaged in the sale of "tobacco products" as defined
herein.
SELL OR SALE: To sell or offer for sale at retail, barter, exchange, deliver or give away or cause or permit a sale at retail, barter, exchange,
delivery or giving away.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, loose
tobacco, plants or herbs intended for smoking; snuff; smokeless tobacco; or related smoking accessories.
VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service device, which upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of
payment dispenses tobacco products. (Ord. 2012-09, 1-23-2012)
4-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. No person shall operate a business primarily selling tobacco products or selling tobacco products over the counter in conjunction with its
primary type of business without first having obtained a license for such business. Application for such license shall be made in conformity
with the requirements of this title. Such license shall be in addition to any other license required by this code.
B. No person shall operate or maintain within the village any vending machine for the sale of any tobacco products, nor sell any such tobacco
products by means of a vending machine without first having obtained a license according to the requirements of this title. Such license shall
be in addition to any other license required by this code. (Ord. 2012-09, 1-23-2012)
4-6-3: PROHIBITED SALES; SIGNS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell, offer for sale or deliver tobacco products to any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years. A seller of tobacco products must check the identification, including the bearer's date of birth and photograph, of all
persons twenty six (26) years of age, or younger, to verify that they are at least eighteen (18) years old.
B. Any person operating a business selling tobacco products, or where vending machines are located, shall post a sign informing the public of
the age restrictions provided herein in a conspicuous place upon the premises or machine. Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall
state:
THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND SMOKING ACCESSORIES TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED
BY LAW. WE CHECK I.D.'S OF ALL CUSTOMERS UNDER AGE 27.
The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background, said letters to be at least one inch (1") high.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, including a licensee, to give away free samples of tobacco products.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, including a licensee, to sell single cigarettes ("loosies") or packs with fewer than twenty (20) cigarettes
("kiddie packs"), that are not contained within a sealed container, pack or package, as provided by the manufacturer, which container, pack
or package bears the health warning required by federal law.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to redeem a coupon for a tobacco product through the mail rather than at a face to
face exchange in a store.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to give away any gift or item to anyone in exchange for a tobacco proof of
purchase or as a part of a sale of tobacco products.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee or any manager, employee or agent of any such licensee, to sell, offer for sale at
retail, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, or to advertise or promote tobacco products on any right of way, park,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 119/548
playground or other property owned by the village, any school district, or any park district.
H. Except for a person operating a business selling tobacco products, no person shall sell cigarette paper. No person shall sell cigarette paper
from a vending machine.
I. No person shall sell tobacco products from a vending machine that also sells nontobacco products, with the exception of matches, unless
such vending machine is located in one of the following places:
1. Places to which minors under eighteen (18) years of age are not permitted access;
2. Places where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises and vending machine operation is under the direct supervision
of the owner or manager; and
3. Places where the vending machine is locked and can only be operated by the owner or an employee over eighteen (18) years of age,
either directly or through a remote control device if the device is accessible to all customers. (Ord. 2012-09, 1-23-2012)
4-6-4: MINIMUM AGE TO SELL TOBACCO PRODUCTS:
No person under sixteen (16) years of age may sell any tobacco products at a retail establishment selling such products. No person operating a
business selling tobacco products, or any officer, manager, agent or employee of such a business, shall engage, employ or permit any person
under sixteen (16) years of age to sell tobacco products in any licensed premises. This restriction shall not apply to a sales clerk in a family
owned business that can prove that the sales clerk is, in fact, a son or daughter of the owner. (Ord. 2012-09, 1-23-2012)
4-6-5: PURCHASE BY MINORS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to purchase tobacco products or to misrepresent their identity or age or
to use any false or forged identification card for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products. (Ord. 2012-09, 1-23-2012)
4-6-6: POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess any tobacco products, provided that the possession by a
person under the age of eighteen (18) years under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent's
or guardian's home shall not be prohibited. (Ord. 2012-09, 1-23-2012)
4-6-7: PROXIMITY TO CERTAIN INSTITUTIONS:
No person shall sell tobacco products within one hundred feet (100') of any school, childcare facility or other building used for education or
recreational programs for persons under eighteen (18) years of age, provided that this section shall not apply to a business lawfully existing on
the date this chapter is adopted. The one hundred feet (100') limitation would be measured from the front door of each building or facility in
question. In the event such a business ceases the sale of tobacco products for any reason for a period of six (6) months or more, except by
reason of license suspension or revocation as provided herein, then such business shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-
09, 1-23-2012)
4-6-8: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other
agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee and such licensee shall be punishable in the same
manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally. (Ord. 2012-09, 1-23-2012)
4-6-9: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE; FINES, COSTS:
A. The village president or an authorized designee shall be charged with the administration of this chapter. The village president may suspend
or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this chapter if it is determined that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter or any other village ordinance or requirement.
B. No license shall be suspended or revoked, nor any administrative fines or costs imposed without a public hearing called by the village
president. The licensee shall receive notice, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, of the charges and the time and place of the hearing.
Notice shall be by certified or registered mail or by personal delivery to the licensee's premises.
C. The village president shall, within seven (7) days after such hearing, if it is determined after such hearing that the license should be revoked
or suspended, state the reason for such determination in a written order and the period of suspension or that the license has been revoked,
and serve a copy of such order within the seven (7) days upon the licensee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 120/548
D. Any licensee determined by the village president to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the village the costs of the
hearing before the village president on such violations. The village president shall determine the costs incurred by the village for said hearing
including, but not limited to, court reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorney fees, the costs of preparing and mailing notices
and orders, and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the village or such lesser sum as the village president may allow. The licensee
shall pay said costs to the village within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the village president. Failure to pay said costs within
thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this chapter and may be cause for license suspension or revocation. (Ord. 2012-09, 1-23-2012)
4-6-10: USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION:
When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to said licensee for the period of six (6) months thereafter
for the conduct of the business of selling tobacco products in the premises described in such revoked license. (Ord. 2012-09, 1-23-2012)
4-6-11: APPLICANT ACKNOWLEDGMENT:
The application for a tobacco dealer's license shall state immediately above the applicant's signature line the following:
I hereby acknowledge receipt of a copy of the Village of Bloomingdale Ordinance providing for the Comprehensive Regulation of Tobacco
Products (title 4, chapter 6 of the village code) and having applied for a tobacco dealers license do hereby accept, concur and agree to comply
with the terms and regulations of the Ordinance in its entirety.
(Ord. 2012-09, 1-23-2012)
4-6-12: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating the terms and conditions of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00),
with each and every day that the violation of this chapter is allowed to remain in effect being deemed a complete and separate offense. In
addition, the appropriate authorities of the village may take such other action as they deem proper to enforce the terms and conditions of this
chapter, including, without limitation, an action in equity to compel compliance with its terms. Any person violating the terms of this chapter shall
be subject, in addition to the foregoing penalties, to the payment of court costs and reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 2012-09, 1-23-2012)
Chapter 7
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
4-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
EMPLOYEE: Any and all persons, other than the licensed massage therapists, who render any service to the owner, operator, license holder
(licensee) of the establishment or patrons, who receive compensation directly from the owner, operator, license holder (licensee) of the
establishment or patrons, and who have no physical contact with clients or patrons.
HEALTH OFFICER: An inspecting officer of the DuPage County health department.
LICENSED MASSAGE THERAPIST: An individual who is licensed by the state of Illinois under the massage licensing act1.
LICENSEE OR LICENSE HOLDER: The owner, operator or individual granted a massage establishment license.
MASSAGE: Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the
external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any object, mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person, firm, association or corporation engages
in, or carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on, for hire, any of the activities of the practice of massage.
OUTCALL MASSAGE SERVICE: Any business, the function of which is to engage in or carry on massages at a location designated by the
customer or client rather than at a massage establishment.
PERSON: Any individual, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of individuals of whatever form or
character.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA: The genitals, pubic area, anus, or perineum of any person, and the vulva or breast of a female. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-
14-2005)
4-7-2: PERMITS AND LICENSES REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 121/548
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any
premises in the Village, the operation of a "massage establishment" as defined in section 4-7-1 of this chapter, without first having obtained the
required building and/or occupancy permits and licenses for a massage establishment. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005; amd. 2012 Code)
4-7-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file an application with the Building Department,
upon a form provided by the Village and pay a nonrefundable application fee as set forth in section 4-1-5-1 of this title. The annual business
license fee for a massage establishment is set forth in section 4-1-5-1 of this title. The applicant for a license to operate a massage
establishment shall furnish the following information: (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
A. Name (including any alias) and address.
B. Written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
C. All residential addresses for the past three (3) years.
D. Date of birth.
E. Social security number.
F. Driver's license number.
G. The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the four (4) years immediately preceding the date of application.
H. The massage or similar business license or permit history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in the Village or
another city or state under license or permit, has had such license or permit revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business
activity or occupation subsequent to such action or revocation.
I. All criminal or ordinance violation convictions, including forfeiture of bond or pleadings of nolo contendere, on all Federal, State and local
charges, except minor traffic violations.
J. A recent photograph of the applicant.
K. If the applicant is a corporation, or a partner of a partnership is a corporation, the name of the corporation exactly as shown in its articles of
incorporation. A copy of its articles of incorporation and/or permission to do business in the State of Illinois shall be attached.
L. The information required in subsections A through K of this section shall be required for the following individuals:
1. The operator, manager or owner.
2. Any partner or limited partner of a partnership application.
3. Any officer, director or greater than ten percent (10%) stockholder of a corporate applicant or corporate partnership, if a partnership.
M. The application for a license to operate a massage establishment shall, each license year applied for, state the names of the individuals who
shall be licensed massage therapists, whether employees or independent contractors. The application shall be revised as additional licensed
massage therapists are employed or allowed to work on the premises. A copy of the State license issued to any such massage therapist
shall accompany said application.
N. The applicant for a massage establishment license shall also sign an affirmative statement accepting full responsibility for any acts of an
independent contractor who is licensed as a massage therapist employed or allowed to work on the premises. Any violation of Village
ordinance or Federal or State law by the licensed massage therapist on the premises of the massage establishment shall be grounds to
revoke, suspend or fine the massage establishment license holder. Lack of knowledge of the activities of a licensed massage therapist by
the massage establishment license holder shall not be a defense.
O. The applicant shall submit to fingerprinting as required by the Village Police Department. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005)
4-7-4: REVIEW OF APPLICATION; GRANT OR DENIAL OF LICENSE; ISSUANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 122/548
A. Review Of Application: The Village Police Department and Building Department, will make an investigation based on the application
information submitted and the proposed business location for the massage establishment; final review and approval to be made by the
Village President. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
1. Police Department Review: The Chief of Police shall investigate and report in connection with the accuracy of the information submitted
as required by this chapter. The Chief of Police may delegate the investigative, inspecting and reporting responsibilities imposed by this
chapter. The Chief of Police shall issue a report of investigative findings to the Village President. The report shall advise as to whether the
applicant has been convicted of:
a. A felony.
b. An offense involving sexual misconduct with children.
c. Prostitution, soliciting for a prostitute, pandering, keeping or residing in a place of prostitution, pimping or any other offense involving
moral turpitude in relation to sexual misconduct.
2. Building Department Review: The Building Commissioner shall inspect and report in connection with full compliance with respective
Village Building, Plumbing, Electrical, Mechanical, Property Maintenance, Fire, Life Safety, Health, Zoning and all other applicable Codes
and ordinances. The Building Commissioner may delegate the inspecting and reporting responsibilities imposed by this chapter.
B. Grant, Denial Or Additional Review Of License:
1. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of reports from the aforesaid departments, the Village President shall notify the applicant that his
application is granted, denied or held for further review. The period of such additional review shall not exceed an additional thirty (30) days
unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. Upon conclusion of such additional review, the Village President shall advise the applicant in
writing whether the application is granted or denied.
2. Whenever an application is denied or held for further review, the Village President shall advise the applicant of the reasons for such
action. An application may be denied by the Village President based on the report of findings required by subsection A of this section. The
failure or refusal of the applicant to promptly give any information relevant to the investigation of the application, or refusal or failure to
appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding said application, or refusal or failure to submit to or
cooperate with any inspection required by this chapter shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he is ineligible for such license
and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the Village President.
C. Issuance Of License: Upon receipt of the written recommendations of the departments referred to in this section, the Village President shall
issue a license to maintain a massage establishment. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005)
4-7-5: LICENSE FEES:
The fees for licenses regulated by this chapter are as follows: (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005)
A. Filing Fee: Each applicant for a massage establishment license shall pay a nonrefundable filing fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00) for an
original application, to include the initial business license if issued. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Renewal Fee: Each applicant renewing a massage establishment license shall pay a renewal fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) each year
for renewal. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005)
4-7-6: TERMS OF LICENSE:
The terms of massage establishment licenses are as follows:
A. Expiration Date: Every massage establishment license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be issued for the balance of the license year and
shall expire on April 30 of the license year, unless the license is suspended or revoked on a sooner date by the Village President.
B. No Proration Of Fees: License fees shall not be prorated.
C. Licensed Massage Therapist Required: It shall be unlawful to engage in, conduct, operate, carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted,
operated or carried on, in or upon any premises in the Village, the business of a massage establishment without having at least one licensed
massage therapist employed on the premises. The massage establishment license holder may allow independent contractors to work on the
premises, so long as the massage establishment license holder is responsible for the acts of the licensed massage therapists. Any
independent contractor shall be deemed to be an agent of the massage establishment licensee while working on the premises. The
massage establishment licensee shall be held responsible for violation of Federal, State or local ordinance laws regarding the activities of
the licensed massage therapist. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005)
4-7-7: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 123/548
Every massage establishment license holder shall display a valid license in a conspicuous place within the massage establishment so that the
same may be readily seen by persons entering the premises. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005)
4-7-8: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
No license for the operation of a massage establishment issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable. However, upon
the death or incapacity of the licensee, the massage establishment may continue in business for a reasonable period of time to allow for an
orderly transfer of the license, but such period shall not exceed sixty (60) days. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005)
4-7-9: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
All massage establishment license holders shall renew their licenses annually upon payment of all fees due. Successful completion of renewal
applications and background checks are required prior to issuance of any license. Applications for renewal of massage establishment licenses
must be filed not less than one month prior to termination of an existing license. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005)
4-7-10: ADVERTISING RESTRICTIONS:
No massage establishment granted a license under the provisions of this chapter shall place or publish, or cause to be placed or published, or
distributed, any advertising matter that depicts any portions of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any
services are available other than authorized massage services. Displays of any and all signage for the business establishment are to be
regulated by applicable Village ordinances. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005)
4-7-11: EMPLOYEES:
A. Persons Under Eighteen: It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any massage establishment to
employ any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age.
B. Licensed Massage Therapists Or Massage Therapists In Training: It shall be the responsibility of the massage establishment licensee to
ensure that each person employed as a massage therapist shall first have obtained a valid license from the State of Illinois. (Ord. 2005-12,
3-14-2005)
4-7-12: FACILITY REQUIREMENTS:
No massage establishment shall be issued a license, nor be operated, established or maintained, in the Village unless an inspection by the
Village reveals that the premises for the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements:
A. Construction of rooms used for restrooms/toilets, tubs, steam baths and showers shall be made waterproof with approved waterproof
materials and shall be installed in accordance with the Building and Construction Codes of the Village, State of Illinois Accessibility Code and
Federal ADA Regulations.
B. All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas and floors shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected.
C. Adequate bathing, dressing, and locker facilities shall be provided for the patrons to be served at any given time. In the event male and
female patrons are to be served simultaneously, separate bathing, dressing, locker and massage room facilities shall be provided and shall
be along an accessible route.
D. The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering
massages. Such nondisposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron.
E. Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean linen, towels and other materials used in connection with administering
massages. All soiled linens, towels and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets
shall be kept separate from the clean storage areas.
F. Restroom/toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the
same time, separate restroom/toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex. A single water closet per sex shall be provided for each fifteen
(15) or fewer employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets after one water
closet has been provided. Restroom/toilet facilities shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein and shall be located along an
accessible route.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 124/548
G. Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in each restroom/toilet room and in each room
where massage therapy would be provided. Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with soap and dispenser and with sanitary towels.
H. The premises shall be equipped with a high/low drinking fountain, providing accessibility to those who use wheelchairs and to those who
have difficulty bending. The drinking fountain shall be located along an accessible route.
I. The premises shall be equipped with a service/mop sink for custodial services.
J. The premises shall be equipped with a stationary or portable professional massage table with appropriate headrest. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-
2005)
K. The Building Department, shall certify or report that the proposed massage establishment facility complies with all the requirements of this
section and all other applicable Village ordinances, and shall send such certification or report to the Village Administrator and/or Village
President. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
4-7-13: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
The operating requirements for a massage establishment are as follows:
A. Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.
B. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers.
C. All employees, including licensed massage therapists, shall be clean and fully covered in clean clothing from a point not to exceed four
inches (4") above the center of the kneecap to the base of the neck by opaque material, excluding the arms and hands. A separate dressing
area for each sex must be available on the premises, with individual lockers for each employee.
D. All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity, and shall be laundered after
each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner.
E. The sexual and genital areas of patrons must be covered by sheets, clothes or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or
licensed massage therapist.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment knowingly to place his or her hand upon, to touch with any part of his or her
body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage a sexual or genital area of any other person.
G. No licensed massage therapist, employee or operator shall offer or agree to perform any act which would require the touching of a patron's
sexual or genital areas.
H. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and
restroom/toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned after each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly
cleaned after each use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry.
I. Oils, creams, lotions or other preparations used in administering massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets and shall be
dispensed in unit doses so that said bulk containers are not contaminated between clients. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005)
J. Eating and/or drinking in the massage work areas shall not be permitted. Animals, except for seeing eye and other service dogs for persons
with disabilities, shall not be permitted in the massage work areas. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005; amd. 2012 Code)
K. No licensed massage therapist shall administer a massage to a patron exhibiting any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation or skin
eruption unless a physician, duly licensed by the State of Illinois, certifies in writing that such person may be safely massaged, prescribing
the conditions.
L. Each licensed massage therapist shall wash his or her hands in hot running water, using a proper soap disinfectant before administering a
massage to each patron.
M. Massage may be practiced only for the purposes of physical fitness, relaxation, general health and well being. The practice of massage for
any other purpose is prohibited.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 125/548
N. The doors to the individual massage rooms shall not be equipped with any locking devices and shall not be blocked or obstructed from either
side. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005)
4-7-14: OUTCALL MASSAGE SERVICES PROHIBITED:
Outcall massage services, as defined in section 4-7-1 of this chapter, shall be prohibited in the Village. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005)
4-7-15: INSPECTIONS:
The Police Department and/or the Building Department, or authorized designee, shall from time to time, and at least twice a year, make an
inspection of each massage establishment granted a license under the provisions of this chapter for the purposes of determining that there is
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such inspections shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner. It shall be
unlawful for any massage establishment license holder to fail to allow such inspection officer access to the premises or to hinder such officer in
any manner. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
4-7-16: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
A. Grounds: Any license issued to an owner or operator of a massage establishment may be suspended or revoked for any length of time
during the remaining period of validity of the license for any one or more of the following reasons: For any violation by the massage
establishment license holder of the provisions of this chapter relating to the license, the subject matter of the license or to the premises
occupied by the massage establishment.
B. Notice Required; Right To Appeal: No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be revoked or suspended without first giving the licensee
notice of such action and an opportunity to be heard in accordance with the provisions of this section.
C. Notice Requirements:
1. Before any license is suspended or revoked, at least five (5) days' written, advance notice shall be given to the licensee by certified mail,
returned receipt requested.
2. In case of a suspension or revocation of a massage establishment license, notice shall be sent to the licensee at the business address
indicated on the licensee's application for massage establishment license.
3. The notice shall set forth the date, time and place of the hearing and shall state the facts which constitute the reasons for the hearing on
the suspension or revocation of the license.
D. Change In Address: It shall be the duty of all licensees to inform the Village of any changes in address which are needed to inform them of
any hearing conducted pursuant to this section. All changes in address shall be reported to the Village within ten (10) days of such change.
Failure by any licensee to inform the Village of any change in address required pursuant to this section shall not prevent the bringing of any
action or the holding of any hearing pursuant to this section for a suspension or revocation of the license.
E. Action On Suspension Or Revocation: The Village Attorney shall be responsible for bringing and proving any and all actions for the
suspension or revocation of any massage establishment license. All initial pleadings and subsequent original pleadings shall be filed with the
Village Clerk. A decision by the Village President to suspend or revoke a license shall be final.
F. Suspension Or Revocation In Addition To Fine: Any suspension or revocation of any massage establishment license shall be in addition to
any fine(s) imposed. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005)
4-7-17: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to other units of government, hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums or persons holding a valid, unrevoked
certificate to practice the healing arts under the laws of the State of Illinois or persons working under the direction of any such persons or in any
such establishment. This chapter shall also not apply to barbers, beauticians or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their particular profession or
business and holding a valid, unrevoked license or certificate of registration issued by the State of Illinois and business license issued by the
Village. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005)
4-7-18: EXISTING BUSINESSES:
A. All persons who presently operate a massage establishment must file for a massage establishment license within three (3) months of the
effective date hereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 126/548
B. This chapter shall not be construed to extend to or affect any activity for which a license was issued or application for a license filed prior to
the effective date hereof, unless the Building Commissioner determines that any provision of this chapter or the regulations incorporated
herein by reference should be applied for reasons of public health and safety. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005)
4-7-19: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. Nuisance Declared: Any building used as a massage establishment in violation of this chapter with the intentional knowing, reckless or
negligent permission of the owner thereof, or the agent of the owner managing the building, together with all fixtures and other property used
in violation of this chapter, is hereby declared a nuisance. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-14-2005)
B. Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a penalty in the amount of one
hundred percent (100%) of any unpaid fee and, in addition, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2005-12, 3-
14-2005; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 8
ADULT USES1
4-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate adult uses to protect the community from the many types of criminal activity frequently associated with
such uses. The village recognizes that such regulation cannot, in effect, prohibit such uses. This chapter has balanced the competing interest of
the community in reducing criminal activity and protecting property values versus the protected rights of the owners, operators, employees and
patrons of adult uses. (Ord. 98-08, 2-23-1998)
4-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having, as a substantial or significant portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for
sale or for viewing on the premises by use of motion picture devices or by coin operated means, and periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such materials; or an establishment that holds itself out to the public
as a purveyor of such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin operated booths,
exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such
material.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A public or private establishment which: a) features topless dancers, strippers, "go-go" dancers, male or
female impersonators, lingerie or bathing suit fashion shows; b) not infrequently features entertainers who display specified anatomical areas; or
c) features entertainers who, by reason of their appearance or conduct, perform in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the
prurient interest of the patron or features entertainers who engage in, or are engaged in, explicit simulation of specified sexual activities.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A building or area used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT NOVELTY STORE: An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its sales or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices,
clothing "novelties", lotions and other items distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on or use for specialized sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its signage,
advertising, displays, actual sales, exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any other factors showing the establishment's
primary purpose is to purvey such material.
ADULT USE: Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult entertainment cabarets, and other similar uses.
EMPLOYEE: Employees, independent contractors or any other person who is retained by the licensee or subject to dismissal from working at
the licensed premises.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Less than completely and opaquely covered:
1. Human genitals;
2. Pubic region;
3. Buttock;
4. Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 127/548
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: Any of the following offenses:
A. Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual
performance by a minor; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child;
engaged in organized criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling; or distribution of a controlled substance; or any
similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries.
B. For which: 1) less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 2) less than five (5) years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony offense; or
3) less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement from the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor
offenses and occurred within any twenty four (24) month period.
C. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
C. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts. (Ord. 98-08, 2-23-1998)
4-8-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult use without a valid adult use business license issued by the village pursuant to this
chapter. (Ord. 98-08, 2-23-1998)
4-8-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. An application for a license shall be made on a form provided by the village. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of
this chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such information (including fingerprints) as is needed to enable the
village to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter.
B. If a person who wishes to operate an adult use is an individual, the person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person
who wishes to operate an adult use is other than an individual, each individual who has a twenty percent (20%) or greater interest in the
business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under subsection C of this section, and each
applicant shall be considered a licensee if the license is granted.
C. The completed application for an adult use business license shall contain the following information:
1. If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he/she is eighteen (18)
years of age.
2. If the applicant is a partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is
general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.
3. If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in
good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal shareholders, and
the name and address of the registered corporate agent.
4. If the applicant intends to operate the adult use business under a name other than that of the applicant; he/she must state:
a. The business' fictitious name; and
b. Submit any required registration documents.
5. Whether the applicant has been convicted of any "specified criminal activity" as defined in this chapter, and if so, the specified criminal
activity involved, and the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
6. Whether the applicant has had a previous license under this chapter or similar ordinance from another city or county denied, suspended
or revoked, including the name and location of the business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of
the denial, suspension or revocation. If the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or similar ordinance in another jurisdiction or an
officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is or was licensed under this chapter and a license has previously been
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 128/548
denied, suspended or revoked, include the name and location of the business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as
well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
7. Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or other similar provisions from another city or county and, if so, the
names and locations of such other licensed businesses.
8. A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor area occupied by the business. This
sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of
the interior of the premises. (Ord. 98-08, 2-23-1998)
4-8-5: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF LICENSE; INELIGIBILITY:
Within thirty (30) days after receipt of a completed adult use business license application, the village shall approve or deny the issuance of a
license to an applicant. The village shall approve the issuance of a license unless it determines by a preponderance of the evidence any one or
more of the following:
A. The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
B. The applicant is overdue in payment to the village of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to
any business.
C. The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for the issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form.
D. The applicant has been denied a license by the village to operate an adult use business within the preceding twelve (12) months or whose
license to operate an adult use business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months.
E. The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity defined in this chapter. (Ord. 98-08, 2-23-1998)
F. The premises to be used for the adult use business has not been approved by the fire protection district and the building and zoning official as
being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. (Ord. 98-08, 2-23-1998; amd. 2012 Code)
G. The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
H. The applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 98-08, 2-
23-1998)
4-8-6: CERTIFICATION OF PREMISES:
The fire protection district and building and zoning official shall complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or not in
compliance with village codes within twenty (20) days of receipt of the application along with application for an occupancy permit by the village.
No adult use business license shall be issued unless the premises at which the adult use will operate is in conformance with the restrictions set
forth in the village zoning ordinance2. (Ord. 98-08, 2-23-1998; amd. 2012 Code)
4-8-7: APPLICATION AND INVESTIGATION FEE:
Every application for an adult use business license (whether a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a two
hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) nonrefundable application and investigation fee. (Ord. 98-08, 2-23-1998)
4-8-8: CONTENTS OF LICENSE; POSTING REQUIRED:
The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of
the adult use business. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the business so that they may be easily
read at any time. (Ord. 98-08, 2-23-1998)
4-8-9: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE; RENEWALS:
A. Each license shall expire on April 30 each year and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 4-8-4 of this chapter.
Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before
the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. (Ord. 98-08, 2-23-1998; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 129/548
B. If the village denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to
denial, the village finds that the basis for denial of the license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license. (Ord.
98-08, 2-23-1998)
4-8-10: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another nor shall a licensee operate an adult use business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address on the license. (Ord. 98-08, 2-23-1998)
4-8-11: CLOSING HOURS:
No adult use shall be open prior to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. or after twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. (Ord. 98-08, 2-23-1998)
4-8-12: CABARETS:
A. All dancing and other performances shall occur on a stage intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet (2') from the level of the
floor. No dancing or other performances shall occur closer than ten feet (10') to any patron.
B. In addition, no performer shall fondle, caress or otherwise touch any patron, and no patron shall fondle, caress or otherwise touch any
performer.
C. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any performer, and no performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. Gratuities
may be indirectly given to performers by placing the gratuity on the stage. (Ord. 98-08, 2-23-1998)
4-8-13: VIDEO VIEWING BOOTHS:
A. No booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms used for the viewing of motion pictures or other forms of entertainment
shall have doors, curtains or portal partitions, but all such booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms so used shall
have at least one side open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to persons in the adjacent public room.
B. All such described areas shall be lighted in such a manner that the persons in the areas used for viewing motion pictures or other forms of
entertainment are visible from the adjacent public rooms, but such lighting shall not be of such intensity as to prevent the viewing of the
motion pictures or other offered entertainment. (Ord. 98-08, 2-23-1998)
4-8-14: INSPECTIONS:
An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Police Department, Fire Protection District, Building Department or other Village or
Village designated departments or agencies to inspect the premises of the adult use for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any
time it is occupied or open for business. A person who operates an adult use, or his agent or employee, violates this chapter if he/she refuses to
permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 98-08, 2-23-1998; amd. 2012 Code; Ord.
2017-42, 11-13-2017)
4-8-15: BUSINESS RECORDS:
All adult use licensees shall file a verified report with the Village showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to employees during
the preceding calendar year. In addition, all adult use licensees shall maintain and retain, for a period of two (2) years, the names, addresses
and ages of all persons employed, including independent contractors, by the licensee. (Ord. 98-08, 2-23-1998)
4-8-16: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Suspension: The Village may suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if, after a hearing, it determines that a licensee or
an employee of a licensee: 1) violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter; 2) refused to allow an inspection of the adult
use business premises as authorized by this chapter; or 3) knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult use business premises.
If the licensee or an employee of the licensee has been found guilty in a court of law of a violation of this chapter, no hearing is necessary
prior to suspension of the license.
B. Revocation:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 130/548
1. The Village shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in subsection A of this section occurs and the license has been suspended
within the preceding twelve (12) months or if the licensee is convicted of any specified criminal activity.
2. The Village shall revoke a license if it determines, after a hearing, that:
a. A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process;
b. A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of alcohol or controlled substances on the premises;
c. A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
d. A licensee knowingly operated the adult use business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
e. A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sex act to occur in or on
the licensed premises;
f. A licensee is delinquent in payment to the Village, County or State of any taxes or fees past due; or
g. A licensee has knowingly or intentionally facilitated another commission of the offense of public indecency.
3. If the Village revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued an adult use business
license for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the Village finds that the factual basis for
the revocation did not occur, the applicant may be granted a license. (Ord. 98-08, 2-23-1998)
4-8-17: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may
seek prompt judicial review of such action in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 98-08, 2-23-1998)
Chapter 9
CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICES
4-9-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION:
A. Law Adopted: The provisions of the customer service and privacy protection law are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to all
cable and/or video providers offering services within the village boundaries.
B. Amendments: Any amendment to the customer service and privacy protection law that becomes effective after the effective date hereof shall
be incorporated into this section by reference and shall be applicable to all cable and/or video providers offering services within the village
boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this
section by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village.
C. Enforcement: The village does hereby, pursuant to law, declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection
standards of the customer service and privacy protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the village. The
village does hereby incorporate the terms and conditions of the law as the terms and conditions of this section. (Ord. 2008-02, 1-14-2008)
D. Penalties:
1. The village, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any "material
breach" (as defined herein) of the law by cable and/or video providers in addition to the penalties provided by the law. The monetary
penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day of the
material breach, and shall not exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per customer.
"Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in
any provision of the law. (Ord. 2008-02, 1-14-2008; amd. 2012 Code)
2. The village shall give a cable and/or video provider written notice of any alleged material breach of the law and allow such provider thirty
(30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
3. A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been
remedied by a cable and/or video service provider after receipt by such cable and/or video provider of the notice set forth in subsection D2
of this section. (Ord. 2008-02, 1-14-2008)
E. Customer Credits For Violations: The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided
in the provisions of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle
following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits, and the
customer is under no obligation to request the credit. (Ord. 2008-02, 1-14-2008; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 131/548
4-9-2: SERVICE PROVIDER FEE:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: 1. All consideration of any kind or nature including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind
contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the
holder's cable service or video service area within the village.
2. Gross revenues shall include the following, without limitation:
a. Recurring charges for cable or video service.
b. Event based charges for cable service or video service including, but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
c. Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
d. Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and
repair charges.
e. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service including, but not limited to, service order and
service termination charges.
f. Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting
delinquent payments.
g. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or
video service within the village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the village divided by the total
number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement.
h. Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video
service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or
services on the holder's network, such as a home shopping or similar channel, subject to subsection 2i of this definition.
i. In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or
applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in
the gross revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that
are kept in the regular course of business.
j. The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b).
3. "Gross revenues" do not include any of the following:
a. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
b. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service.
c. Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any
revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video service including, without limitation, revenue received from
telecommunications services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages,
white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or
nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any
applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 132/548
d. The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee
permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
e. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity,
including sales and use taxes.
f. Security deposits collected from subscribers.
g. Amounts paid by subscribers to home shopping or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel
offered as part of the cable service or video service.
4. Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to
220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE: The provision of cable service or video service to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that
has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-
401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this section and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to the village
for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video
programming services, and which is provided through wire line facilities located at least in part in the public right of way without regard to
delivery of technology, including internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a
commercial mobile service provider as defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of and via
service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the internet.
B. Fee Imposed; Exemption:
1. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall
be five percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
2. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with
the village in which a fee is paid. The fee imposed here is the same as that imposed on other cable service or video service providers.
C. Notice To Village Of Video Service; Liability For Fee: The holder shall notify the village at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the
holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the village. The holder shall be liable for and shall pay the service provider fee to the
village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of a copy
of this section. A copy of this section shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401(b)(6) to the village.
D. Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for
the calculation of the fee.
E. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-301(c), with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement, may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that
the operator owes under subsection B1 of this section.
F. Accounting: All determinations and calculations under this section shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
G. Affect On Other Taxes:
1. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village,
including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service.
2. A state issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village simplified municipal
telecommunications tax1 or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 133/548
3. A state issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village 911 or E911 fees, taxes or
charges.
H. Audits:
1. The village shall notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit of
its books and records.
2. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service providers in its jurisdiction
to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the village.
3. If all local franchises between the village and the cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq2.
4. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
5. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the village submission of an invoice for the sum.
I. Late Payments: All fees due and payments that are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by the village pursuant to the local
government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 2008-03, 1-14-2008)
Chapter 10
VIDEO GAMING
4-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT: Any Bloomingdale dining, hotel or resort establishment with a class V video gaming supplemental liquor license.
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL OR VGT: An electronic video game machine that, upon insertion of cash, electronic card or voucher or any
combination thereof, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including, but not limited to, video poker, line up, and blackjack, as
authorized by the state of Illinois gaming board (the "gaming board") utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which the player may
receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash, or
tokens or is for amusement purposes only. (Ord. 2014-12, 2-24-2014)
4-10-2: LICENSE:
A. License Required: No establishment shall install video gaming terminals without having first obtained a class V video gaming supplemental
liquor license. (Ord. 2014-12, 2-24-2014)
4-10-3: DUTIES OF LICENSEES:
A. Hours Of Operation: Video gaming terminals may only be operated within the permitted liquor service hours, in accordance with section 4-2-
16 of this title.
B. Location, Screening And Supervision: The location and screening of the video gaming terminals and supervision of the video gaming area
shall be in accordance with subsection 4-2-18D of this title.
C. Compliance: Licensed establishments shall comply with all provisions of this code and the Illinois video gaming act, and all rules, regulations
and restrictions imposed by the gaming board.
D. Inspections: Licensed establishments shall permit inspection of any licensed premises during regular business hours by village officials to
determine compliance with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 2014-12, 2-24-2014)
4-10-4: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LIQUOR LICENSE:
A. Every class V liquor license is subject to suspension or revocation, in accordance with chapter 2 of this title.
B. If a class V liquor license is revoked or suspended in accordance with chapter 2 of this title, the village will consider the video gaming license
as issued by the village and the gaming board to be revoked or suspended at the same time, and no more VGT activity will be allowed after
the revocation or suspension, until and up to the time when a license suspension is lifted by the liquor commissioner. (Ord. 2014-12, 2-24-
2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 134/548
4-10-5: PENALTIES:
Every class V liquor license holder found to be in violation of chapter 2 of this title is subject to the penalties in accordance with chapter 2 of this
title. (Ord. 2014-12, 2-24-2014)
4-10-6: VIOLATIONS OF THE ILLINOIS VIDEO GAMING ACT:
The chief of police, or his designee, will report any violations of the Illinois video gaming act to the gaming board as soon as possible, and any
enforcement of the act will be the responsibility of the gaming board. (Ord. 2014-12, 2-24-2014)
Title 5
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
Chapter 1
NUISANCES
5-1-1: NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a nuisance or to allow a nuisance to exist/be maintained on any property under the person's
control. The following are hereby declared nuisances: (Ord. 72-27, 7-12-1972; amd. 2012 Code)
A. Dangerous Premises: To permit any building, structure, or place to remain in such a condition as to be dangerous to the public health or
safety in any manner.
B. Offensive Businesses: To maintain or operate any rendery, tallow chandlery, soap factory, glue factory, tannery, packing plant, or
slaughterhouse anywhere in the Village or within one mile of the limits thereof.
C. Manufacturing Explosives: To carry on the business of manufacturing gunpowder, nitroglycerin, or other highly explosive substances, or
mixing or grinding the materials therefor, in any building within three hundred fifty feet (350') of any structure or building erected at the time
such business may be commenced.
D. Powder Magazines Near Dwellings: To establish powder magazines within one thousand feet (1,000') of any occupied dwelling house.
E. Offensive Deposits Generally: To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any offal, filth, or noisome substance to be collected,
deposited, or to remain in any place, to the prejudice of others.
F. Offensive Deposits In Water Bodies And Public Ways: To throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter, or the carcass of any dead
animal, in any watercourse, lake, pond, spring, well or common sewer, street or public highway.
G. Deposit Of Garbage And Refuse Without Consent Of Property Owner: To dump, deposit, or place any garbage, rubbish, trash, or refuse on
real property owned by another without the consent of the owner or person in possession of same real property.
H. Stagnant Water: To obstruct, or to allow the obstruction, of any ditch, culvert, or gutter so as to cause water to stagnate therein to the
detriment of the public health; further, for any person to cause or allow any stagnant pool of water on any property under his control.
I. Obstructing, Polluting Water: To obstruct or corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water of any spring, river, stream, pond, or lake, to
the injury or prejudice of others.
J. Obstructing Navigable Waterways: To obstruct or impede, without legal authority, the passage of any navigable river or waters. (Ord. 72-27,
7-12-1972)
K. Obstructing, Encroaching Upon Public Ways And Places: To obstruct or encroach upon public highways, private ways, streets, alleys,
commons, landing places, and ways to burying places, except as may be specifically authorized by ordinance or by the Village Engineer.
(Ord. 72-27, 7-12-1972; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 135/548
L. Offensive Odors: To erect, continue, or use any building, structure, or real estate for the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture,
which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, offensive smells, or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous to the health of individuals or the public.
M. Posting Advertisements Without Permission: To advertise wares or occupations by painting notices of the same on, or affixing them to,
fences or other private property, or on lots or other natural objects, without the consent of the owner, or if in the highway or other public
place, without permission of the proper authorities; provided, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the President and
Board of Trustees from declaring what shall be nuisances and abating them within the limits of the Village. (Ord. 72-27, 7-12-1972)
5-1-2: STATUTE AND COUNTY NUISANCES:
It shall be unlawful to commit any act which constitutes a nuisance according to the statutes of the state of Illinois and the ordinances of the
county. (Ord. 72-27, 7-12-1972)
5-1-3: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall be convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 72-27, 7-12-1972; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 2
SOLID AND LIQUID WASTE1
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BULK MATERIAL: Any refuse item, not otherwise covered or excluded, that is too large to fit into an approved refuse container and which
exceeds fifty (50) pounds in weight. Examples include sofas, large tables and chairs, dressers, bookcases, mattresses and box springs, other
large household furniture, and large appliances which do not contain CFC or HCFC refrigerant gas, PCB containing capacitors, mercury
switches, or other hazardous components.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS: Any waste or refuse collected at premises on which the construction, reconstruction, alteration or remodeling of a
building(s) and/or structure(s) is in process and which waste and refuse originates and is derived from such construction processes and
operations including paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, packing material made from wood shavings, concrete, brick, lumber, metal, scraps
and shavings, and similar materials.
CUSTOMER: Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who owns, leases, occupies, or manages any premises within the village, or who is
otherwise responsible for providing for the removal of garbage and/or refuse from said premises, and who is required to obtain garbage and/or
refuse removal service by a scavenger as provided in subsection 5-2-2D of this chapter.
E-WASTE: Electronic waste banned from Illinois landfills, including, but not limited to, such items as: TVs, DVD and MP3 players, cellphones,
computers, monitors, printers, scanners, laptops, fax machines, game consoles, etc.
GARBAGE: Includes, but is not limited to, food waste, fruit, commonly edible vegetable, animal, fish or fowl matter; food containers of any
nature and other material of any nature which is subject to rapid decay, putrefaction and generation of noxious gases or odors and which serve
as breeding or feeding materials for insects, rodents or other animals.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any material or combination of materials, in any state of matter that poses a threat to public health or the environment
by exhibiting characteristics such as: carcinogenic, ignitable, oxidizing, corrosive, toxic, radioactive or explosive, and including such household
items as batteries, paints, pesticides, electronics and automotive waste. Hazardous waste as defined by the U.S. resource conservation and
recovery act, as amended, or any state or local laws or regulations with respect thereto, or a "toxic substance" as defined in the toxic substance
control act, as amended, or any regulations with respect thereto, or any reportable quantity of a "hazardous substance" as defined by the
comprehensive environmental response, compensation and liability act of 1980, as amended, or any regulations with respect thereto. The term
"hazardous waste" also includes any waste storage, treatment, incineration or disposal that requires a special license or permit from any
federal, state or local government entity, body or agency and any substance that is determined to be hazardous or toxic by any judicial or
governmental entity, body or agency having jurisdiction to make such determination.
LIQUID WASTE: Waste classified as liquid in accordance with the federal EPA assessment process, to include any waste (excluding hazardous
waste and sanitary wastewater) that is liquid at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C) regardless of whether or not it is packaged or otherwise
contained, and irrespective of whether or not the packaging or container is to be disposed of together with the liquid that it contains.
PERSON: An individual, firm, company, partnership, or corporation.
PREMISES: Each separate residence, apartment unit, condominium unit, or other dwelling unit, industrial or commercial establishment, motel,
hotel, school, church, hospital, club building or meeting hall and every structure or building within the village which is occupied for any purpose.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL: Materials that have a useful second life in the economic cycle if they are successfully collected, separated,
processed, and marketed for return to the economic mainstream. Recyclable materials shall include aluminum cans, tin/steel/bimetal cans,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 136/548
colored and clear glass bottles, HDPE and PET plastic containers, newspaper, magazines, catalogs, telephone directories, corrugated
cardboard, chipboard, 6-pack rings, and any other items contractually agreed to. Said materials shall be free of garbage or refuse and stored in
a sanitary and healthful manner for purposes of delivering to an authorized recyclable accumulation facility.
REFUSE: Every type of waste material, excluding garbage, recyclable materials, hazardous waste, and any waste prohibited from collection by
law. Refuse includes, but is not limited to, debris, appliances, furniture, furnishings and fixtures; and all other material which is not subject to
rapid decay or decomposition and which does not serve as breeding or feeding material for insects, rodents or other animals.
SCAVENGER: Any person, firm, or corporation licensed by the village to provide residential and/or commercial garbage and refuse removal
services within the village, and as further defined in article A of this chapter.
SOLID WASTE: Refers collectively to garbage, refuse, yard waste, and recyclable materials.
WHITE GOODS: Any domestic and/or commercial large appliance that contains CFC or HCFC refrigerant gas, PCB containing capacitors,
mercury switches, or other hazardous components. Examples include, but are not limited to, refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners, ranges
(both electric and gas), dehumidifiers, water heaters, furnaces, and other similar large appliances.
YARD WASTE: Consists of both hard landscape (e.g., limbs, branches, or other loose items), and soft landscape (grass clippings, leaves, and
plant materials). (Ord. 2012-26, 5-29-2012)
5-2-2: STORAGE AND DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS2:
All garbage and refuse located within the village shall be stored, contained and disposed of by each occupant/owner/customer of each premises
within the village in accordance with the following requirements:
A. Collection:
1. Residential: Curbside refuse and recyclable material collection service are provided by the village authorized residential scavenger.
Wheeled refuse and recycling carts shall be supplied by the residential scavenger for weekly refuse and recycling collection.
2. Multi-Family And Commercial: All multi-family residential and commercial establishments are required to contract with a commercial
scavenger for garbage and refuse collection service. The type, size and number of containers used and the number of pick ups required
shall be commensurate with the amount of accumulation of such garbage and refuse at any one premises, but shall not be collected less
than one time per week.
3. Occupied Premises: All occupied premises within the village are required to establish an account with and be serviced by a scavenger
licensed with the village. Residential units covered by a homeowners' association scavenger contract are not required to establish a
separate account.
B. Containers:
1. Type:
a. Can: A plastic or galvanized metal can of a capacity not less than four (4) gallons and not to exceed thirty four (34) gallons in size. No
garbage can shall exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight when filled.
b. Bag: A plastic bag of a capacity not to exceed thirty three (33) gallons in size and fifty (50) pounds in weight when filled.
c. Cart: A wheeled plastic container with a tightfitting top, not to exceed ninety five (95) gallons in size, designed to be lifted by and
emptied hydraulically into a collection truck. All carts for residential collection must be supplied by the residential scavenger.
d. Dumpster: A large metal or plastic receptacle, one cubic yard or greater, used exclusively for the temporary storage of solid waste,
recyclables or yard waste material, which is designed to be lifted by and emptied hydraulically into a collection truck.
e. Kraft Paper Bag: A special biodegradable paper bag, which shreds and degrades quickly in the composting process, not to exceed
thirty three (33) gallons in size and fifty (50) pounds in weight when filled.
f. Bundle: A bundle of material shall consist of any refuse material tied together, not to exceed eighteen inches (18") in diameter and fifty
(50) pounds in weight. No item contained within each bundle shall exceed two inches (2") in diameter.
2. Number, Use Required:
a. Each occupant, owner or customer of any premises in the village shall provide, and at all times properly maintain, a sufficient size
and/or number of containers for that customer's garbage or refuse.
b. It shall be unlawful for any occupant, owner, or customer of any premises to deposit solid waste into a container provided for another
premises, with or without the approval of the occupant/owner/customer of said premises.
c. No garbage and refuse may be stored or placed in an interior area accessible to the public or in any exterior location other than in a
container.
d. No occupant, owner, or customer shall be limited to any number of containers (except where limited by the residential scavenger
contract); however, whenever the building and zoning official deems necessary to protect the public health, welfare and safety, he may
require the owner of such premises to provide a dumpster(s).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 137/548
3. Maintenance Required:
a. All containers must comply with the standards set forth herein. All containers shall be kept clean, leakproof and disinfected with an
effective antiseptic solution as often as necessary so that same shall remain in a sanitary condition.
b. Compliance with these requirements shall be determined by the village building and zoning official. If the building and zoning official
shall find that the requirements have not been met, he may issue a citation for failure to comply with this chapter, and he may, in
addition, require that the containers will either be repaired or replaced by the occupant and/or the owner of such premises, or the
residential scavenger. Failure to replace the containers within three (3) days after notice shall constitute a violation under this chapter.
4. Placement For Pick Up, Time For Removal: For any premises for which refuse and recycling collection is contained by use of a cart
supplied by the residential scavenger, it shall be the duty of the occupant/owner/customer of such premises to cause such cart to be
placed in the parkway at the curb line, unless other arrangements have been made between such customer and the residential scavenger.
Refuse or recycling carts shall not be set out earlier than six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on the night before collection. All carts shall be removed
from the specified location no later than twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the day the scavenger has been present for the purpose of
collection and disposal.
5. Placement On Noncollection Days: On days other than the scheduled day for collection, all containers must be screened from view in the
front yard, as provided for in section 10-9-2 of this code.
C. Preparation For Disposal:
1. Garbage: It shall be the duty of every occupant/owner/customer to cause all garbage produced or present on each premises to be
securely wrapped, bagged or packed in a paper or plastic bag constructed of not less than one and one-half (1.5) mill material or a
covered box or carton that will fit into a container. After such preparation, the bag, box or carton shall be deposited into a container which
shall then be closed.
2. Refuse: Refuse must be placed in a container which shall then be closed. Acceptable bulk material or refuse items too large to fit into
residential refuse cart may be placed along side said cart (excluding hazardous materials and any materials banned by law from
collection).
3. Yard Waste:
a. Residential Curbside Collection:
(1) Soft landscape may be deposited into either a biodegradable kraft paper bag, not to exceed thirty three (33) gallons in size and
weighing no more than fifty (50) pounds, or into a can not to exceed thirty four (34) gallons in size or fifty (50) pounds in weight, set
out at the curb with a yard waste sticker attached.
(2) Hard landscape may be placed outside bags and cans if such materials are cut up and securely bound into bundles of no more than
four feet (4') in length and fifty (50) pounds in weight. Each branch shall not exceed two inches (2") in diameter, and each bundle shall
be no more than eighteen inches (18") in total diameter.
(3) Residences serviced by Townhome Association Landscape Contractors shall dispose of yard waste in accordance with their
homeowners' association's rules.
b. Multi-Family And Commercial: All multi-family and commercial premises are required to secure their own yard waste collection service.
The size and number of yard waste dumpsters used and the number of pick ups required shall be commensurate with the amount of
accumulation of yard waste at any one premises.
4. Recyclable Material: Recyclable material should be rinsed clean of food with caps/lids removed before placed into either a recycling cart
or dumpster for collection.
5. Bulk Material And White Goods: Bulk material, white goods and refuse items too large to fit into a refuse cart, may be placed next to a
refuse cart for curbside residential refuse collection. A refrigerator or freezer manufactured prior to 1970 must have the door totally
disconnected and separated therefrom, if manufactured after 1970 the door may be duct taped shut.
D. Disposal By Scavenger: All occupied premises within the village must receive garbage and refuse collection services. Single-family premises
must receive said collection service from the residential scavenger; multi-family and commercial premises must receive said collection
service from a commercial scavenger. No customer/occupant/owner shall use the disposal services of any scavenger not licensed by the
village for the purpose of removal of garbage or refuse. (Ord. 2012-26, 5-29-2012)
5-2-3: PROHIBITIONS REGARDING ACCUMULATION, STORAGE AND DISPOSAL:
The following are prohibited in connection with the accumulation, storage or disposal of garbage or refuse within the village:
A. Failure To Comply With Village Regulations: No customer, occupant, or owner of any premises within the village shall accumulate, store or
dispose of solid or liquid waste in violation of the prohibitions of this section or any other applicable provision of this code.
B. Burning: It shall be unlawful for any person to burn solid or liquid waste within the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 138/548
C. Burying: It shall be unlawful for any person to bury solid or liquid waste anywhere within the village (excluding the composting of yard waste),
or to permit the same to be placed or accumulated in any place or manner other than in a permitted container.
D. Accumulation: It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate any solid or liquid waste on any premises except in compliance with the
provisions hereof. (Ord. 2012-26, 5-29-2012)
5-2-4: ADDITIONAL PROHIBITIONS:
A. No person shall:
1. Cause or allow the open dumping of any solid or liquid waste on any property within the village.
2. Abandon, dump, or deposit any solid or liquid waste upon public right of way or other public property within the village.
3. Abandon any vehicle in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-201 of the Illinois vehicle code.
4. Conduct any solid or liquid waste storage, treatment, or disposal without a permit granted by the federal or Illinois environmental
protection agencies or in violation of any conditions imposed by such permit, including periodic reports and full access to adequate
records and the inspection of facilities, as may be necessary to assure compliance with this chapter and with other applicable regulations
and standards.
5. For any detached or attached single-family premises, use a scavenger service other than the village residential scavenger.
6. For any scavenger, who is not the village residential scavenger, to collect or remove garbage, refuse or yard waste from any detached or
attached single-family premises within the village.
7. For any scavenger, who is not licensed by the village, to collect or remove garbage, refuse or yard waste from any premises within the
village. (Ord. 2012-26, 5-29-2012)
5-2-5: REMOVAL OF GARBAGE AND DEBRIS REQUIRED; FAILURE TO COMPLY:
A. It is the duty of the occupant or owner of any property to remove all solid and liquid waste or construction debris from said property or
premises.
B. In the event the occupant or owner of any property or premises refuses or neglects to remove the solid or liquid waste after reasonable notice
from the village, the village may provide for the removal of said solid or liquid waste pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-13, and
collect from such owner the reasonable cost thereof.
C. Within sixty (60) days after such cost and expense is incurred, as described in subsection B of this section, the village shall file such a lien in
the office of the county recorder of deeds. (Ord. 2012-26, 5-29-2012)
5-2-6: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein, any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, in addition to any license
revocation or suspension, and one hundred percent (100%) payment of any unpaid fee, be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 2012-26, 5-29-2012)
ARTICLE A. SCAVENGERS
5-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
COMMERCIAL SCAVENGER: A person, firm or corporation licensed by the village to collect, remove and dispose of garbage and refuse from
each multi-family residential structure of more than two (2) families, and all other premises.
EXCLUSIVE CONTRACT: Written contract for residential scavenger service awarded by the village of Bloomingdale to a single contractor, and
amended from time to time.
RESIDENTIAL SCAVENGER: A person, firm or corporation licensed by the village to collect, remove and dispose of garbage and refuse only
from each and every single-family or duplex residential structure. (Ord. 82-13, 5-24-1982; amd. Ord. 93-55, 11-8-1993)
5-2A-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Except as set forth in this chapter, no person, firm or corporation shall remove garbage, refuse or recyclable materials from any premises in the
village, or in any manner dispose of garbage, refuse or recyclables originating within the limits of the village, or contract for or permit himself or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 139/548
itself to be employed or engaged for the removal, transportation or disposal of such garbage, refuse or recyclables without first having secured
from the village a scavenger license. (Ord. 88-43, 9-26-1988)
5-2A-3: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
A. Residential: The village shall issue one scavenger license, which license shall allow for acting as a residential scavenger. The village may
solicit bids for residential scavenger services.
B. Commercial: The village shall issue licenses for commercial scavengers, provided they meet all requirements as set forth by the village. (Ord.
88-43, 9-26-1988)
5-2A-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
Application for a scavenger license shall be made to the village clerk upon forms provided. The annual fee as provided in section 4-1-5-1 of this
code shall accompany each application. (Ord. 82-13, 5-24-1982; amd. 2012 Code)
5-2A-5: FINANCIAL AND SERVICE RESPONSIBILITY:
Every applicant must demonstrate that it has adequate and sufficient equipment, personnel, financial responsibility and a licensed and approved
disposal site wherein it may lawfully dispose of all garbage and refuse collected by such licensee within the village. The village administrator
may establish appropriate specifications and procedures for license applications which an applicant must satisfy and fulfill in order to comply
with the provisions hereof. (Ord. 82-13, 5-24-1982)
5-2A-6: BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Each scavenger shall provide evidence of workers' compensation insurance coverage in a minimum amount of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00), pursuant to Illinois law, and shall carry public liability insurance protecting the scavenger and village with limits of not less
than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person, and five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for any one occurrence, and the scavenger shall
carry property damage insurance protecting the scavenger and the village with limits of not less than five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) for each occurrence. Such insurance will protect the scavenger and the village from any liability, loss or damage, or any
claims of such liability, loss or damage, resulting, or claimed to have resulted as a result of operations of the scavenger or pursuant to its
operations. Said insurance shall be secured from a responsible company acceptable to the village, and certificates of insurance shall be
furnished to the village by the scavenger.
B. In addition, the scavenger shall agree to and shall hold the village harmless as to any liability or claims of liability arising under or pursuant to
its scavenger operation or contract. (Ord. 82-13, 5-24-1982)
5-2A-7: RIGHT TO DENY LICENSE:
The village shall have the right to deny a license to any applicant who fails to meet any applicable requirements of this article, or the application
specifications established by the village. (Ord. 82-13, 5-24-1982)
5-2A-8: TERM OF LICENSE; DISPLAY REQUIRED:
Any license shall be in full force and effect and valid for a one year period. The license shall be provided by the village and displayed on each
licensee's motor vehicle used in the village for scavenger purposes. (Ord. 82-13, 5-24-1982)
5-2A-9: REMOVAL OF RECYCLABLES FROM APARTMENT BUILDINGS REQUIRED:
A. A commercial scavenger providing service to apartment buildings, as a condition of licensure, shall submit a written plan to the village at the
time when the initial application or renewal for licensure is made, setting forth a recycling plan for the apartments serviced including, but not
limited to:
1. The type of dumpster to be used for collection of recyclable materials.
2. A map showing the dumpster location, which shall be located no more than two hundred feet (200') from the nearest entry or exit into the
apartment building, and a description of the capacity of the dumpster showing a minimum capacity of 0.033 cubic yards per apartment
unit.
B. No commercial scavenger will be permitted to operate within the village offering service to apartment buildings unless and until such time as
that scavenger offers those customers the same recycling opportunities as are offered to other residents in the village by the residential
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 140/548
scavenger operating under exclusive license and contract to the village. (Ord. 93-55, 11-8-1993)
5-2A-10: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Type Of Vehicle: No person, firm or corporation shall transport garbage, refuse or recyclable materials over the streets or other public ways in
the village unless such garbage, refuse or recyclable materials are contained in a leakproof compaction type vehicle, commonly referred to
as a "packer type" refuse body, or a vehicle approved and licensed by the village.
B. Maintenance Required: Such equipment shall be maintained in good condition and repair to prevent nuisance and insect breeding and kept,
when not in use, in a closed building or shed if housed within the village. (Ord. 88-43, 9-26-1988)
5-2A-11: REQUIREMENTS AT COLLECTION SITE:
A. A scavenger shall immediately clean up any garbage, refuse or recyclable materials that it may have caused to spill on private or public
places, and shall perform the function in a neat and workmanlike manner, and shall replace any permanent type garbage containers which
its agents or employees may have damaged. (Ord. 88-43, 9-26-1988; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Containers provided for the recycling program must be stacked and replaced in an orderly fashion near the curb. (Ord. 88-43, 9-26-1988)
5-2A-12: STORAGE AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE:
It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to dispose of or to store any garbage or refuse in any place within the village limits, without the prior
written permission of the village administrator. (Ord. 82-13, 5-24-1982)
5-2A-13: INSPECTIONS:
The village building and zoning official or other personnel designated by the village administrator shall inspect or cause to be inspected, as often
as it is deemed necessary, scavenger refuse vehicles; bulk storage containers of commercial, multi-family, institutional or industrial
establishments; and methods of doing business utilized by each licensee hereunder to determine whether there is compliance with all
applicable provisions of this article. (Ord. 82-13, 5-24-1982)
5-2A-14: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
The village shall have the right, after a public hearing pursuant to prior reasonable notice to the scavenger, to revoke or suspend a license if it is
determined that such licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article, or any other applicable provisions of this code or any written
agreement between the village and such scavenger. Any suspension or revocation of a license shall not prevent the imposition of any other
penalty provided in this code. (Ord. 82-13, 5-24-1982)
5-2A-15: VIOLATIONS PROHIBITED:
No licensee shall dump or otherwise place or dispose of garbage or refuse, construction debris or recyclables in violation of the laws of the state
or the ordinances of the village. (Ord. 82-13, 5-24-1982)
Chapter 3
ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
5-3-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the VILLAGE OF BLOOMINGDALE ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2009-30, 9-14-2009)
5-3-2: STATUTE AUTHORITY:
The village promulgates this chapter pursuant to its authority to adopt ordinances pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12,
5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2 and such other authority as applicable to the village, and other applicable authority, all as amended from
time to time. (Ord. 2009-30, 9-14-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 141/548
5-3-3: PURPOSES:
A. The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of village, and to protect and enhance water
quality in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.) through the
regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the storm drainage system. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
discharges other than those occurring as a direct result of precipitation and/or snowmelt into the municipal separate storm sewer system
(MS4) and the storm drainage system in order to comply with requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES)
phase II permit process. Other purposes of this chapter include:
1. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 and the storm drainage system by nonstormwater discharges; and
2. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4 and the storm drainage system.
B. The purposes of this chapter are consistent with the county stormwater management plan (the "plan"), which advances the following
objectives:
1. To protect and enhance the quality, quantity, and availability of surface water and groundwater resources.
2. To preserve and enhance existing aquatic and riparian environments and encourage restoration of degraded areas.
3. To promote equitable, acceptable, and legal measures for stormwater management.
C. The purposes of this chapter shall be implemented by its provisions. (Ord. 2009-30, 9-14-2009)
5-3-4: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
A. Interpretation Of Words And Terms: For the purposes of this chapter, the terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
1. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; and
2. Words used in the singular number include the plural number, and words used in the plural number include the singular number; and
3. The words "shall", "will", and "must" are mandatory, not permissive; and
4. The term "Director" refers to the individual responsible for ordinance administration and enforcement. (Ord. 2009-30, 9-14-2009)
B. Definitions: For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings set forth, except where otherwise
specifically indicated. Words and terms not defined shall have the meanings indicated by common dictionary definition.
BUILDING: A structure that is constructed or erected partially or wholly aboveground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term "building"
includes manufactured homes and includes both the aboveground and the belowground portions of the structure.
CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA): The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments
thereto.
COMMITTEE: The Village of Bloomingdale Planning, Zoning and Environmental Concerns Committee of the Village Board, or successor
committee.
COMMUNITY: Any municipality or the unincorporated county within DuPage County acting as a unit of local government.
COUNTY: The County of DuPage, Illinois.
DEPARTMENT: The Village of Bloomingdale Engineering Department or successor agency.
DIRECTOR: The Village Engineer or successor position or his or her designee(s).
DRAIN: Piping and appurtenances for conveying a fluid.
FACILITY: Something that is built, installed, or established to serve a particular purpose.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Any material which may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment.
ILLICIT CONNECTION: Either of the following:
1. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drainage system
including, but not limited to, any conveyances that allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and
washwater to enter the storm drainage system and any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless
of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the community; or
2. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drainage system that has not been documented
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 142/548
in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the community.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm drainage system, except as exempted in subsection 5-3-
7A3 of this chapter.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES: Activities subject to an industrial NPDES stormwater permit, as defined in 40 CFR section 122.26 (b)(14).
LINE: A hollow conduit through which fluids are transported between two (2) or more points.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): A conveyance or system of conveyances (including, but not limited to,
sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, Municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, and storm sewers)
owned or operated by a governmental entity and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and that is not used for collecting
or conveying sewage.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT: A permit issued by Illinois environmental protection
agency (IEPA) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual,
group, or general areawide basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is not the direct result of precipitation and/or snowmelt
in the tributary drainage basin.
NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI): Illinois environmental protection agency notice of intent to participate in coverage under the general permit to
discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity.
PARCEL: Contiguous land under single ownership or control.
PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership, public or private corporation, municipality, political subdivision, government agency, or
any other legal entity, including heirs, successors, agents, officers, and assigns of such entity.
pH NEUTRAL: pH value between 6.5 and 9.0 standard units.
PLAN: The DuPage County stormwater management plan, adopted by the DuPage County board in September 1989, as amended from
time to time.
POLLUTANT: Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents;
oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or
abandoned objects, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, wastewater, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes;
wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.
RUNOFF: The waters derived from precipitation and/or melting snow within a tributary drainage basin that exceeds the infiltration capacity of
that basin.
SEWAGE: Polluted stormwater, wastewater, or other refuse liquids usually conveyed by sewers.
SEWER: An artificial conduit to carry off sewage and/or surface water (as from rainfall), including sanitation, stormwater, and/or combined
sewers.
SEWERAGE: A system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation, pumping, and treatment of sewage.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: A facility by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
humanmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
STRUCTURE: Anything that is erected or constructed. The term "structure" includes, without limitation: buildings, manufactured homes,
tanks, dams, sewers, constructed channels, outfalls, parking lots, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and concrete patios.
VILLAGE: The Village of Bloomingdale, Illinois, a Municipality with home rule powers pursuant to State Statute.
WASTEWATER: Water that has been used and is not for reuse unless treated by a wastewater treatment facility.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES: As defined in the CWA, "waters of the United States", applies only to surface waters, rivers, lakes,
estuaries, coastal waters, and wetlands. Not all surface waters are legally "waters of the United States". Generally, those waters include the
following:
1. All interstate waters;
2. Intrastate waters used in interstate and/or foreign commerce;
3. Tributaries of the above;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 143/548
4. Territorial seas at the cyclical high tide mark; and
5. Wetlands adjacent to all the above. (Ord. 2009-30, 9-14-2009; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
5-3-5: APPLICABILITY AND INTERPRETATION:
A. Applicability: This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system from any developed or undeveloped lands within the
jurisdiction of the department, unless explicitly exempted by subsection 5-3-7A3 of this chapter, including any amendments or revisions
thereto.
B. Interpretation:
1. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, prosperity, and general welfare and the environment of the residents of the Village, and to effectuate the purposes of this
chapter and enabling legislation.
2. a. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions
imposed by any other applicable statute, law, ordinance, regulation, or rule, the provision that is most restrictive or imposes the higher
standards or requirements shall apply.
b. This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. Where any provision of
this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law,
whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control.
3. The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to be cumulative of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other ordinances, laws,
codes, and regulations in existence or which may be passed governing any subject matter of this chapter. To the greatest extent possible,
the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict with, the provisions of such other ordinances,
laws, codes, and regulations, and with each other, to the end that all such provisions may be given their fullest application.
4. The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore, this chapter does not intend
or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. 2009-30, 9-14-2009)
5-3-6: ADMINISTRATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Participating Communities: Participating communities within the County shall promulgate and enforce this chapter in accordance with the
following participation levels. Participation levels shall be established through the adoption of intergovernmental agreements.
1. Duties of a full participant community include:
a. Completion of an intergovernmental agreement for full participation in the Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination Program.
b. Provide the department with a current storm sewer atlas. An updated storm sewer atlas shall be provided to the department annually.
c. Provide assistance to the department in acquiring access to the storm drainage system as mutually deemed necessary.
d. Provide timely prosecution of persons found to be in violation of this chapter when necessary per section 5-3-10 of this chapter.
e. Provide the department with documentation of any enforcement action or prosecution from the previous one year for inclusion in the
IEPA annual facility inspection report.
2. Duties of a partial participant community include:
a. Completion of an intergovernmental agreement for partial participation in the illicit discharge detection and elimination program.
b. Provide the department with a current storm sewer atlas. An updated storm sewer atlas shall be provided to the department annually.
c. Tracing discharges to their source when the department determines that an illicit discharge has been located within the jurisdiction of
the community.
d. Provide timely prosecution of persons found to be in violation of this chapter when necessary per section 5-3-10 of this chapter.
e. Provide the department with documentation of any enforcement action or prosecution from the previous one year for inclusion in the
IEPA annual facility inspection report.
3. Duties of a nonparticipant community include:
a. Responsible for developing and implementing an illicit discharge detection and elimination program to ensure compliance with the IEPA
NPDES regulations within municipal limits on its own behalf.
b. If an intergovernmental agreement is not submitted to the county for partial or full participation, the community will be designated as a
nonparticipant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 144/548
B. Responsibility For Administration: The department shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers
granted or duties imposed upon the department may be delegated in writing by the director to persons or entities acting in the beneficial
interest or in the employ of the department as representatives, contractors, designees and/or assigns.
C. Duties Of Director: The duties and functions of the director shall include:
1. Determining policy related to and directing the enforcement of this chapter, as applicable;
2. Supervising the execution of this chapter; and
3. Notifying the communities and the IEPA of any amendments to this chapter.
D. Representative Capacity: In all cases when any action is taken by the director, or his or her duly appointed designee, to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, such action shall be taken in the name of and on behalf of the village, and neither the director nor his or her
designee, in so acting for the village, shall be rendered personally liable. (Ord. 2009-30, 9-14-2009)
5-3-7: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS AND EXEMPTIONS:
A. Illicit Discharge Prohibitions And Exemptions:
1. No person shall place, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under their control to place, drain, or otherwise discharge into
the storm drainage system or MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than normal stormwater, unless specifically
exempted in subsection A3 of this section.
2. The following discharges into the MS4 or the storm drainage system shall be prohibited:
a. Discharges that are not a direct result of precipitation and/or snowmelt within the drainage area of the MS4.
b. Discharges from an illicit connection.
3. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established herein, provided they do not cause an adverse effect on
water quality as determined by the director:
a. Discharges caused by governmental public works and stormwater management units as part of their standard operations in compliance
with all applicable regulations.
b. Discharges required by law or authorized by permit, including any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver,
or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the USEPA and/or IEPA.
c. Water line and fire hydrant flushing.
d. Landscape irrigation water.
e. Rising groundwaters.
f. Groundwater infiltration.
g. Pumped groundwater.
h. Discharges from potable water sources.
i. Foundation drains.
j. Air conditioning condensate.
k. Irrigation water (except for wastewater irrigation).
l. Springs.
m. Water from crawl space pumps.
n. Footing drains.
o. Storm sewer cleaning water.
p. Water from any outdoor residential or charitable or nonprofit organization car wash.
q. Routine external building washdown which does not use detergents.
r. Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
s. Dechlorinated pH neutral swimming pool discharges.
t. Residual street washwater.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 145/548
u. Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
v. Dechlorinated water reservoir discharges.
w. Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spilled material has been
removed).
x. Discharges associated with dye testing of water lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, private drains or septic systems; however, this
activity shall not take place until the discharger or tester has provided notification to the department at least two (2) full business days
prior to the test date, unless an emergency situation does not allow time for such notification.
y. Other discharges approved by the department as being substantially like any of the discharge types enumerated in this subsection A3.
B. Illicit Connection Prohibitions:
1. The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drainage system or MS4 is prohibited.
2. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
3. A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm drainage system or
MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
4. Connections in violation of this chapter must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved wastewater management
system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the department and the appropriate sanitary treatment facility.
5. Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer
system or MS4, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the department
requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or
conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or conveyance be identified as a storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall
location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, MS4, sanitary sewer system, or other discharge point be identified. Results of
these investigations are to be documented and provided to the department. (Ord. 2009-30, 9-14-2009)
5-3-8: INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY DISCHARGES; NOTICE OF INTENT:
A. Any person operating a facility subject to the IEPA's general permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity shall submit a
copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to the county stormwater management division department at the same time the operator submits the
original notice of intent to the IEPA as applicable.
B. The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the county stormwater management division either in person or by mailing it to:
Notice Of Intent To Discharge Stormwater
DuPage County Stormwater Management Division
421 North County Farm Road
Wheaton, IL 60187
C. A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is discharging stormwater associated with industrial activity without having
submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the county stormwater management division. (Ord. 2009-30, 9-14-2009)
5-3-9: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
A. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person owning, leasing or exercising control over a property, or responsible for
emergency response for a property, has information of any known or suspected spill of materials which is resulting or may result in illicit
discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4 or the storm drainage system, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment, and cleanup of such spill.
B. 1. In the event of such a spill, said person shall immediately notify local emergency dispatch services and act in accordance with Illinois
emergency management agency (IEMA) and IEPA regulations.
2. Said person shall notify the department of the spill in person or by phone, facsimile, or e-mail no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the department within three (3) business
days of the phone notice.
C. If the spill emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an onsite
written record of the spill and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five (5) years. (Ord.
2009-30, 9-14-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 146/548
D. Proper notice, including containment and cleanup as outlined in subsections A and B of this section shall exempt the notifying parties from
the penalty referenced in subsection 5-3-10F of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-30, 9-14-2009; amd. 2012 Code)
E. Failure to provide notification of a release as provided in this section is a violation of this chapter.
F. Notwithstanding the language of subsection D of this section, a party causing a spill that contaminates or harms a storm sewer system shall
not be relieved of liability for damages resulting from such act. (Ord. 2009-30, 9-14-2009)
5-3-10: VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. Enforcement Official: The director shall have primary responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The village may enter
into agreements with other governmental units for the purpose of implementing this chapter.
B. Violations: A person violates this chapter when that person:
1. Performs any act expressly prohibited by any provision of this chapter; or
2. Disobeys, neglects, or fails to carry out or comply with any provision of this chapter or of any order or notice issued by the director; or
3. Allows any condition or act that violates any provision of this chapter to continue unabated on property owned, leased, managed, or under
the control of such person; or
4. Directs, orders, permits, or allows a second person to do any act expressly prohibited by any provision of this chapter, or to maintain or
continue unabated any condition or act that violates any provision of this chapter on property owned, leased, managed or under the
control of the first person.
C. Notice To Correct Violations; Director Actions:
1. The director may issue a notice of violation ordering a person to take action to achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter
and/or to cease and desist from any action conducted in violation of this chapter. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a
notice of violation and/or order to cease and desist shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
2. The director shall set forth the form and content of any notices issued under this chapter.
3. The director may issue a warning of violation ordering a person to take action to achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If
a person fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a warning, the director may, thereafter, issue a notice of violation.
4. The director may issue a warning of violation and disburse educational materials outlining appropriate measures to minimize the
discharge of pollutants.
5. If a person fails to comply with an order issued under this subsection, the director may direct the appropriate legal counsel to commence
any legal proceeding authorized by this chapter, under law or equity, necessary to enforce any provision of this chapter and/or to protect
public health and safety. Any legal action brought under this chapter shall be in the name of the village.
D. Emergency Cease And Desist Orders:
1. The department may obtain an emergency order in the event of the following:
a. Any person has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past
violations are likely to recur; and
b. That the person's violation has caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or storm drainage system and an
imminent threat of violation is present.
2. The department may issue the emergency order to the violator directing that the violator:
a. Immediately cease and desist all such violations;
b. Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and
c. Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
3. Any person notified of an emergency order under this subsection shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering
discharge. In the event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the department may take such
steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4, storm drainage system, or waters of the United States, and/or
endangerment to persons or to the environment, including immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other
municipal utility services. The department may allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction
of the department that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the discharger
under this chapter. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a
detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 147/548
the department within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a
bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.
E. Nuisance Declared; Abatement Provisions:
1. Declaration Of Nuisance: Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a threat to
public health and safety and is declared and deemed a public nuisance.
2. Abatement Provisions:
a. Whenever a nuisance shall be found to exist on any premises, the director may order such nuisance to be abated upon determination
that the nuisance constitutes a threat to public health or safety.
b. In the event of an emergency situation, as determined by the director, involving an immediate threat to public health and safety, the
director may direct legal counsel to immediately commence any legal or equitable proceeding necessary to restrain, abate, and/or
remedy said situation. The director may take such action without having to first issue a notice of violation to the person(s) having control
of, or acting as agent for, such premises where the nuisance is located, or waiting for such person(s) to abate or remove such nuisance
as previously ordered by the director.
c. In all other cases, the director may notify, in writing, the person(s) having control of, or acting as agent for, such premises where the
nuisance is located and directing such person(s) to abate or remove such nuisance within such time as is stated on the notice. Upon the
failure or refusal of such person(s) to comply with the notice, the director may direct that appropriate proceedings commence to compel
the abatement or removal of such a nuisance in any manner allowed by law, equity, or this chapter and/or authorizing the department to
act to abate or remove such nuisance. The person(s) having control of such premises, in addition to the other remedies provided by this
chapter, shall be liable to the department for any costs incurred by the department to effect such abatement or removal including
reasonable attorney fees and other costs of enforcement, to be recovered by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2009-30, 9-14-
2009)
F. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2009-30, 9-14-
2009; amd. 2012 Code)
G. Remedies Not Exclusive: The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedy available under this chapter or under any
applicable federal, state, or local law and do not supersede or limit any and all other penalties provided by law. The director may seek, at his
discretion, cumulative remedies. (Ord. 2009-30, 9-14-2009)
5-3-11: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
A. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have his MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or
reduce an illicit discharge. The department shall notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the
department for a reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated
pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the department.
B. In emergency situations, the department may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or
to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4, storm drainage system, or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the department may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the
MS4, storm drainage system, or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to public health and safety. The department shall obtain
an emergency court order authorizing such termination. (Ord. 2009-30, 9-14-2009)
5-3-12: APPEALS:
A. Every request for an appeal shall be made, in writing, to the director. The director may delegate the hearing of appeals to the committee in
the manner provided in this section.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling, or determination by the director, or by any interpretation or application of any provision of this
chapter, may appeal such matter. An appeal of any decision made by the director shall be made within seven (7) days of the decision
contested, except an appeal involving the assessment charge or calculation of any fine or penalty, in which cases, an appeal shall be
brought before said amount becomes thirty (30) days past due.
1. The appeal procedure shall commence when the person aggrieved notifies the director, in writing, of the intent to appeal the decision of
the director. Such notice shall contain a short, clear, statement stating the following:
a. Identifying the decision of the director which such person is appealing and how this chapter has been misread, misinterpreted, or
misapplied in this instance and/or any mistakes of fact the aggrieved believes the director to have relied upon.
b. The name and both a mailing address and a telephone number of the person making the request, which contact information shall be
used for giving notices related to the appeal. The person making the request shall attach all written materials on which he or she intends
to rely upon in support of the request.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 148/548
2. The director may, without conducting a hearing, grant relief sought by the appeal, or may set the matter over for a hearing in the manner
provided in subsection B3 of this section.
3. Upon receipt of such notice of appeal, if relief is not granted by the director in accordance with subsection B2 of this section, the director
shall set a date for a hearing. Such hearing shall take place no fewer than fourteen (14) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date
that the director receives such notice of appeal, unless the director and party requesting the hearing agree to a different schedule. The
director shall notify the person making the appeal of the date of such hearing.
4. At the hearing, the person making the appeal may appear in person or be represented by counsel, or submit his case in writing. The
decision concerning the appeal shall be in writing, shall be communicated to the person making the appeal, and shall state a finding upon
which the decision is based.
C. The committee shall have the authority to reverse, modify, or affirm any decision, ruling, or determination by the director made pursuant to
this chapter upon appeal. The committee shall not act in a manner that would violate or in any way conflict with any federal or state standard
or requirement. The committee or village board may adopt such additional rules and procedures as it deems appropriate for performing such
matters.
D. The decision of the committee may be appealed to the village board in accord with the village board rules. (Ord. 2009-30, 9-14-2009)
5-3-13: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within seven
(7) days of the decision of the director or committee upholding the decision of the department, then representatives of the department are
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. In no case shall an appeal stay or bar the
village from commencing a legal action seeking emergency relief. (Ord. 2009-30, 9-14-2009)
Chapter 4
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS DISCHARGE
5-4-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of this chapter:
A. To establish the legal authority of the village to enable the establishment of policies and procedures to inspect, perform surveillance, monitor,
perform emergency response, containment and remediation; to declare as a public nuisance, and therefore unlawful and subject to
prosecution, any wilful or accidental acts to cause discharges, deposits, spills, placements, and/or dumps of hazardous materials either over,
under, or onto public and private properties, or any location where not intended, which endangers or may endanger the public health, safety
and welfare, and the environment in the village; and
B. To establish a means to impose fines and penalties and recoup village expenses incurred to investigate, inspect, perform surveillance,
monitor, declare a public nuisance, respond, contain and remediate any damages caused by wilful or accidental acts, to cause deposits,
spills, placements, dumps, and discharges of hazardous materials either over, under, or onto any premises, or any location where not
intended or permitted. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009)
5-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall mean:
DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect, wilful or accidental, spill, placement, deposit, dump, and/or discharge of a hazardous material over, under,
or onto a premises.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Any material, or combination of materials, in any state of matter including, but not limited to, any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which, because of its location, quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or
significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to the public health, safety, welfare, and/or the environment when improperly
treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed including, but not limited to, materials or substances that are caustic,
flammable, poisonous, carcinogenic or acidic.
PERSON: Any individual, owner, lessee, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation, business, trust, discharger, or other entity
recognized by law and acting as the owner, owner's agent, operator, assign, successor, heir or in any other capacity that results in any wilful or
accidental acts to cause discharges of hazardous materials.
PREMISES: Any public or private building, facility, lot, parcel of land, property, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, developed or
undeveloped, including public rights of way and public or private easements, roads, streets, driveways, sidewalks, parking strips and lots.
VILLAGE: The village of Bloomingdale. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 149/548
5-4-3: APPLICABILITY AND INTERPRETATION:
A. Applicability: This chapter shall apply to any discharges of hazardous materials as defined in section 5-4-2 of this chapter.
B. Minimum Requirements: The provisions set forth herein are considered minimum provisions. Therefore, this chapter neither intends nor
implies that compliance with these minimum provisions will ensure that there will be no prosecution against any person causing wilful or
accidental contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharges of hazardous materials pursuant to regulations promulgated by other
agencies such as USEPA and IEPA.
C. Severability:
1. The provisions, clauses, sentences and paragraphs of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable in accordance with the following
rules:
a. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter as invalid, then such
judgment shall not affect any other provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter.
b. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular person or
premises, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other person or premises.
2. All such unaffected provisions, clauses, sentences, or paragraphs of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-
2009)
5-4-4: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
The Department of Public Works, managed by the Director of Public Works and Village Engineer, shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed pursuant to this chapter may be delegated in writing by the Director of Public
Works and Village Engineer to persons in the employ of the Village, as representatives, contractors, designees, assigns and/or entities acting in
the beneficial interest of the Village. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
5-4-5: DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge hazardous material(s) on any premises within the Village. This prohibition shall not apply to any
person permitted under a USEPA, IEPA, or NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the person and administered under the
authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) or Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA); provided, that the
person is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and any other applicable laws and regulations; and provided,
that written approval or permit has been granted. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009)
5-4-6: NUISANCE DECLARED:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter is a threat to the public health, safety, welfare and/or the environment and is hereby declared and deemed a nuisance, and may
be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such
nuisance may be taken. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009)
5-4-7: ACCESS TO PREMISES:
This section applies to any persons or premises reasonably suspected of violating the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009;
amd. 2012 Code)
A. After thirty (30) days' notice in nonemergency cases, and without prior notice in the case of an emergency, the Director of Public Works or
Village Engineer shall be permitted reasonable access, as often as may be reasonably necessary, to enter into, onto and upon a premises to
cause inspections to determine compliance and/or conduct emergency response, containment and/or remediation.
B. Except in conditions of emergency, if the Director of Public Works or Village Engineer has been refused access to any part of a premises,
and the Director of Public Works or Village Engineer is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of any
provision of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect, monitor, sample the premises to verify compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and the environment, then the Director of Public
Works or Village Engineer may seek issuance of a search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction.
C. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director of Public Works or Village Engineer access to a premises reasonably suspected of violating
provisions of this chapter is considered to be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-
2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 150/548
5-4-8: NOTIFICATION OF DISCHARGE:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, any person responsible for a discharge of hazardous material(s) from, over, under, or onto any
premises shall immediately contact emergency response agencies of said occurrence via emergency dispatch services and the Director of
Public Works or Village Engineer, and shall immediately take all necessary steps to ensure the containment and remediation of such
discharge(s) of hazardous material(s). Failure to provide said notice shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009; amd.
2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
5-4-9: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
A. Whenever the Director of Public Works or Village Engineer discovers, finds, determines or reasonably suspects that a person has violated a
provision of this chapter, then the Director of Public Works or Village Engineer may, by written notice of violation to the responsible person or
persons and by posting a copy of said notice of violation on the subject premises, order compliance. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009; amd. 2012
Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
B. Such notice of violation ordering compliance may require without limitation:
1. The suspension of activities causing the discharge(s); and
2. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; and
3. The elimination of said discharge(s); and
4. That said discharge(s) shall cease and desist; and
5. The abatement or remediation of contamination or hazards and the restoration of any affected premises; and
6. The payment of fines, fees, and costs of abatement and remediation; and
7. Other reasonable actions, orders, provisions or requirements intended to protect the public health, safety, welfare, and the environment.
(Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009)
C. Except in the case of emergency permitting immediate access, if the notice of violation orders monitoring, sampling, abatement, containment
remediation and/or restoration of the affected premises, then said notice of violation shall set forth a deadline, not less than fifteen (15)
calendar days after the date of the notice, when such monitoring sampling, abatement, remediation, and/or restoration shall be completed.
Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to restrain or cease actions causing the violation, or fail to monitor, sample,
abate, remediate or restore the premises within the established deadline, then the required order conditions may be completed by the
Director of Public Works or Village Engineer, and the expenses thereof shall be charged to the person or persons violating this chapter. (Ord.
2009-31, 9-14-2009; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
D. As necessary and required, the Village may institute appropriate action or proceedings in the Circuit Court of DuPage County, or other
applicable court, to cause the violator to restrain, monitor, sample, abate, restore, remediate and/or reimburse the Village for such violation.
(Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009)
5-4-10: SUSPENSION OF ACTIVITIES:
A. Emergency Situations:
1. In cases of imminent and substantial emergency, as declared by the Director of Public Works or Village Engineer, or other sworn
Municipal official, the Village may, without prior notice, suspend or cause the suspension of activities by a person causing a discharge
when such suspension is necessary to stop, prevent or minimize an actual or threatened discharge which presents, or may present, an
imminent and substantial danger to the public health, safety and welfare, and/or the environment. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009; amd. 2012
Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
2. If the person(s) notified of said declaration of any emergency and of said violation of this chapter fails to comply with the suspension order
issued in an emergency, then the Village may take such steps as deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare and/or the
environment.
B. Nonemergency Situations:
1. Any person suspected, observed, discovered or detected of a discharge in violation of this chapter may have said activity suspended or
terminated if doing so is deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare and/or the environment. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009)
2. The Director of Public Works or Village Engineer will serve said person, in writing, with a notice of violation indicating the suspected,
observed, discovered or detected discharge of hazardous material(s) in violation of this chapter and describing the necessary action(s) to
achieve compliance. The person receiving a notice of violation shall suspend activities outlined in said notice until compliance is achieved.
3. Any person shall be considered violating the provisions of this chapter and subject to prosecution if said person resumes a discharge
previously suspended or terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the Director of Public Works or Village Engineer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 151/548
(Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
5-4-11: ABATEMENT COSTS:
A. Any person found violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the Village by reason of such violation for any direct
and indirect costs including, but not limited to, administrative, legal and court costs, costs incurred to cause restraint, monitoring, sampling,
abatement, restoration, containment, remediation, and/or other reasonable actions to protect the public health, safety, welfare and/or the
environment. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009)
B. After the Director of Public Works or Village Engineer compiles the total costs, the person(s) responsible for said violation will be notified of
and invoiced for said total costs incurred by the Village. Said costs shall become the liability of the person(s) found responsible for the
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
C. If the amount due is not paid within thirty (30) calendar days pursuant to the terms and conditions of the invoice submitted by the Village,
then the charges shall become a lawful encumbrance against the person and/or premises and shall constitute a lien against the person
and/or the premises for the full amount. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009)
D. At his sole discretion, the Director of Public Works or Village Engineer may permit the responsible person(s) to satisfy the liability, in equal
installments, for a duration determined by the Director of Public Works or Village Engineer, but in no case to exceed ten (10) years. The
liability shall accrue interest at an annual percentage rate to be determined by the Director of Public Works or Village Engineer, upon advice
of the Finance Director-Treasurer, but in no case less than a five percent (5%) annual percentage rate. Said interest shall be assessed on
the balance beginning on the thirtieth day following the date of first invoice. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-
13-2017)
5-4-12: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF; LEGAL AND EQUITABLE RELIEF:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any provision of this chapter. A person who has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this chapter is hereby determined to be subjecting, or has subjected, imminent or substantial danger to
the public health, safety, welfare and/or the environment.
B. In such cases, the Village shall have authority to cause to be instituted a civil action or petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction
restraining the person from activities which would create further violations and/or compel the person to perform abatement, remediation or
restoration of the violation. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009)
C. In the enforcement of this chapter, the Director of Public Works or Village Engineer may have authority to institute or cause to be instituted, in
the name of the Village, any and all required actions, legal and equitable, including appeals. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009; amd. 2012 Code;
Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
5-4-13: PENALTIES:
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this chapter shall be subject to civil or criminal prosecution and imprisonment to the fullest
extent permitted by the law, and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. The Village may recover all attorney fees, court
costs, administrative fees and expenses, and other associated expenses pursuant to provisions outlined in this chapter. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-
2009; amd. 2012 Code)
5-4-14: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable Federal, State or local law, and it is
within the discretion of the Village to seek cumulative remedies. (Ord. 2009-31, 9-14-2009)
Chapter 5
NOISE CONTROL1
5-5-1: NOISE PROHIBITED GENERALLY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise or any noise
which either annoys, disturbs, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others within the limits of the village. (Ord. 72-29, 7-
12-1972; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 152/548
5-5-2: SPECIFIC ACTS PROHIBITED:
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
A. Vehicle Noises:
1. The sounding of any horn or signaling device of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place of the village,
except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the
sounding of any such device unnecessarily or for an unreasonable period of time.
2. The use of any signaling device, except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle, or other device operated by
engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic for any reason is held up.
3. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary
grating, grinding, rattling, or other such noise.
B. Exhaust: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat, or other
motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
C. Steam Whistle: The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the
time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper village authorities.
D. Transportation Of Metal Rails, Pillars And Columns: The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and
along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to
disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places.
E. Radios And Phonographs: The using or operating, or the permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio, receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet
and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or
persons who are in the room, vehicle, or chamber in which the machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The
operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') from the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is
located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection.
F. Drums: The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show, or sale by
creation of noise.
G. Loudspeakers And Amplifiers: Playing, using or operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated, any radio, receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast
upon the public street for the use and purposes of commercial advertising or for attracting the attention of the public to any building or
structure.
H. Yelling And Shouting: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., or at any time or place so as to annoy or destroy the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any
office or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity.
I. Hawkers And Peddlers: The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
(Ord. 72-29, 7-12-1972)
J. Animals: The keeping of any animal which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in
the vicinity. (Ord. 72-29, 7-12-1972; amd. 2012 Code)
K. Loading, Unloading, Opening Boxes: The creating of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the
opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
L. Construction Or Repair Of Buildings: The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between
the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and
safety, and then only with a permit from the building and zoning official, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three (3)
days or less while the emergency continues, and which permit may be renewed for a period of three (3) days or less while the emergency
continues.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 153/548
M. Pile Drivers And Hammers: The operation of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other
appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise, between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
N. Blowers: The operation of any noise creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise
due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a
muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. (Ord. 72-29, 7-12-1972)
O. Near Schools, Courts, Places Of Worship And Hospitals And Care Centers: The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to
any school, institution of learning, place of worship, or court of law while the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital or care center, which
unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital or care center,
provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or care center, or court of law street.
(Ord. 72-29, 7-12-1972; amd. 2012 Code)
5-5-3: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall be convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1
of this code for each offense. (Ord. 72-29, 7-12-1972; amd. 2012 Code)
ARTICLE A. SOUND TRUCKS
5-5A-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT: Any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or other sound. The term "sound
amplifying equipment" shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in
which installed or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic
safety purposes.
SOUND TRUCK: Any vehicle, self-propelled or otherwise, having mounted thereon or attached thereto any sound amplifying equipment. (Ord.
72-29, 7-12-1972)
5-5A-2: NONCOMMERCIAL SOUND TRUCKS:
A. Registration Statement:
1. No person shall use, or cause to be used, a sound truck with its sound amplifying equipment in operation for noncommercial purposes in
the village before filing a registration statement with the village clerk in writing. This registration statement shall be filed in duplicate and
shall state the following:
a. Name and home address of the applicant.
b. Address of place of business of applicant.
c. License number and motor number of the sound truck to be used by the applicant.
d. Name and address of the person who owns the truck.
e. Name and address of the person having direct charge of the sound truck.
f. Names and addresses of all persons who will use or operate the sound truck.
g. The purpose for which the sound truck will be used.
h. A general statement as to the section or sections of the village in which the sound truck will be used.
i. The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck.
j. The number of days of proposed operation of the sound truck.
k. A general description of the sound amplifying equipment which is to be used.
l. The maximum sound producing power of the sound amplifying equipment to be used in or on the sound truck.
(1) The wattage to be used.
(2) The volume in decibels of the sound which will be produced.
(3) The approximate maximum distance for which sound will be thrown from the sound truck.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 154/548
2. The village clerk shall return to each applicant for registration hereunder one copy of said registration statement, duly certified by the
village clerk, as a correct copy of said application. Said certified copy of the application shall be in the possession of any person operating
the sound truck at all times while the sound truck is in operation, and said copy shall be promptly displayed to any police officer of the
village upon request.
B. Regulations: Noncommercial use of sound trucks in the village with sound amplifying equipment in operation shall be subject to the following
regulations:
1. The only sounds permitted shall be music or human speech.
2. Operations shall be permitted only between the hours of eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) A.M. and one thirty o'clock (1:30) P.M. and between
the hours of four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. and six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M. Provided, however, that no operations shall be authorized or
allowed on Sundays and legal holidays.
3. Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at
least ten (10) miles per hour, except when said truck is stopped or impeded by traffic. When a sound truck is required by traffic conditions
to stop or travel at a speed of less than ten (10) miles per hour, the sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated for longer than one
minute at such stop or during such travel less than ten (10) miles per hour. (Ord. 72-29, 7-12-1972)
4. Sound shall not be issued within one hundred (100) yards of hospitals and care centers, schools, places of worship, or courthouses. (Ord.
72-29, 7-12-1972; amd. 2012 Code)
5. Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated on streets in the downtown congested traffic areas, nor upon state or county highways
within the village.
6. The human speech and music amplified shall not be profane, lewd, indecent, or slanderous.
7. The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of one hundred feet (100') from the sound
truck and so that said volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility.
8. No sound amplifying equipment shall be operated in excess of fifteen (15) watts of power in the last stage of amplification. (Ord. 72-29, 7-
12-1972)
5-5A-3: COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING PROHIBITED:
No person shall operate or cause to be operated in the village any sound truck for commercial sound advertising purposes with sound
amplifying equipment in operation. (Ord. 72-29, 7-12-1972)
5-5A-4: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this article, the police department is authorized to abate any nuisance or hazard created by the
operation of sound amplifying equipment. (Ord. 72-29, 7-12-1972)
Title 6
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
6-1-1: MEMBERSHIP:
The Police Department of the Village shall consist of the following sworn members: one Chief of Police, eleven (11) Sergeants, and thirty seven
(37) police officers. (Ord. 2006-18, 4-24-2006)
6-1-2: APPOINTMENTS, PROMOTIONS AND REMOVALS:
Appointments to, promotions to nonexempt ranks within, and removal and discharge from the Police Department, relating to ranks and positions
other than the Office of Chief of Police, shall be made by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, when and as provided by law1. (Ord.
2006-18, 4-24-2006)
6-1-3: CHIEF OF POLICE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 155/548
A. Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the Office of Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Village
President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
B. Administration And Supervision Of Department: The Chief of Police shall be the Administrative Head of the Police Department and shall have
supervision over all members thereof.
C. Duties: The Chief of Police shall:
1. Be the keeper of the Police Department holding facility and shall have custody of all persons incarcerated therein.
2. Keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities of the Police Department as may be required by statute or ordinance,
or by the Board of Trustees.
3. Be responsible for the performance by the Police Department of all its functions, and all persons who are members of the Police
Department shall serve subject to the orders and direction of the Chief of Police.
4. Have the custody of all lost, abandoned, or stolen property recovered in the Village. (Ord. 2006-18, 4-24-2006)
6-1-3-1: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY:
A. Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the Office of the Director of Public Safety. The Director of Public Safety shall be
appointed by the Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
B. Administration And Supervision Of Police Department: The Director of Public Safety shall be a civilian administrative position which serves as
the Administrative Head of the Police Department and shall have supervision over all members thereof.
C. Duties: The duties of the Director of Public Safety include, but are not limited to:
1. Be qualified through training and experience to advise and oversee the Police Department. The Director of Public Safety shall not have
any powers of arrest and shall not be required to carry a firearm.
2. Be responsible for the oversight of all Police Department functions, including all police officers appointed by the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners and any civil employees hired by the Village working within the Police Department. The Director of Public Safety shall
monitor the efficient operation of the Police Department and shall provide advice with respect to the performance by the Police
Department of all of its functions.
3. Shall make reports concerning the activities of his department as may be required by statute or by the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
4. Be responsible for the performance by the Police Department of all its functions, and all persons who are members of the Police
Department shall serve subject to the orders and direction of the Director of Public Safety.
5. Be responsible for the oversight of all Police Department functions, being the final department authority on all matters of policy, discipline,
promotion, hiring, and staff coordination.
6. Monitors the planning, staffing, directing, coordinating and controlling of all department functions and activities, ensuring their efficiency.
7. Reviews and analyzes all Police Department services and activities including maintenance of law and order, protection of life and property,
regulation of traffic, apprehension, arrest and detention of law violators, general orders, and maintenance of police records. Recommends
policies and procedures based upon review.
8. Develops and monitors Police Department goals, objectives, policies and priorities for each assigned service area; recommends, within
Village policy, appropriate service and staffing levels and the allocation of resources.
9. Oversees the risk management programs established by the Village. Coordinates with supervisors to implement the risk management
program/policies per Village guidelines.
10. Represents the Police Department to other Village departments, elected officials and outside agencies; explains, justifies, and defends
Police Department programs, policies and activities; negotiates and resolves sensitive, significant and/or controversial issues.
11. Participates in budget development for the Police Department; directs the forecast of funds needed for staffing, equipment, materials and
supplies; directs the monitoring of and approves expenditures; directs the preparation of and implements budgetary adjustments as
necessary.
12. Coordinates Police Department activities with those of other departments, outside agencies and organizations; provides staff assistance
to the Village Administrator and Board of Trustees; prepares and presents staff reports and other necessary correspondence.
13. Acts as the Emergency Management Coordinator for the Village (per Village ordinance). (Ord. 2017-28, 6-26-2017)
6-1-4: POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE OFFICERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 156/548
A. The Chief of Police and all sworn members of the Police Department of the Village shall preserve the peace, order, and safety, and to this
end they shall execute and enforce all criminal codes, traffic codes, and all ordinances and police regulations; they shall take notice of all
nuisances, and at all times render all necessary assistance to Village departments in the abatement thereof; and they shall take notice of the
impediments, obstructions, and defects in the walks, streets, avenues, alleys, and public places of the Village, and shall remove the same or
cause immediate notice to be given to the proper person whose duty it may be to attend to the same, according to the ordinances of the
Village.
B. It shall be the duty of the sworn members of the Police Department to aid the Fire Protection District in maintaining order on the streets and
grounds in the immediate vicinity of a fire or other emergency, so that members of the fire protection district shall not be hindered or
obstructed in the performance of their duties.
C. The sworn members of the police department of the village shall have power and authority, and it shall be their duty, in the village and outside
the same, when necessary and lawful, to serve and execute warrants and other processes for the apprehension and commitment of persons
charged for the violation of any village ordinances, or any crime, misdemeanor, or offense against the laws of the village, state, or federal
government, or to be held for examination or trial, or to be taken in execution for the commission of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of
any law or ordinance of the village; and they shall have the power and authority, and it shall be their duty, to serve and execute any civil
processes issued on behalf of the village by any court of proper jurisdiction; and while serving or executing, or assisting in the service or
execution, of any such warrant or process, and carrying out the duties of a police officer, they shall be vested with and have all the powers
and authority conferred upon constables at common law and by the laws of the state.
D. Sworn members of the police department shall have the power, and it shall be their duty, to arrest, on view, all persons in the village found in
the act of violating any law or ordinance, or aiding or abetting in such violations, and to bring such persons so arrested before a court of
proper jurisdiction, to be dealt with according to law.
E. Sworn members of the police department shall have the legal authority to carry and use firearms and other weapons consistent with Illinois
statute as directed by the chief of police. Designated nonsworn members of the police department shall have the legal authority to carry and
use certain weaponry (nonfirearms) as authorized by the chief of police and in conformance with state law. (Ord. 2006-18, 4-24-2006)
6-1-5: CONDUCT OF MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of every sworn member of the police department to conduct himself or herself in a proper and law abiding manner at all
times, and to avoid the use of unnecessary force. Each member of the police department shall obey the orders and directions of his superior.
(Ord. 2006-18, 4-24-2006)
6-1-6: SERVE AS WITNESSES; FEES:
Every member of the police department shall appear as a witness whenever it is necessary for the prosecution of a violation of a village
ordinance or a state or federal law. No such member shall retain any witness fee for service as a witness in any action or suit to which the
village is a party, and any fees paid for such services shall be turned over to the chief of police, who shall deposit the same with the village
finance director-treasurer. (Ord. 2006-18, 4-24-2006; amd. 2012 Code)
6-1-7: SALARIES:
The salaries of the sworn members of the police department and such persons who shall be employed by the village from time to time for duty
within the police department shall be as set forth in a collective bargaining agreement (if applicable) or as approved by the board of trustees in
the manner provided by law. (Ord. 2006-18, 4-24-2006)
6-1-8: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. Department Rules And Regulations: The chief of police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations as the chief shall deem advisable.
Such rules, when approved by the board of trustees, shall be binding on the members of the police department. Such rules and regulations
may cover, besides the conduct of members, uniforms and equipment to be worn or carried, hours of service, and all other similar matters
necessary or desirable for the better efficiency and performance of the police department. (Ord. 2006-18, 4-24-2006)
B. Adoption Of Board Of Fire And Police Commissioners' Rules And Regulations: The amendments to the rules and regulations of the board of
fire and police commissioners of the village, attached to ordinance 2003-15, are incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 2006-18, 4-24-2006;
amd. 2012 Code)
6-1-9: DETECTIVES:
The chief of police is hereby authorized to designate as a "detective" any sworn member of the police department who has successfully
completed the designated probationary period as a police officer of the department. The status of detective shall not be construed as an
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 157/548
established rank within the department, and the chief is authorized to eliminate such designation and to reassign members when, in his
discretion, the best interests of the village and law enforcement so require. (Ord. 2006-18, 4-24-2006)
6-1-10: POLICE PENSION FUND AND BOARD:
A. Rules And Definitions:
1. Words as used in this section that import the masculine gender are also intended to import the feminine gender, and words used in the
singular number are also intended to import the plural number (or vice versa), unless such construction would be inconsistent with the
manifest intention of the context. (Ord. 94-03, 1-24-1994)
2. The following words or phrases, as used in this section, shall have the meanings set forth in this subsection A2:
ACT: That act contained in article 3 of the Illinois pension code entitled "Police Pension Fund - Municipalities 500,000 And Under", 40
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., and as the same is amended from time to time hereafter.
BENEFICIARY: A person entitled to receive benefits from the fund as set forth in the act.
CLERK: The clerk of the police pension board.
FINANCE DIRECTOR-TREASURER: The finance director-treasurer of the village.
FUND: The police pension fund of the village of Bloomingdale, DuPage County, Illinois, established hereunder.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The police department of the village.
POLICE OFFICER: a. Any person who, on the date the act became applicable to the village, was employed as a police officer by the
village, regardless of his age or physical condition and who, within three (3) months after the effective date hereof, makes written
application to the police pension board, in such form as that board shall prescribe, to come under the provisions of the act.
b. Any person who hereafter is:
(1) Appointed to the police force of the village and who is sworn and commissioned to perform police duties; and
(2) Found upon examination by a physician or physicians licensed by the state of Illinois to practice medicine in all of its branches,
and selected by the police pension board, to be physically and mentally fit to perform the duties of a police officer; and
(3) One who, within three (3) months after being appointed or reappointed, when such appointment or reappointment occurs after
the effective date hereof, makes written application to the police pension board, in such form as that board shall prescribe, to come
under the provisions of the act.
c. Persons excluded from the definition of police officer shall be:
(1) Part time police officers; special police; night watchmen; temporary employees; traffic guards; auxiliary police officers appointed
to direct traffic at or near schools or public functions or to aid in civilian defense; municipal parking lot attendants; clerks, or other
civilian employees of the police department who perform clerical duties exclusively.
(2) A police officer who fails to pay salary payments as required by the act.
(3) Any person who has elected, under section 3-109.1 of the act, to participate in the Illinois municipal retirement fund rather than a
fund established by this section.
POLICE PENSION BOARD: The board of trustees of the fund as established hereunder.
RESERVES: The reserves required to be established and maintained by section 3-127 of the act.
SALARY: The annual salary, including longevity, attached to the rank held by the police officer as established by the village
appropriation ordinance. The term "salary" does not include overtime pay, holiday pay, bonus pay, merit pay, or any other cash benefit
over and above the salary established by the village appropriation ordinance.
VILLAGE: The village of Bloomingdale, DuPage County, Illinois.
VILLAGE BOARD: The president and board of trustees of the village. (Ord. 94-03, 1-24-1994; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Fund Established; Purpose: There is hereby established a police pension fund under and in accordance with the provisions of the act to be
known as the "Police Pension Fund Of The Village Of Bloomingdale, DuPage County, Illinois" (the fund). The purpose of the fund is to
provide pensions for police officers and benefits for their beneficiaries under the terms and regulations herein set forth and in accordance
with the provisions of the act.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 158/548
C. Tax Levied: The village board shall annually hereafter levy a tax upon all taxable property of the village at the rate on the dollar of all such
taxable property which will produce an amount which, when added to the deductions from the salaries of police officers and receipts
available from all other sources as hereinafter referred to, will equal a sufficient sum to meet the annual requirements of the fund. Such tax
shall be levied and collected in a like manner with the general taxes of the village and shall be in addition to all other taxes now or hereafter
authorized to be levied upon all property within the village.
D. Monies Constituting Fund: The following monies shall constitute the fund:
1. All monies derived from taxes levied hereunder.
2. Contributions by police officers under section 3-125.1 of the act.
3. All donations, gifts or other transfers received by the police pension board or the village board for or on behalf of the fund. (Ord. 94-03, 1-
24-1994)
E. Finance Director-Treasurer Duties:
1. The finance director-treasurer shall have custody of all monies constituting the fund for and on behalf of the police pension board.
2. The finance director-treasurer shall disburse monies from the fund only upon the order to do so directed to him and signed by the
president and secretary of the police pension board. The disbursement of monies from the fund by the finance director-treasurer shall be
as so ordered by the police pension board.
3. The finance director-treasurer shall, from time to time, advise the police pension board of the balance of funds on hand and of his
estimate of current cash needs of the fund. Any monies on hand in excess of such current needs shall be invested by the finance directortreasurer
when ordered to do so by the police pension board. Investments may be made only in those securities authorized by section 3-
135 of the act. Interest earned on all such investments shall be credited to the fund.
4. On the second Tuesday in May annually, the finance director-treasurer shall file with the police pension board and with the village clerk (to
be transmitted by such clerk to the village board) a statement, under oath, of all monies of the fund received and paid out by him during
the preceding fiscal year. Such statement shall also show the amount of fund monies then on hand and the amount owing to the fund.
5. Upon the written demand, signed by the president and secretary of the police pension board, the finance director-treasurer shall furnish a
written statement to the police pension board setting forth the method of collecting and handling monies of the fund.
6. The finance director-treasurer shall keep accurate books and records of the monies of the fund, and such books and records shall be
made available by him for examination by the police pension board. (Ord. 94-03, 1-24-1994; amd. 2012 Code)
F. Board Of Trustees Of Fund:
1. Established; Membership; Compensation: There is hereby established a board of trustees of the police pension fund of the village (the
"board"). Such board shall be composed of five (5) members. No member of the board shall receive or have a right to receive any
payment of money or other compensation from the fund as salary for services performed as such member.
2. Appointive Members; Terms: Two (2) members of the board shall be appointed by the village president as follows:
a. One member shall be appointed as soon after the effective date hereof as is possible. His term of office shall be from the date of his
appointment until the second Tuesday of May 1974, or until his successor is appointed and shall have qualified.
b. One member shall be appointed as soon after the effective date hereof as is possible. His term of office shall be from the date of his
appointment until the second Tuesday of May 1975.
c. On or before the second Tuesday of May 1974, the village president shall appoint one member whose term shall commence on the
second Tuesday of May 1974, and shall be for two (2) years, or until his successor is appointed and shall have qualified.
d. The terms of members appointed by the village president (except the term of the members appointed under subsections F2a, F2b and
F2c of this section) shall be for two (2) years, or until their successors are appointed and shall have qualified.
3. Elective Members:
a. Two (2) members of the board shall be elected from the active participants of the fund by the active members thereof as follows:
(1) A special election shall be called by the appointed members of the board to be held as soon as possible after the effective date
hereof. At such election, two (2) members of the regular police force shall be elected members of the board to serve until the second
Tuesday of May 1974.
(2) The board shall call a regular election to be held on the third Monday of April 1974, and on the third Monday of April biennially
thereafter, for the election of two (2) members of the active participants of the fund to serve as members of the board for two (2) year
terms, beginning on the second Tuesday of May following such election, and until their successors are elected and shall have
qualified.
(3) Such elections shall be held at such place or places in the village and under such regulations as shall be prescribed by the
appointed members of the board.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 159/548
b. One member of the board shall be elected by and from the beneficiaries of the fund as follows:
(1) Until such time as the retirement, disability or death of a police officer shall create a class of beneficiaries of the fund, there shall not
be any election to fill the fifth membership position of such board, but such position shall remain vacant.
(2) When the retirement, disability or death of one or more police officers shall create a class of beneficiaries of the fund, and upon the
designation of such beneficiaries by the appointed and active members of the board, an election shall be called to be held as soon as
possible after such designation. At such initial election, the beneficiaries of legal age shall elect one of their number as a member of
the board to serve until the second Tuesday of May following such election.
(3) The board shall call an election to be held on the third Monday of April following such initial election, and on the third Monday of April
biennially thereafter, for the election of one member from among the beneficiaries to serve for a two (2) year term beginning on the
second Tuesday of May following such election, or until his successor is elected and shall have qualified.
c. Upon the death, resignation or inability to act of any elected member of the board, his successor shall be elected for the unexpired term
at a special election to be called by said board and conducted in the same manner as the regular biennial election.
4. Organization:
a. Officers: As soon as the initial police pension board has been constituted, as provided in this subsection, the village shall fix a date for
the first meeting thereof. At such meeting, the members of the police pension board shall select from among themselves a president,
vice president, secretary and assistant secretary. The term of such offices shall expire on the second Tuesday in July 1974.
b. Meetings:
(1) Regular Meetings: The police pension board shall hold regular meetings in July, October, January and April of each year. At the
regular meeting in July 1974, and at such meeting annually thereafter, the police pension board shall select the officers named in
subsection F4a of this section, whose terms shall be for one year, or until their successors are selected and shall have qualified.
(2) Special Meetings: Special meetings may be held upon the call of the president of the police pension board.
c. Clerk Of Board: The police pension board may appoint a clerk and define his duties. The clerk may be paid such reasonable
compensation as the police pension board shall determine. No person drawing a pension under the act shall be employed by the police
pension board.
5. Powers And Duties: The police pension board shall have the following powers and duties (and such other powers and duties as may be
conferred thereon by the act):
a. To control and manage, exclusively, the monies of the fund.
b. To order and direct the payment of pensions and other benefits provided by the act.
c. To designate the beneficiaries of the fund.
d. To issue certificates, signed by the president and secretary of the police pension board, to beneficiaries of the amount ordered paid
from the fund thereto, and the purpose of such payment. (Ord. 94-03, 1-24-1994)
e. Beginning January 1, 1998, to invest funds in accordance with 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-113.1. (Ord. 94-03, 1-24-1994; amd.
2012 Code)
f. To hold such public hearings as may be necessary or required in connection with the administration of the fund, and to subpoena
witnesses to attend and testify at such hearings. A stenographic record shall be taken of all such hearings at which the rights of any
person with respect to the fund may be determined by the police pension board. The cost of such transcript shall be paid by the fund.
Copies thereof shall be provided to any person upon the payment to the fund of the amount of the actual cost to the fund for
reproducing such copy.
g. To provide for the payment from the fund of all necessary expenses of the fund, including compensation to be paid to the clerk, printing
costs and witness fees.
h. To keep a public record of all of its proceedings.
i. To adopt such rules and regulations for the administration of the fund as may be required; provided, that such rules and regulations are
consistent with the provisions of the act and this section, and to amend such rules and regulations from time to time. A certified copy of
such rules and regulations, and all amendments thereto, shall be filed with the village clerk. Copies of such rules and regulations, and
all amendments thereto, shall be transmitted to all pensioners of and contributors to the fund.
j. To take, by grant, gift, transfer, devise or bequest, any money, real property or personal property of any description. Such money and the
proceeds of the sale of, or the income derived from, any such real or personal property shall be paid into the fund.
6. Reports Required:
a. As soon as practicable after the close of the village fiscal year, the police pension board shall submit a written report, under oath, to the
village board, signed by the president and secretary of the police pension board, containing, among other things, the following:
(1) A list of persons entitled to payments from the fund as ordered by the police pension board, stating the amounts and purposes of
such payments.
(2) A statement of the items of income accrued to the fund during the fiscal year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 160/548
b. Prior to the meeting of the village board held for the purpose of levying taxes for the year, the police pension board shall submit to the
village board a report containing, among other things, the following:
(1) The assets of the fund in the custody of the police pension board.
(2) The estimated receipts during the next succeeding calendar year for deductions from the salaries of police officers and from all other
sources.
(3) Where the reserves provided in subsection H of this section are less than the actuarial requirements of the fund, a statement of the
proportionate amount needed annually to ensure the accumulation of such actuarial reserve over a period of forty (40) years
subsequent to the date the fund is established or over a period of time as amended by the act.
(4) The estimated amount required during the next succeeding calendar year to pay all pensions and other obligations of the fund and to
maintain the reserves as provided in subsection H of this section.
G. Pensions And Benefits:
1. The police pension board shall provide for the payment from the fund of such pensions and benefits as are provided in the act.
2. If, at any time, there are not sufficient monies in the fund to pay the allowances of the police pension board to the beneficiaries of the fund,
the village board shall make every effort consistent with law to replenish the fund so that all beneficiaries may receive the amounts to
which they are entitled.
3. If, however, after such effort is made as set forth in subsection G2 of this section, there remains a deficit in the fund, the police pension
board shall order pro rata payments from the fund to the beneficiaries.
4. No allowance or order of the police pension board shall be held to create any liability against the village except upon the fund.
H. Reserves: The police pension board shall establish and maintain a reserve in compliance with section 3-127 of the act.
I. Rooms For Offices And Meetings: The village board shall make available to the police pension board suitable rooms for offices and meetings
of the police pension board. (Ord. 94-03, 1-24-1994)
6-1-11: HIRING STANDARDS FOR PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
A. All part time police officers employed by the village shall be qualified to enter and successfully complete any training mandated in accordance
with the procedures for part time police officers established by the Illinois law enforcement training standards board.
B. The hiring standard, particularly with respect to part time police officers employed by the village, shall be submitted to the Illinois law
enforcement training standards board, as required by statute. (Ord. 2007-01, 1-8-2007, eff. 2-1-2007)
6-1-12: REIMBURSEMENT FOR POLICE TRAINING:
All costs expended by the village on the accomplishment of the police training program by a person appointed as a probationary police officer of
the village, and not reimbursed, shall be repaid, in full, by said person to the village in the event that said person should leave the employment
of the village prior to the end of two (2) years following his completion of the police training program and obtains employment with another police
department or police agency or organization involving police or investigative work. Each person, as a requirement of his employment as a
probationary police officer of the village, shall execute an agreement with the village, on a form provided by the village for this purpose, as a
contract and agreement by said person to reimburse the village for such police training program costs as provided in this section. (Ord. 78-2, 1-
23-1978)
6-1-13: BOOKING FEE:
The police department shall charge a fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) for posting bail or bond in any legal process, civil or criminal. In the event
charges are not paid within forty five (45) days after being incurred and notice of delinquency sent to the person owing the charge, the village
may submit any delinquent account to a third party collection agent for processing and collection. If said collection agent assesses a fee for
processing or collection, the village may add up to one hundred percent (100%) of said fee to the charge in question, plus any late charges.
Said fee is due and payable in addition to all other charges for arrearages and late charges previously assessed and added to the account.
(Ord. 2009-48, 11-23-2009)
Chapter 2
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN
6-2-1: ADOPTION OF PLAN:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 161/548
The document entitled "Bloomingdale emergency operations plan", created on April 22, 2013, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted as the emergency operations plan for the village of Bloomingdale, DuPage County, Illinois. (Ord. 2013-18, 4-22-2013)
Chapter 3
ALARM SYSTEMS
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
ALARM EQUIPMENT INSTALLERS: Any person, firm or corporation engaged in, conducting or carrying on the business of maintaining,
servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing, or causing to be installed, automatic protection devices or signaling devices which
transmit alarms upon receipt of a stimulus from a detection apparatus to a bell or a remote monitoring location, or an outside ringer.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE: An electrically operated instrument which automatically selects a public telephone trunk line of the police
department of the village and then reproduces any prerecorded message to report any robbery, burglary or other emergency.
FALSE ALARM: A visual and/or audible signal transmitted by an automatic protection device, a signaling device, or an outside ringer which
indicates the existence of an emergency situation when, in fact, no such emergency exists.
OUTSIDE RINGER: A local alarm that sounds audibly on the premises of the individual and/or corporate establishment and is not connected to
any central station.
SIGNALING DEVICE: A. An electrically operated instrument which automatically transmits visual and audible signals over a signal line to be
registered by indicators at a monitor panel in a receiving terminal monitored by the police department of the village of Bloomingdale.
B. The term signaling device shall also include such systems that provide visual and/or audible systems on the premises. (Ord. 83-2, 1-24-
1983)
6-3-2: ALARM SYSTEMS BUSINESS:
A. License Required: No person, firm or corporation shall engage in, conduct or carry on the business of maintaining, servicing, repairing,
altering, replacing, moving, installing, or causing to be installed, in or on any building, place or premises within the village, any device
commonly known as an automatic protection device or a signaling device which is intended to be connected to the village police department,
or an outside ringer, without having first obtained a license to do so as provided by this chapter.
B. Ineligibility For License: No license shall be issued to any person convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or to any
firm or corporation in which a partner, officer or employee has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, any
such subsequent conviction being cause for revocation of an existing license. (Ord. 83-2, 1-24-1983)
C. Application For License: Applications for licenses to maintain, service, repair, alter, replace, move or install an automatic protection device, a
signaling device, or an outside ringer shall be filed with the chief of police on forms prepared by the building department and shall be
accompanied by a processing fee in the amount of thirty dollars ($30.00). Said application shall include the following: (Ord. 83-2, 1-24-1983;
amd. 2012 Code)
1. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the type of business organization (individual, partnership, or corporation). If a
partnership, the names and addresses of the partners; if a corporation, the names and addresses of the principal officers and the state
where incorporated.
2. In the case of automatic protection devices, a description of and operation specifications for the automatic protection device or devices
offered to the public, together with a statement that the equipment complies with the standards of an underwriting organization such as
Underwriters Laboratories, Factory Mutual, etc.
3. A list of names and addresses of persons for whom installations have been made by the applicant prior to the effective date hereof.
4. A list of criminal convictions, if any (other than for minor traffic offenses), of the applicant, or a list of criminal convictions, if any (other than
for minor traffic offenses), of the partners, directors, and officers, if the applicant is other than an individual.
5. A statement of responsibility for service of the automatic protection device, signaling device or outside ringer or that the applicant
proposes for the public.
6. A statement that the applicant is willing to comply with other reasonable rules and regulations concerning the installation and operation of
the automatic protection device, signaling device, or outside ringer as may be issued by the chief of police.
7. Such application form shall recite that the applicant releases the village, its officers, employees, and agents, of any liability arising from the
service, repair, alteration, moving or installing of any automatic protection device, signaling device, or outside ringer.
D. Investigation Of Applicant; Issuance Of License: Licenses under this chapter shall be issued only after investigation by the chief of police and
his approval that the applicant meets the requirements of this chapter. Licenses shall be issued by the village administrator.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 162/548
E. Conditions Of License: A licensee must maintain an adequate service organization to repair, maintain and otherwise service the automatic
protection device, signaling device or outside ringer sold or leased by him, and must provide his customer locations with twenty four (24)
hour emergency service, seven (7) days a week. (Ord. 83-2, 1-24-1983)
6-3-3: SIGNALING DEVICE SYSTEMS:
A. Permit Required: Every user of a signaling device must obtain an alarm system user permit for such signaling device from the chief of police.
B. Application For Permit:
1. The alarm user shall state on a permit application form, to be prepared by the chief of police, his name, the address of the residence or
business or businesses in or upon which the alarm system has been or will be installed, his telephone number, the alarm business or
businesses selling, installing, monitoring, inspecting, responding to and/or maintaining the alarm system, and the name, address and
telephone number of at least two (2) other persons who can be reached at any time, day or night, and who are authorized to respond to an
alarm signal and who can enter the premises in which the system is installed.
2. If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, such application form must so state and recite the names and addresses of the partners or
of the principal officers, and if a corporation, specify the state where incorporated.
3. Every alarm system user application shall be accompanied by an application fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) to reimburse the village for
expenses incurred in connection with alarm system services.
4. Such application form shall recite that the applicant releases the village, its officers, employees and agents, of any liability arising from the
use of the alarm system.
C. Right Of Inspection: The chief of police shall have the right to inspect any signaling device on the premises where it is intended to be used,
both prior to and subsequent to the issuance of a permit, at reasonable times, to determine whether a permit should be granted and whether
it is being used in conformity with the terms of the permit and the provisions of this chapter.
D. Charges:
1. The permit holder shall pay the alarm equipment installer for all equipment at its location, fees for connection to the monitoring system,
and maintenance charges necessitated by the installation, operation and maintenance of the signaling devices in the monitoring system.
The company supplying and maintaining the monitoring system shall have the right to charge alarm system users or the installer of their
equipment a reasonable fee for connection to and maintenance of the system.
2. Each permit holder shall pay to the village, on or before May 1 of each year, a fee in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) to
reimburse the village for the costs of providing monitoring services to alarm system users and for other related operating expenses for any
signaling device registering signals by indicators at a monitor panel in a receiver terminal monitored by the village police department.
E. Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit: The chief of police may revoke or suspend any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
after giving written notice to the permit holder and an opportunity for the permit holder to effect compliance, if he determines that the
signaling device under said permit has been installed, maintained or operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any term or
condition of the permit. (Ord. 83-2, 1-24-1983)
6-3-4: OUTSIDE RINGER AND AUTOMATIC PROTECTION SYSTEMS:
A. Permit Required: Every user of an outside ringer or an automatic protection device may obtain, at no cost, an alarm user permit for such
alarm systems from the chief of police.
B. Application For Permit:
1. The alarm user shall state on a permit application form, to be prepared by the chief of police, his name, the address of the residence or
business or businesses in or upon which the outside ringer or automatic protection device has been or will be installed, his telephone
number, the alarm business or businesses selling, installing, monitoring, inspecting, responding to and/or maintaining the alarm system,
and the name, address and telephone number of at least two (2) other persons who can be reached at any time, day or night, and who are
authorized to respond to an alarm signal and who can enter the premises in which the system is installed.
2. If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, such application form must so state and recite the names and addresses of the partners or
of the principal officers, and if a corporation, specify the state where incorporated.
3. Such application form shall recite that the applicant releases the village, its officers, employees, and agents, of any liability arising from the
use of the alarm system.
C. Requirements For Outside Ringers:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 163/548
1. No person shall allow or cause to exist an outside ringer which emits an audible sound in any manner similar to emergency vehicles of the
village. In addition, said sound shall also be distinguishable from any and all village alert systems disseminated in an audible manner.
2. All outside ringers shall be equipped with an automatic shutoff which will deactivate the alarm within fifteen (15) minutes of the initial
alarm. The person owning or operating an outside ringer shall have one year from the effective date hereof to provide such automatic
shutoff. Failure to provide such shutoff shall result in an order to disconnect the ringer by the village.
3. In addition to any other remedies provided by ordinance, the chief of police, or his representative, whenever he shall have knowledge of
the misuse or improper maintenance of an outside ringer, may order the removal and/or deactivation of the system.
D. Right Of Inspection: The chief of police shall have the right to inspect, at reasonable times, any outside ringer or automatic protection device
on the premises where it is used to determine whether it is being used in conformity with the terms of the permit and provisions of this
chapter.
E. Revocation Of Permit: If the chief of police determines that the automatic protection device or outside ringer has been installed, maintained or
operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any term or condition of said permit, then, after giving written notice to the permit
holder and after allowing an adequate opportunity for the permit holder to effect compliance, he may:
1. Order the deactivation of any automatic protection device or outside ringer; or
2. Suspend any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 83-2, 1-24-1983)
6-3-5: CONNECTION OF SIGNALING DEVICES:
All signaling devices transmitting signals to the village police department monitor panel shall use telephone trunk lines specifically designated
for that purpose. (Ord. 83-2, 1-24-1983)
6-3-6: FALSE ALARMS:
A. Responsibility For False Alarms: Each person, firm, partnership or corporation holding a permit for the use of an automatic protection device,
signaling device or outside ringer shall be responsible for any false alarm transmitted or emitted by the device in use at the permitted
location.
B. Maximum Number Allowed: More than four (4) false alarms in a calendar year, or more than one in a three (3) month period, from any alarm
system for which an alarm user permit has been obtained, may constitute grounds for revocation of such permit.
C. Quarterly Report By Police Chief: The chief of police shall submit a quarterly summary of all false alarms and actions taken to the president.
D. Fees For False Alarms:
1. The holder of an alarm user permit shall be assessed a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each false alarm in excess of one in any
three (3) month period. This shall be in addition to any suspension or revocation of the permit which might be imposed. Such charge shall
be remitted to the village by such permit holder upon receipt of a statement for such charge.
2. After the chief of police has recorded four (4) false alarms within a calendar year, or more than one within three (3) months, for any alarm
user permit holder, the permit holder shall be invoiced. (Ord. 83-2, 1-24-1983; amd. 2012 Code)
6-3-7: IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED FOR EMPLOYEES AND REPRESENTATIVES:
All employees, agents or representatives of individuals or entities maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing alarm
equipment and devices shall be supplied with a proper identification card. This identification card shall be in the employee's possession at all
times and shall include a photo, physical description, and the signature of the employee and of an officer of the employing entity. (Ord. 83-2, 1-
24-1983)
6-3-8: OFFENSES:
The following shall constitute an offense:
A. The failure of any alarm user permittee to obtain an alarm system user permit pursuant to this chapter.
B. The failure of a permittee to pay the fees required by this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 164/548
C. The failure of a permittee to properly maintain his alarm system or cause same to be properly maintained according to recognized minimum
standards of the alarm industry.
D. An excessive number of false alarms as defined in section 6-3-1 of this chapter.
E. Failure to comply with any suspension or revocation of an alarm user permit.
F. The failure of a licensee to pay the fee required by this chapter.
G. The failure of any alarm system business licensee to obtain an alarm system business license pursuant to this chapter. Each day that a
violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 83-2, 1-24-1983)
6-3-9: PENALTY:
In addition to all other penalties provided in title 4, chapter 1 of this code, any person, firm, or corporation who shall be convicted of violating any
provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 83-2, 1-24-1983; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
6-4-1: DEFINITION:
The word "animal", as used in this chapter, is hereby defined to mean any living, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, not including man. (Ord.
72-30, 7-12-1972; amd. 2012 Code)
6-4-2: LIVESTOCK AND POULTRY:
No person shall keep, or suffer to be kept, any cattle, goats, swine, or poultry in the village, except as necessarily incidental and directly related
to the conduct of a licensed business establishment. (Ord. 72-30, 7-12-1972)
6-4-3: AT LARGE ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful, and it is hereby declared to be a nuisance, for any domestic animal of the species of horse, mule, goat, swine, sheep,
poultry, or cattle of any kind, to run, go, or be at large within the village. (Ord. 72-30, 7-12-1972)
6-4-4: NOISY ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night. (Ord. 72-30, 7-12-
1972)
6-4-5: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
Any person who shall commit any of the following acts shall be deemed guilty of cruelty to an animal(s):
A. By abandoning any animal.
B. By failing to provide any animal in one's charge or custody, as owner or otherwise, with proper food, drink, shelter or air.
C. By driving or keeping, or causing to be driven or kept, any animal in a cruel manner.
D. By overloading, overdriving, overworking, beating, torturing, tormenting, mutilating, or killing any animal, or causing or knowingly allowing the
same to be done. (Ord. 72-30, 7-12-1972; amd. 2012 Code)
6-4-6: BIRDS PROTECTED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 165/548
No person shall kill or wound, or attempt to kill or wound, any game bird or songbird in the village, or shall take the eggs or young of any such
game bird or songbird. (Ord. 72-30, 7-12-1972)
6-4-7: PENALTY:
Any person who shall be convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for
each offense. (Ord. 72-30, 7-12-1972; amd. 2012 Code)
ARTICLE A. DOGS
6-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The chief of police, or an authorized designee, shall be the animal control officer for the village.
COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL: The DuPage County animal care and control department.
DOG: All domestic members of the biological family of carnivorans known as Canidae.
DOG, AT LARGE: Any dog shall be deemed to be at large when it is off the premises of its owner or keeper and not under the adequate
restraint of a competent person (the "custodian"). A dog is under adequate restraint, within the meaning of this article, if it is on its owner's or
keeper's premises, and the dog has not strayed off such premises; or on a stout leash, not more than eight feet (8') in length.
DOG, DANGEROUS: Any dog that, because of its aggressive nature, training or characteristic behavior, presents a risk of serious physical
harm or death to human beings, or would constitute a danger to human life, physical well being or property if not kept under the direct control of
the owner. The term "dangerous dog" includes, but is not limited to, any dog that, according to the records of either the village, the police
department, the fire protection district, local medical providers, county animal control, any law enforcement agency, or a licensed veterinarian:
A. Has aggressively bitten, attacked, endangered, or inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property, or when
unprovoked, has chased or approached a person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent
attitude of attack; provided, that such actions are attested to in a sworn statement by one or more persons and dutifully investigated by
any of the above referenced authorities; or
B. Has severely injured or killed a domestic animal while off the owner's property; or
C. Has been used primarily, or in part, for the purpose of dogfighting, or is a dog trained for dogfighting.
DOG, VICIOUS: Any dog that, at any time, has attacked a person without provocation.
HAS BEEN BITTEN: Has been seized with the teeth or jaws so that the person or animal seized has been nipped, gripped, wounded or pierced,
and further includes contact of saliva with any break or abrasion of the skin.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The DuPage County Health Department.
KENNEL CUSTODIAN: The Director of Public Works, or an authorized designee, who shall be responsible for the temporary care of dogs and
the maintenance of the Village operated kennel.
OWNER: A. A person, partnership or corporation who has a right of property in a dog;
B. A person, partnership or corporation who keeps a dog;
C. A person, partnership or corporation who has a dog in his care or custody; or
D. A person, partnership or corporation who knowingly permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied thereby. (Ord. 2014-17,
4-14-2014; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
6-4A-2: LICENSING PROVISIONS:
A. License Required: No person shall own, keep, harbor, or have custody of any dog over four (4) months of age without first obtaining a dog
license from the Police Department.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 166/548
B. Certificate Of Rabies Inoculation Required: A certificate of inoculation against rabies issued by the State, County animal control, or a licensed
veterinarian, bearing proof that such inoculation is effective at the time of application of a dog license, shall be furnished to the Police
Department for inspection at the time of application for a dog license.
C. Application For License: At the time of making application for a dog license, the owner shall furnish the following information to the Police
Department:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the dog;
2. The name, sex and breed of the dog;
3. The name and address of the issuer of the certificate of inoculation;
4. The date of inoculation;
5. The inoculation tag number; and
6. Such other information as may be required by the Police Department.
D. Tags:
1. Upon issuing a license to keep a dog, the Police Department shall issue to the owner a durable tag bearing the words "Bloomingdale Dog
Tag", and with the license number and license period marked thereon. No fee is required.
2. Tags issued pursuant to this subsection must be affixed to the collar of the dog, and the collar is to be worn by the dog at all practicable
times.
3. Any owner of a licensed dog whose tag has been lost may obtain a replacement tag from the Police Department for no charge.
E. Term Of License; Renewals: A license, if not revoked, shall be valid until December 31 following the date of issuance. A new license shall be
obtained on or before January 1 of each year by every owner.
F. Nonresidents:
1. Nonresidents keeping a dog in the Village no longer than thirty (30) days will not be required to make application for a license; provided,
that the dog is kept under restraint.
2. Nonresidents keeping a dog in the Village thirty (30) days or longer are required to make application for a license.
3. Any nonresident who keeps a dog in the village for any length of time is responsible for ensuring the dog is currently vaccinated against
rabies and is kept under restraint.
G. Revocation Of License; Destruction Of Dog Required:
1. The animal control officer may revoke any dog license if the person holding the license refuses or fails to comply with this article, or any
state or local law governing cruelty to dogs or the keeping of dogs.
2. Any person whose dog license is revoked shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, humanely dispose of all dogs being owned, kept or
harbored by such person, and no part of any fees shall be refunded. It shall be a condition of the issuance of any dog license to any owner
of dogs kept for commercial purposes that the animal control officer shall be permitted to inspect all dogs on the premises where the dogs
are kept at any reasonable time, and the animal control officer shall, if permission for such inspection is refused, revoke the dog license of
the refusing owner. (Ord. 2014-17, 4-14-2014)
6-4A-3: NUMBER OF DOGS PERMITTED:
No person shall own or harbor at any one time more than three (3) dogs over the age of four (4) months on or about any residence. Said
limitations shall not take precedence over any covenants, restrictions, or tenant rules which are more restrictive. This section shall not apply to
any veterinary hospital, pet shop, pound or licensed kennel. The mere obtaining of a dog license or tag shall not be construed to allow the
keeping of more than the number of dogs provided in this section. (Ord. 2014-17, 4-14-2014)
6-4A-4: RESTRAINT AND EXCREMENT REMOVAL REQUIRED:
A. Restraint: It shall be unlawful for any dog, except when on a leash, to use, be or enter upon any public street, sidewalk, parkway, recreational
path, or public area within the village. No leash shall be longer than eight feet (8'). This subsection shall not apply to dogs used in assisting
an individual with a handicap or a community owned police dog.
B. Excrement Removal: The owner or custodian of the dog must have proper means to clean up and dispose of any fecal matter deposited by
the dog on public or private property. (Ord. 2014-17, 4-14-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 167/548
6-4A-5: PRESENCE ON CERTAIN PREMISES RESTRICTED:
A. Businesses:
1. It shall be unlawful for any dog to be or enter upon any shop, store, or retail place of business wherein the public is invited to do business
with the management thereof during such hours in which the public is invited or to be or enter upon any public building at any time.
2. The provisions of this subsection A shall not apply to dogs used in assisting an individual with a handicap or a community owned police
dog.
3. Nothing to the contrary withstanding, dogs under the control of an individual eighteen (18) years of age or older shall be permitted upon
the premises of a veterinary clinic, pet store, pet supply store, animal grooming establishment or any other location; provided, that the
management of the business consents to the presence of dogs upon the premises; and further provided, that the dog is under the control
of an individual eighteen (18) years of age or older during the entire time the dog is present on the premises.
B. Schools:
1. It shall be unlawful for any dog, even though on a leash, to enter or be upon or in any school premises. The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to dogs used in assisting an individual with a handicap or community owned police dog. (Ord. 2014-17, 4-14-2014)
6-4A-6: NUISANCE DOGS:
A. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any owner or custodian to permit, allow or otherwise fail to prevent any dog from being a
nuisance. For the purposes of this section, a dog shall be considered to be a nuisance if any such dog:
1. Is allowed to bark, whine, howl or make other noises excessively;
2. Substantially damages the property of any person other than its owner;
3. Causes unsanitary, dangerous or unreasonable offensive conditions;
4. Chases vehicles;
5. Chases, molests, attacks, bites, interferes with or physically intimidates any person while on or off the premises of its owner unless acting
in the defense of its owner on such owner's premises; or
6. Chases, molests, attacks, bites or interferes with any other animal while off the premises of its owner.
B. Any dog being a nuisance under subsection A of this section and discovered to be at large may be impounded by any police officer or any
village or county animal control officer. (Ord. 2014-17, 4-14-2014)
6-4A-7: FEMALE DOGS IN ESTRUS (HEAT):
Every female dog in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure at all times, or shall be kept on a leash not to exceed twelve feet
(12') in length, and shall not be at large in the streets, parks or other public places in the village or on any premises other than that of the owner;
except, that female dogs in heat may be in or upon premises other than that of the owner for purposes of planned breeding. (Ord. 2014-17, 4-
14-2014)
6-4A-8: DANGEROUS, VICIOUS DOGS:
A. Dangerous Dogs: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for the owner of any dog within the village that is found to be a dangerous
dog pursuant to the provisions of subsection C of this section to fail to do any of the following:
1. To post in clear view at all times, and in the most conspicuous and prominent point of entry to such owner's premises, a sign indicating
that a dangerous dog is on such premises. Such sign shall be at least eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11") in size but
no larger than eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17") and shall contain in words and pictures a clear indication that a dangerous
dog is on the premises.
2. To muzzle and keep under the control of a responsible adult any such dangerous dog, by means of a leash, when not otherwise under
restraint.
3. To fail to inform the police department of any change in ownership of any such dangerous dog.
B. Vicious Dogs:
1. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for the owner of any dog within the village to keep, maintain, abandon, sell or otherwise
transfer any such dog that is found to be a vicious dog pursuant to the provisions of subsection C of this section. Any such vicious dog is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and is subject to immediate impoundment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 168/548
2. Any vicious dog impounded under this subsection shall not be returned to its owner unless such dog is subsequently found not to be a
vicious dog by the animal control officer, an authorized veterinarian employed by the village, county animal control, or by the village
hearing officer after an administrative appeal is adjudicated as described in subsection C of this section. Any dog subsequently found to
be a vicious dog shall be humanely destroyed.
3. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for the owner of any premises to knowingly permit a lessee of such premises to move,
keep or maintain a vicious dog on or within any such leased premises. Any owner of any such leased premises shall, upon learning that
any vicious dog is being so moved, kept or maintained, notify the lessee having any such vicious dog to immediately remove such vicious
dog from such leased premises and report same to the animal control officer.
C. Declaring Dogs Dangerous Or Vicious:
1. Requirements: The animal control officer or any police officer may find a dog to be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog after fulfilling each of
the following requirements:
a. By conducting an investigation; and
b. Making findings of fact in writing that the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog; and
c. Based upon such findings of fact, making a declaration in writing that the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, and by citing the
specific provisions of this article or state statute upon which such a declaration is based.
2. Written Declaration To Owner: The owner of any such dog shall be served with a copy of such written declaration which also includes
information regarding the owner's right to appeal such declaration as provided in subsection C3 of this section, either personally or by first
class mail, postage prepaid, to such owner's last known address. The date of service of any written declaration or notice under this
subsection C2 shall be deemed to be either the date of the personal service or three (3) calendar days after the date that the written
declaration or notice was mailed in the manner provided in this subsection C2.
3. Right To Appeal: Any owner may appeal any such written declaration that a dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog by filing a written
request for an administrative appeal hearing with the animal control officer within seven (7) working days after service of the written
declaration.
4. Hearing: Upon the filing by an owner of any such written request for an administrative appeal hearing before the village administrator in
the role of hearing officer, such hearing shall be scheduled by the hearing officer within not less than five (5) nor more than fifteen (15)
working days, and notice of the time and place of such appeal hearing shall be served upon the owner who requested the appeal either
personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid, to such owner's last known address. The appeal hearing shall be open to the public and
shall be recorded. The hearing officer may admit into evidence all relevant matters, including incident reports, and either the affidavits or
live testimony of witnesses. The hearing officer shall determine, based upon a preponderance of the evidence, whether the dog is a
dangerous dog or a vicious dog. If the written declaration specifies that the dog is a vicious dog, the hearing officer may nevertheless
determine that any such dog is a dangerous dog rather than a vicious dog if the evidence so warrants.
5. Notice Of Decision: The hearing officer shall serve written notice upon the owner of the determination of the hearing officer, either
personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the owner's last known address.
6. Failure To Appeal: Upon the failure of an owner to make a written request for an administrative hearing within the time specified, or if the
hearing officer makes a written determination that a dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, the dog shall be considered to be a
dangerous dog or a vicious dog, as the case may be.
D. Immediate Impoundment Of Suspected Dangerous Or Vicious Dog:
1. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, a police officer may take immediate custody of any dog who has bitten any person and
hold said animal at a facility authorized in section 6-4A-9 of this article.
2. Any police officer has the right and duty to immediately impound a dog pursuant to this subsection D if he has probable cause to believe
the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog and that it is reasonably necessary to immediately impound the dog in order to protect the
health, welfare or safety of the general public.
E. Humane Destruction Of Vicious Dogs: Upon any dog being found to be a vicious dog, such dog shall be humanely destroyed after not less
than seven (7) working days after the date of service of the declaration or, if appealed, the notice of determination upon the owner, unless
such owner, within that time period, delivers to the animal control officer, a request to stay the humane destruction for a period of ten (10)
working days for the purpose of filing a complaint for court review of the declaration or determination of being found a vicious dog. If, at the
end of that period, the village has not received any notice that a complaint for court review of the declaration or determination has been filed,
such vicious dog shall be humanely destroyed without further notice to the owner. (Ord. 2014-17, 4-14-2014)
6-4A-9: IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION PROCEDURES:
A. Dogs Subject To Impoundment: Any dog found running at large within the limits of the village in violation of this article, as well as any dog in
violation of section 6-4A-9-1 of this article, shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be apprehended and impounded and therein
confined in a humane manner.
B. Authority To Impound; Recorded Entry In Log: It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to apprehend, impound, and confine any dog in
violation of subsection A of this section. The animal control officer shall immediately, upon the impounding of any dog, make a recorded
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 169/548
entry in a log kept at the police department and with the police emergency dispatch agency of such impoundment, recording, if known: the
breed, color, and sex of such dog, whether licensed and any other information deemed necessary.
C. Time Of Retention; Redemption Provisions:
1. Impounded dogs shall be kept for not less than seven (7) days unless reclaimed by the owner or his designee and only upon showing
proof of rabies inoculation or proper village licensing.
2. The animal control officer reserves the right to send dogs to county animal control earlier than the seven (7) days if the dog is sick, injured,
or deemed dangerous, or if it is deemed a nuisance to kennel operations in any manner.
3. An owner, or his designee, reclaiming an impounded dog shall present proof of rabies inoculation or proper village licensing to the animal
control officer. An owner reclaiming an impounded dog shall pay all applicable fees referenced herein and in subsection D of this section.
D. Fee Schedule:
1.
Kennel Fee After
An Initial 8 Hour
Time Period (Or
Portion Thereof)
Kennel Fee For
Every 24 Hour Time
Period Thereafter
(Or Portion Thereof)
Dog with or without village license $40.00 $20.00
2. A license application form, if not done previously, must be completed prior to the redemption of any dog.
3. The assessment of the initial kennel fee provided in subsection D1 of this section begins eight (8) hours after the dog is logged in at the
kennel. The initial fee is for a twenty four (24) hour time period, including the initial eight (8) hours.
4. Subsequent kennel fees provided in subsection D1 of this section begin twenty four (24) hours after a dog is initially logged in at the
kennel and are assessed for each twenty four (24) hour period or portion thereof. The animal control officer shall determine the fee to be
charged by computing the time elapsed from the impoundment and log in to the release time.
5. All fees are to be paid and proper village license issued prior to the release of any dog, however, the animal control officer may release
the dog to the owner for vaccination for rabies, provided vaccination occurs within seven (7) days of release of the animal as described in
subsection 6-4A-9-2B of this article.
6. With the adoption of this article, the village administrator, from time to time, may review and adjust, as necessary, the fees contained in
this subsection.
E. Unclaimed Dogs Transferred: Dogs not claimed by their owners or designee within seven (7) days will be transferred to county animal
control. (Ord. 2014-17, 4-14-2014)
6-4A-9-1: ALL ANIMALS SUBJECT TO IMPOUNDMENT:
An animal shall be subject to impoundment if such animal:
A. Has been subject to the commission of cruelty;
B. Has been used to commit a criminal act;
C. Is not properly tagged showing vaccination against rabies as provided under this article;
D. Constitutes a rabies threat as provided under this article;
E. Is discovered to be at large as provided under this article;
F. Is a nuisance as provided under this article;
G. Has been found to be a dangerous dog and is not otherwise kept in compliance with the provisions of subsection 6-4A-8A of this article;
H. Has been found to be a vicious dog and is subject to the provisions of subsection 6-4A-8B of this article;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 170/548
I. Is lost, apparently abandoned or otherwise deemed a stray; or
J. Is otherwise subject to impoundment under any other section of this article or any applicable provision of state law. (Ord. 2014-17, 4-14-2014)
6-4A-9-2: REDEMPTION AND DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
A. Any animal may be redeemed from impoundment only upon compliance with this section and only when otherwise permitted by this article.
B. No animal may be redeemed from impoundment unless its owner first pays general impoundment fees, provides proof of having paid the
rabies vaccination fee, and any other costs for spaying or neutering, veterinary or other care. The animal may be released to the owner to
obtain rabies vaccination or neutering, however, the owner must provide the police department with proof of vaccination or neutering within
seven (7) days after the animal is released to the owner.
C. Any dog subject to proceedings to determine whether such dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog may be redeemed from impoundment
only at such time as may be permitted under section 6-4A-8 of this article.
D. If any impounded dog has not been vaccinated against rabies, the police department shall notify county animal control, giving the name and
address of the owner. Said dog can only be released according to the provisions of subsection B of this section.
E. If the dog released to the owner according to subsection B of this section has not been inoculated for rabies or neutered after the seven (7)
day requirement has expired, the owner shall be guilty of a violation of subsection B of this section and the animal control officer may issue a
citation for every day that the dog is out of compliance.
F. A dog which has found to be at large three (3) times will not be returned to its owner unless the dog has first been neutered or spayed at the
expense of the owner. The neutering or spaying requirement must be satisfied by having the procedure performed by a veterinarian of the
owner's choice. In this case, the police department may release the animal for neutering or spaying, provided the procedure is completed
within seven (7) days of the release of the dog to the owner.
G. Any dog impounded and not redeemed within seven (7) working days after being impounded may be humanely destroyed. In the case of a
dog subject to proceedings regarding being found to be a vicious dog, such dog may be humanely destroyed pursuant to section 6-4A-8 of
this article, or within seven (7) working days after such dog is not found to be a vicious dog and thus authorized to be redeemed from
impoundment. (Ord. 2014-17, 4-14-2014)
6-4A-10: RABIES CONTROL:
A. Report Of Rabies Suspects: Any veterinarian, owner or person in a law enforcement capacity discovering or suspecting any dog to be
suffering with rabies shall forthwith report such fact to the police department and to the health department, giving the name and address of
the owner of such dog, if known, and the license number thereof, if known. If such dog, after examination by the health department, is
thereby suspected to be suffering from such disease, the dog shall be immediately impounded at the county rabies control pound or, at the
option of the owner, placed in the charge of a veterinarian licensed by the state of Illinois, whose establishment is located in the county, for a
period of not less than ten (10) days, for observation. Any impoundment shall be at the expense of the owner. If the dog should die during
the interval of observation, the owner shall be responsible for compliance with the appropriate state and county health regulations and
procedures.
B. Impoundment For Observation: Any dog which shall have been bitten by another dog having or suspected of having rabies shall be
immediately impounded for observation, as provided by Illinois statute.
C. Sale Or Removal Of Dog Suspected To Have Rabies From The County Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog, when
notified that such dog has bitten or scratched any person or has otherwise injured any person so as to cause an abrasion or laceration of the
skin, to sell or give away such dog or permit or allow such dog to be taken beyond the limits of the county.
D. Confinement For Observation:
1. It shall be the duty of the owner, upon receiving such notice, to immediately place the dog in a duly licensed veterinary hospital located in
the county or the county rabies control pound where such dog shall be confined for a period of at least ten (10) days, for observation.
2. In case the dog is delivered to a veterinary hospital, notice of the name and location of the hospital shall be immediately furnished to the
police department and to the county health department by the owner of the dog, and upon receipt of the dog, the veterinary hospital shall
submit to the village police department and the county health department or the county rabies control division the certificate of a licensed
veterinarian stating that such dog shows no symptoms of rabies.
3. If, at the expiration of the ten (10) days of confinement in the veterinary hospital, the veterinary hospital shall submit to the police
department and the county health department or to the county rabies control division a second certificate stating that the dog does not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 171/548
have rabies, the dog then may be released.
4. When evidence is presented to a licensed veterinarian that the dog was inoculated against rabies within the time prescribed by law, it may
be confined in the house of its owner, or in a manner which will prohibit it from biting any person for a period of ten (10) days, if a licensed
veterinarian adjudges such confinement satisfactory. (Ord. 2014-17, 4-14-2014)
6-4A-11: SURRENDER OF RABID OR DANGEROUS DOG:
It shall be the duty of the owner or custodian of any dangerous dog or of any dog suffering or suspected to be suffering from rabies to surrender
possession of such dog to a police officer upon his demand. Any police officer may enter upon private premises to apprehend any dangerous
dog or any dog suffering or suspected to be suffering from rabies. (Ord. 2014-17, 4-14-2014)
6-4A-12: THE KILLING OF THREATENING ANIMALS:
If any animal is discovered to be at large and cannot be safely tranquilized or otherwise impounded, any such animal may be killed by any
police officer when necessary for the protection of any person or property. (Ord. 2014-17, 4-14-2014)
6-4A-13: PENALTY; LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
A. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed to be guilty of an offense and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-
4-1 of this code.
B. If any dog, without provocation, attacks or injures any person who is peaceably conducting himself in any place where he may lawfully be,
the owner of the dog is liable for damages to such person for the full amount of the injury sustained and shall, in addition thereto, be in
violation of this article for failure to control the dog and shall be subject to penalties as provided under this article. (Ord. 2014-17, 4-14-2014)
Chapter 5
GENERAL OFFENSES
6-5-1: ASSAULT; FIGHTS:
Whoever shall assault, strike, or fight another, or attempt to do so, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. ch. XX, 2-
9-1938; amd. 2012 Code)
6-5-2: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
Whoever shall disturb the peace and quiet of the Village or any neighborhood, family or person by loud and unusual noises, shouting, blowing
horns, yelling, singing, or whistling, or by tumultuous and offensive carriage, or other boisterous and unseemly conduct shall be punishable as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. ch. XX, 2-9-1938; amd. 2012 Code)
6-5-3: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A. Acts Declared Disorderly Conduct: No person shall engage in disorderly conduct in the Village. Any of the following acts shall constitute
disorderly conduct:
1. Making or aiding or assisting in making any improper noise, riot, disturbance, breach of the peace or diversion tending to a breach of the
peace, the propriety of said conduct being measured in the context of the circumstance under which the action has taken place and
wherein it is finally adjudicated that such conduct is unreasonable in that context.
2. Assaulting, striking or deliberately injuring another person.
3. Engaging in or aiding or abetting any fight, quarrel or other disturbance.
4. Disturbing any religious service, funeral, public or private meeting, place of amusement or assembly of persons.
5. Making any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance, gesture, or display which, under the circumstances, creates a clear and present
danger of a breach of the peace or imminent threat of violence.
6. Refusing or failing to cease and desist any conduct or activity likely to produce a breach of the peace where there is an imminent threat of
violence and where the police have made all reasonable effort to protect the otherwise peaceful conduct and activity, and have requested
that said conduct and activity be stopped and have explained the request if there is time.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 172/548
7. Failing to obey a lawful order of disbursement by a person known by the offender to be a police officer under circumstances where three
(3) or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts are likely to cause substantial harm or
serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm.
8. Assembling with three (3) or more persons for the purpose of using force or violence to disturb the public peace.
9. Appearing in any public place manifestly under the influence of alcohol, narcotics or other drugs, not therapeutically administered, to the
degree that the offender may endanger himself or other persons or property, or annoy persons in his vicinity.
10. Resisting or obstructing the performance of one known to be a police officer or any authorized act within the police officer's official
capacity or impersonating a police officer.
11. Assisting any person in the custody of the police to escape, or furnishing any weapons, drugs or liquor to any such person. (Ord. 81-17,
4-13-1981)
12. Engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money or other valuable thing. (Ord. 81-17, 4-13-1981; amd. 2012 Code)
13. Giving any false alarm of fire, danger or disturbance to any person, or false information to any police officer, firefighter or any village
officer.
14. Throwing stones or missiles in public places or at any person or property, or using, brandishing or threatening to use any missile or
dangerous weapon or object.
15. Damaging or defacing trees, bushes, gardens, fences, windows, signs, buildings, monuments or vehicles, or engaging in any acts of
vandalism including, but not limited to, defacing of property by the scrawling or writing on such property without the express consent of the
property owner.
16. Anyone, who is not authorized by law, carrying, either publicly or concealed, any pistol, dagger, razor, knife, slingshot, metal knuckles, or
any other weapon or thing of deadly character. "Carrying" shall include both carrying on or about the person or carrying within a vehicle.
17. Hindering, annoying, or molesting persons passing along any street, sidewalk, crosswalk, or other place which is open to pedestrian
traffic or where the public is invited to enter.
18. Loitering, sitting, or standing around the entrance of any church, theater, public building, store, restaurant, or other place of public
assemblage or place where the public is invited in a manner so as to unreasonably obstruct the entrance to any such place.
19. a. Any person not specifically authorized by law discharging any firearm within the village. This subsection A19a shall not apply to peace
officers.
b. Firing or discharging on any street, public way, public alley or other public place or any way within the village any air gun or air pistol,
spring gun or spring pistol or other device which is calculated or intended to propel or project a bullet, pellet, arrow or similar projectile.
20. Disturbing the peace and quiet of any persons within the village by creating excessive noises. Excessive noise shall include, but not by
way of limitation, any of the following:
a. Loud playing of phonographs, radios, television sets, or music machines, or musical instruments;
b. Barking or howling of dogs or cats or other animals;
c. Vehicles operating without mufflers or the unnecessary use of horns on vehicles; unnecessary being measured by reasonableness
within the context in which the use of the horn takes place.
21. Littering any public or private property with paper or other debris or foreign matter. Any stored or transported material susceptible to
blowing or scattering shall be adequately covered or protected to prevent littering.
B. Signs Posted: If, in the opinion of the chief of police, the posting of signs which state the prohibition of one or more of the above and
foregoing activities is necessary, the chief shall cause the posting of said signs. If these signs are to be placed on private property, the cost
of the posting of said signs shall be borne by the property owner. (Ord. 81-17, 4-13-1981)
C. Penalty: Any person found to violate any of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for
each offense. In addition to any other penalty which may be imposed, weapons used or found in violation of this section shall be forfeited to
and confiscated by the village. (Ord. 81-17, 4-13-1981; amd. 2012 Code)
6-5-4: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES:
Any three (3) or more persons who shall assemble for the purpose of disturbing the peace or of committing any unlawful act, and who shall not
disperse when commanded or requested by any police officer, shall each and severally be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. ch. XX, 2-9-1938; amd. 2012 Code)
6-5-5: TRESPASS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 173/548
A. Offense: Whoever enters upon the land, or any part thereof, of another, after receiving, immediately prior to such entry, notice from the owner
or occupant that such entry is forbidden, or remains upon the land of another after receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart,
shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the village.
B. Notice: A person has received notice from the owner or occupant, within the meaning of subsection A of this section, if he has been notified
personally, either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the
main entrance to such land or the forbidden part thereof. (Ord. 80-2, 1-8-1980)
C. Exemption: Subsection A of this section does not apply to any person living on the land with permission of the owner, or of his agent, having
apparent authority to hire workers on such land and assign them living quarters or a place of accommodation for living thereon, nor to any
person living on such land at the request of, or by occupancy, lease or other agreement or arrangement with, the owner or his agent, nor to
anyone invited by such person so living on such land to visit him at the place he is so living that is upon the land.
D. Penalty: Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code
for each offense. (Ord. 80-2, 1-8-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
6-5-6: POSSESSION OF CANNABIS OR CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA:
A. Definitions:
CANNABIS: Includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any part of the plant Cannabis sativa,
whether growing or not; the seeds thereof and the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol
derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature
stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, and any other compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake or the
sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA: Includes all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are peculiar to, or marketed for use, or
are used, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body cannabis in violation of the cannabis control act. The term includes, but is not limited to:
1. Kits peculiar to and marketed for use, or used in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
cannabis.
2. Isomerization devices peculiar to or marketed for use, or used in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis.
3. Testing equipment peculiar to, or marketed for private home use in, or used for, identifying or analyzing the strength, effectiveness or
purity of cannabis.
4. Diluents and adulterants peculiar to, or marketed for use in, or used for, cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private
persons.
5. Objects peculiar to, marketed for use in, or used for ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, or
hashish oil into the human body including, where applicable, the following terms:
a. Water pipes.
b. Carburetion tubes and devices.
c. Smoking and carburetion masks.
d. Carburetor pipes.
e. Electric pipes.
f. Air driven pipes.
g. Chillums.
h. Bongs.
i. Ice pipes or chillers.
6. Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is for use in violation of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 174/548
B. Possession Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person knowingly to possess cannabis and/or paraphernalia as described herein for the use
thereof. (Ord. 2010-33, 9-13-2010)
C. Exempt Items; Determination:
1. Exempt Items:
a. Items marketed for the use in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling, or other use of cannabis as an incident to lawful
research, teaching or chemical analysis and not for sale.
b. Items marketed for, or historically and customarily used in connection with, the planting, propagation, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance. (Ord. 2010-33, 9-13-2010; amd. 2012
Code)
2. Considerations: In determining whether or not a particular item is exempt under this subsection, all other logically relevant factors should
be considered, including the following:
a. The general, usual, customary and historical use to which the item involved has been put.
b. Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the item and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or engineering of
the item upon its functioning.
c. Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be put.
d. Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the time and place of sale or commercial delivery.
e. Any national or local advertising concerning the design, purpose or use of the item involved, and the entire context in which such
advertising occurs.
f. The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was displayed for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale or
otherwise exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made.
g. Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
h. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community.
D. Violation; Penalties:
1. Cannabis Possession:
a. It is unlawful for any person knowingly to possess cannabis. Any person who violates this subsection D1 with respect to:
(1) Not more than two and five-tenths grams (2.5 g) of any substance containing cannabis is guilty of a class C misdemeanor.
(2) More than two and five-tenths grams (2.5 g), but not more than ten grams (10 g) of any substance containing cannabis is guilty of a
class B misdemeanor.
(3) More than ten grams (10 g) but not more than thirty grams (30 g) of any substance containing cannabis is guilty of a class A
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2010-33, 9-13-2010)
b. The penalty provided in section 1-4-1 of this code may be imposed upon persons found guilty of violating subsection D1a of this
section.
2. Cannabis Paraphernalia Possession:
a. A person who knowingly possesses an item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing
cannabis into the human body, or in preparing cannabis substance for that use, is guilty of a class A misdemeanor for which the court
may impose the penalty provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2010-33, 9-13-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
b. In determining intent under subsection D2a of this section, the proximity of the cannabis drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis
on the drug paraphernalia may be considered.
E. Precourt Diversion:
1. Any person who has not been previously charged with a violation of this section, a provision of the cannabis control act or a provision
under a similar local ordinance shall be eligible for precourt diversion upon payment of a fine of from a minimum of twenty five dollars
($25.00) to a maximum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
2. Precourt diversion may be initiated by service of a village ordinance citation upon the offender setting forth the date and time of the
offense, the fine to be assessed and the date when said fine is to be paid; or by an other method authorized by the village chief of police.
3. If payment is not made by the date indicated, the village is authorized to proceed against the offender in the circuit court of the 18th
judicial court and prosecute that offender under the terms of this section. In the alternative, the village is authorized to set up an internal
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 175/548
procedure whereby the failure to pay would result in entry of a judgment against the defendant to challenge the basis for issuance of the
ticket/citation before a hearing officer appointed by the village.
F. Application Of Provisions: The provisions of this section relating to the possession of cannabis shall be applicable to the possession of any
quantity of cannabis less than thirty grams (30 g). (Ord. 2010-33, 9-13-2010)
6-5-7: SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
A. Prohibitions: It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, as principal, clerk, agent or servant, to sell or distribute any items, effects,
paraphernalia, accessories, equipment, products or materials of any kind which are peculiar to, or marketed for use, or are used in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis
and certain drugs in violation of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, cannabis control act, and regulations governing other controlled substances.
B. Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this code for each violation. (Ord. 2010-34, 9-13-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
6-5-8: RETAIL THEFT:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the words and phrases defined in this subsection have the meanings ascribed to them unless a
contrary meaning is clear from the context:
CONCEAL: To "conceal" merchandise means that, although there may be some notice of its presence, that merchandise is not visible
through ordinary observation.
FULL RETAIL VALUE: The merchant's stated or advertised price of the merchandise.
MERCHANDISE: Any type of tangible personal property.
MERCHANT: An owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment or any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director,
franchisee or independent contractor of such owner or operator.
MINOR: A person who is less than nineteen (19) years of age, is unemancipated and resides with his parents or legal guardian.
PEACE OFFICER: Any person who, by virtue of his office or public employment, is vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to
make arrests for offenses, whether that duty extends to all offenses or is limited to specific offenses.
PERSON: Any natural person or individual.
PREMISES OF A RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, the retail mercantile establishment, any common
use areas in shopping centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf of a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the
convenience of the patrons of such retail mercantile establishment.
RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Any place where merchandise is displayed, held, stored or offered for sale to the public.
SHOPPING CART: Those pushcarts of the type or types which are commonly provided by grocery stores, drugstores or other retail
mercantile establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in stores and markets and, incidentally, from the stores to a
place outside the store.
THEFT DETECTION DEVICE REMOVER: Any tool or device specifically designed and intended to be used to remove any theft detection
device from any merchandise.
THEFT DETECTION SHIELDING DEVICE: Any laminated or coated bag or device designed and intended to shield merchandise from
detection by an electronic or magnetic theft alarm sensor.
UNDER RING: To cause the cash register or other sales recording device to reflect less than the full retail value of the merchandise.
B. Offenses:
1. A person commits the offense of retail theft when he knowingly:
a. Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or
offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the
merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or
b. Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed
to any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such
merchandise personally or in consort with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full
retail value of such merchandise; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 176/548
c. Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on
which such merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such
merchandise; or
d. Under rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of the merchandise; or
e. Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time
of such removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such cart; or
f. Represents to a merchant that he or another is the lawful owner of property, knowing that such representation is false, and conveys or
attempts to convey that property to a merchant who is the owner of the property in exchange for money, merchandise credit or other
property of the merchant; or
g. Uses or possesses any theft detection shielding device or theft detection device remover with the intention of using such device to
deprive the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a
retail mercantile establishment without paying the full retail value of such merchandise. A violation of this subsection shall be a class A
misdemeanor for a first offense and a class 4 felony for a second or subsequent offense; or
h. Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner and thereby intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or
benefit of the property when a lessee of the personal property of another fails to return it to the owner, or if the lessee fails to pay the full
retail value of such property to the lessor in satisfaction of any contractual provision requiring such, within ten (10) days after written
demand from the owner for its return. A notice, in writing, given after the expiration of the leasing agreement, by registered mail, to the
lessee at the address given by the lessee and shown on the leasing agreement shall constitute proper demand.
2. A person commits the offense of theft by emergency exit when he or she commits a retail theft as defined herein and to facilitate the theft,
he or she leaves the retail mercantile establishment by use of a designated emergency exit.
C. Presumptions: If any person:
1. Conceals upon his person or among his belongings unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, sorted or offered for sale in a retail
mercantile establishment; and
2. Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station for receiving payments for that merchandise in that retail mercantile
establishment;
such person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or transferred such merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with
the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail
value of such merchandise.
D. Detention:
1. Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a person has committed retail theft may detain such person, on or off the
premises of a retail mercantile establishment, in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time for all or any of the following
purposes:
a. To request identification.
b. To verify such identification.
c. To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has in his possession unpurchased merchandise and to make reasonable
investigation of the ownership of such merchandise.
d. To inform a peace officer of the detention of the person and surrender that person to the custody of a peace officer.
e. In the case of a minor, to immediately make a reasonable attempt to inform the parents, guardian or other private person interested in
the welfare of that minor and, at the merchant's discretion, a peace officer, of this detention and to surrender custody of such minor to
such person.
2. A merchant may make a detention, as permitted herein, off the premises of a retail mercantile establishment only if such a detention is
pursuant to an immediate pursuit of such person.
3. A merchant shall be deemed to have reasonable grounds to make a detention for the purposes of this subsection if the merchant detains
a person because such person has in his possession either a theft detection shielding device or a theft detection device remover.
E. Affirmative Defense: A detention, as permitted in this section, does not constitute an arrest or an unlawful restraint, as defined in 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/10-3, nor shall it render the merchant liable to the persons so detained. (Ord. 80-2, 1-8-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
F. Value Of Goods: This section shall apply only to goods having a value or full retail value of three hundred dollars ($300.00) or under. (Ord.
2012-37, 8-27-2012)
G. Penalty: Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code
for each offense. (Ord. 80-2, 1-8-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 177/548
6-5-9: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
A. Definition: As used in this section, the term public place means any location frequented by the public, or where the public is present or likely
to be present, or where a person may reasonably be expected to be observed by members of the public. Public places include, but are not
limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks, beaches, business and commercial establishments (whether for profit or not for profit and whether open
to the public at large or where entrance is limited by a cover charge or membership requirement), hotels, motels, restaurants, nightclubs,
country clubs, cabarets, and meeting facilities utilized by religious, social, fraternal or similar organizations. Premises used solely as a
private residence, whether permanent or temporary in nature, shall not be deemed a public place. Public place shall not include enclosed
single sex public restrooms, enclosed single sex functional showers, locker and/or dressing room facilities, enclosed motel rooms and hotel
rooms designed and intended for sleeping accommodations, doctors' offices, churches, synagogues or similar places when used for
circumcisions, baptisms or similar religious ceremonies, portions of hospitals and similar places in which nudity or exposure is necessarily
and customarily expected outside of the home; nor shall it include a place where a person appearing in a state of nudity as a model in a
class operated by: 1) a proprietary school licensed by the state; a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
or 2) a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation or an accredited private college.
B. Offense; Exemption:
1. Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and upwards who performs any of the following acts in a public place commits a public
indecency:
a. An act of "sexual penetration" or "sexual conduct" as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-12.
b. A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of the person.
2. Breast feeding of infants is not an act of public indecency.
C. Penalty: A person convicted of the offense of public indecency shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense
and may be enjoined from continuing the conduct determined to be public indecency. (Ord. 98-07, 2-23-1998; amd. 2012 Code)
D. Encouraging Offense: A person who knowingly or intentionally encourages or facilitates another person's commission of the offense of public
indecency shall be deemed to have committed the offense himself.
E. Premises Declared A Nuisance: A club, restaurant, theater or other place where violations of this section occur shall be deemed a public
nuisance which shall be subject to abatement.
F. Interpretation:
1. This section is patterned after Indiana public indecency statute upheld by the United States supreme court in Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc.,
501 U.S. 560, 111 S.Ct. 2456 (1991). It is the intent of the village that this section be interpreted in the same manner as said statute.
2. It is the intent of the village that the definition of "public place" set forth in subsection A of this section shall be interpreted to be no more
broad than the definition of "public place" set forth in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-9 as upheld by the Illinois supreme court in
People v. Garrison, 82 Ill.2d 444, 412 N.E.2d 483 (1980). (Ord. 98-07, 2-23-1998)
6-5-10: OBSCENE PUBLICATIONS:
Whoever shall bring within the limits of the village for the purpose of sale or exhibition and shall sell or offer to sell, or shall give away or offer to
give away, or shall in any manner exhibit any obscene, indecent or scandalous book, pamphlet, newspaper, journal, print, publication, paper or
writing of any kind, or any obscene, indecent or lewd picture, drawing, engraving, card, photograph, model, cast or instrument shall, on
conviction, be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. ch. XX, 2-9-1938; amd. 2012 Code)
6-5-11: DISCHARGING FIREARMS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any cannon, gun or fowling piece, pistol or firearm of any description within the limits of
the village without permission in writing of the president, which permission shall limit the time and place of such firing; provided, however, that
this section shall not apply to persons engaged in trap shooting, nor to persons engaged in the sport of hunting during the hunting season, all
such hunting to be confined to the open farming lands upon which the person so hunting shall have the permission of the owner or occupant as
required by law. Whoever shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each
offense. (Ord. ch. XX, 2-9-1938; amd. 2012 Code)
6-5-12: POSTING BILLS AND ADVERTISEMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to post any bills, political posters, or advertisements on any public property, and it shall be
unlawful to post any bill, political posters, or advertisement on any property without the written consent of the owner thereof. Any person or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 178/548
corporation violating any provision of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 69-11, 4-
23-1969; amd. 2012 Code)
6-5-13: PUBLIC INTOXICATION:
Whoever shall be drunk or shall be in a state of intoxication in any public place or in any private home or place so as to cause an offense in
connection therewith, in addition to the penalty for such offense, may be punishable for public intoxication as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code. (Ord. ch. XX, 2-9-1938; amd. 2012 Code)
6-5-14: SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUGS:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires different meaning:
PRODUCT CONTAINING A SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUG: Any product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or
psychedelic/hallucinogen, as those terms are defined herein such as, but not limited to, the examples of brand names or identifiers listed on
exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated herein.
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID: Any laboratory created compound that functions similar to the active ingredient in marijuana,
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation,
substance and their analog (including isomers, esters, ethers, salts, and salts of isomers) containing a cannabinoid receptor agonist, or the
five (5) classes of synthetic cannabinoids (naphthoylindoles, naphthoylpyrroles, napthylmethylindenes, phenacetylindoles, or
cyclohexylphenols) such as:
(Not an exclusive list)
AM-2201
JWH-007 (1-pentyl-2-methyl-3-(1 naphthoyl) indole)
JWH-015 ((2-Methyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1-naphthalenylmethanone)
JWH-018 (1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole)
JWH-019 (1-hexyl-3-(naphthalene-1-oyl) indole)
JWH-073 (naphthalene-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl) methanone)
JWH-081 (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl) methanone)
JWH-098 (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentyl-2-methylindol-3-yl) methanone)
JWH-122 (1-Pentyl-3-(4-methyl-1-naphthoyl) indole)
JWH-164 (7-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl) methanone)
JWH-200 (1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethyl)indol-3-yl)-naphthalen-1-yl) methanone)
JWH-203 (2-(2-chlorophenyl)-1-(1-pentylindol-3-yl) methanone
JWH-210 (4-ethylnaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl) methanone
JWH-250 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl) indole)
JWH-251 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methylphenylacety) indole)
JWH-398 (1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl) indole)
HU-210 ((6aR,10aR)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol)
HU-211 ((6aS,10aS)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2 methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol)
HU-308 ([(1R,2R,5R)-2-[2,6-dimethoxy-4-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenyl]-7,7-dimethyl-4-bicyclo [3.1.1]hept-3-enyl] methanol)
HU-331 ((3-hydroxy-2-[(1R,6R)-3-methyl-6-(1-methylethenyl)-2-cyclohexen-1-yl]-5-pentyl-2,5-cyclohexadiene-1,4-dione)
CP 55,940 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) and its homologues
CP 47,497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) and its homologues
WIN 55,212-2((R)-(+)-[2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4-morpholinylmethyl) pyrrolo[1,2,3-de)-1,4-benzoxazin-6-yl]-1-nepthalenylmethanone)
RCS-4 ((4-methoxyphenyl)(1-pentyl-1H-indol-3-yl) methanone)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 179/548
RCS-8 (1-(1-(2-cyclohexylethyl)-1H-indol-3-yl)-2-(2-methoxyphenyl) ethanone)
Naphthoylpyrroles
SYNTHETIC PSYCHEDELIC/HALLUCINOGEN: Any compound that mimics the effects of any federally controlled schedule I substance,
including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog
(including salts, isomers, esters, ethers and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a psychedelic/hallucinogenic effect on the
central nervous system and/or brain, such as:
2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-E);
2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-D);
2-(4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-C);
2-(4-Iodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-I);
2-(4-(Ethylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-T-2);
2-(4-(Isopropylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-T-4);
2-(2,5-Dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-H);
2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-nitro-phenyl)ethanamine (2C-N);
2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-P).
SYNTHETIC STIMULANT: Any compound that mimics the effects of any federally controlled schedule I substance such as cathinone,
methcathinone, MDMA and MDEA, including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture,
preparation, substance and their analog (including salts, isomers, and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a stimulant effect
on the central nervous system, such as:
3-Fluoromethcathinone
4-Fluoromethcathinone (other name: flephedrone)
3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (other name: methylone, MDMC)
3,4-Methylenedioxypyrovalerone (other name: MDPV)
4-Methylmethcathinone (other names: mephedrone, 4-MMC)
4-Methoxymethcathinone (other names: methedrone, bk-PMMA, PMMC)
4-Ethylmethcathinone (other name: 4-EMC)
Ethcathinone
Beta-keto-N-methylbenzodioxyolylpropylamine (other names: butylone, bk-MDDB)
Napthylpyrovalerone (other names: naphyrone, NRG-1)
N,N-dimethylcathinone (other name: metamfepramone)
Alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MDPPP)
4-methoxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MOPPP)
3,4-methylenedioxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MDPPP)
Alpha-pyrrolidinovalerophenone (other name: alpha-PVP)
6,7-kihydro-5H-indeno(5,6-d)-1,3-dioxal-6-amine) (other name: MDAI)
Any compound that is structurally derived from 2-amino-1-phenyl-1-propanone by modification or substitution in any of the following ways:
In the phenyl ring to any extent with alkyl, alkoxy, alkylenedioxy, haloalkyl, or halide substituents, whether or not further substituted in the
phenyl ring by one or more other univalent substituents;
At the 3-position with an alkyl substituent;
At the nitrogen atom with alkyl, dialkyl, benzyl, or methoxybenzyl groups;
Or by inclusion of the nitrogen atom in a cyclic structure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 180/548
B. Sale Or Delivery: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or delivery any product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant
or psychedelic/hallucinogen.
C. Possession: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess a product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or
psychedelic/hallucinogen.
D. Use: It shall be unlawful for any person to be under the influence of a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen.
E. Penalties:
1. Any person found to be in violation of subsection B of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation thereof.
2. Any person found to be in violation of subsection C or D of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation thereof.
3. Each violation of this section, or every day a violation continues to exist, shall constitute a new and separate violation. (Ord. 2012-08, 1-
23-2012)
6-5-15: DRONES/SMALL UNMANNED AIRCRAFT:
A. Definitions: As used in this section:
AIRCRAFT: Any contrivance invented, used or designed to navigate or fly in the air.
DRONE: See definition of small unmanned aircraft.
HOBBY OR RECREATIONAL PURPOSES: A pursuit engaged in for relaxation, and not for business purposes and not for compensation
or hire.
OPEN AIR ASSEMBLY UNIT: Any structure, enclosed area or other demarcated space used for the assembly of persons in the open air,
including, but not limited to, amusement parks, stadiums, athletic fields, automotive speed ways, aviation fields, band stands, beach
enclosures, grandstands, observation platforms, outdoor public swimming pools, outdoor theaters, race tracks, reviewing stands, street
festivals or parade routes.
OPERATE: To pilot, steer, direct, fly or manage a small unmanned aircraft through the air whether from within the aircraft or remotely. The
term "operate" includes managing or initiating a computer system that pilots, steers, directs, flies or manages a small unmanned aircraft.
PUBLIC AIRCRAFT: The meaning ascribed to the term in section 40102 of title 49 of the United States Code.
SMALL UNMANNED AIRCRAFT: An aircraft that: 1) is operated without the possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the
aircraft, and 2) weighs less than fifty five (55) pounds at the time of the operation, including the weight of any payload or field. The term
"small unmanned aircraft" does not include "toy aircraft" or "public aircraft" as defined herein.
SURVEILLANCE: The gathering, without permission and in a manner that is offensive to a reasonable person, of visual images, physical
impressions, sound recordings, data or other information involving the private, personal, business or familial activities of another person,
business or entity, or that otherwise intrudes upon the privacy, solitude or seclusion of another person, business or entity, regardless of
whether a physical trespass onto real property owned, leased or otherwise lawfully occupied by such other person, business or other
entity, or into the airspace above real property owned, leased or otherwise lawfully occupied by such other person, business or other
entity, occurs in connection with such surveillance.
TOY AIRCRAFT: 1. A glider or hand-tossed small unmanned aircraft that is not designed for and is incapable of sustained flight; or
2. A small unmanned aircraft that is capable of sustained flight and is controlled by means of a physical attachment, such as a string or
wire.
VILLAGE AIRSPACE: The airspace above the land, water and waterways within the jurisdiction of the Village.
WEAPON: Any instrument, article or substance that, under the circumstances in which it is used, attempted to be used or threatened to be
used, is readily capable of causing death or serious physical injury.
B. Operating Regulations: Except as otherwise provided in subsection C of this section, operation of the small unmanned aircraft shall only
occur in public areas where designated and no person shall operate any small unmanned aircraft in Village airspace:
1. Except for hobby or recreational purposes only and in conformity with this section;
2. Directly over any person who is not involved in the operation of the small unmanned aircraft, without such person's consent;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 181/548
3. Over property that the operator does not own, without the property owner's consent, and subject to any restrictions that the property
owner may place on such operation;
4. At an altitude higher than four hundred feet (400') above ground level;
5. Outside the visual line of sight of the operator. The operator shall use his or her own natural vision (which includes vision corrected by
standard eyeglasses or contact lenses) to maintain at all times an unobstructed view of the small unmanned aircraft, without the use of
vision-enhancing devices, such as binoculars, night vision goggles, powered vision magnifying devices, goggles designed to provide a
"first person view" from the model or similar devices;
6. Within five (5) miles of any airport;
7. In a manner that interferes with, or fails to give way to, any manned aircraft;
8. Between eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.;
9. Over private property or residential areas;
10. Whenever weather conditions impair the operator's ability to operate the small unmanned aircraft safely;
11. Over any open air assembly unit, school, school yard, hospital, place of worship, prison, police station, or fire station without the property
owner's consent, and subject to any restrictions that the property owner may place on such operation;
12. Within five hundred feet (500') of any water intake facility or any electric generating facility, substation or control center, or within one
hundred feet (100') of any electric transmission facility, or within twenty five feet (25') of any electric distribution facility or of any overhead
wire, cable, conveyor or similar equipment for the transmission of sounds or signal, or of heat, light or power, or data, upon or along any
public way within the Village, without the facility or equipment owner's consent, and subject to any restrictions that the facility or equipment
owner may place on such operation;
13. For the purpose of conducting surveillance, unless expressly permitted by law;
14. While under the influence of alcohol, or other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds or any combination thereof, as those
terms are defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501, as amended;
15. That is equipped with a firearm or other weapon;
16. With intent to use such small unmanned aircraft or anything attached to it to cause harm to persons or property;
17. In a reckless or careless manner; or
18. In violation of any Federal or State law.
C. Construction Of Section:
1. Operations Authorized By The FAA - Exception: Notwithstanding the prohibitions set forth in this section, nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit, limit or otherwise restrict any person who is authorized by the Federal Aviation Administration to operate a small
unmanned aircraft in Village airspace, pursuant to section 333 of the FAA Modernization and Reform Act of 2012 or a certificate of waiver,
certificate of authorization or airworthiness certificate under section 44704 of title 49 of the United States Code or other Federal Aviation
Administration grant of authority for a specific flight operation(s), from conducting such operation(s) in accordance with the authority
granted by the Federal Aviation Administration.
2. Operations Prohibited By The FAA - Clarification: Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the operation of any small
unmanned aircraft in Village airspace in violation of any Federal Statute or rules promulgated thereunder, including, but not limited to, any
temporary flight restrictions or notices to airmen issued by the Federal Aviation Administration.
3. Operations Authorized By The State Of Illinois - Exception: Notwithstanding the prohibitions set forth in this section, nothing in this section
shall be construed to prohibit the use of a drone by a law enforcement agency in accordance with section 15 of the Freedom From Drone
Surveillance Act, codified at 725 Illinois Compiled Statutes 167/1 et seq., or its successor provision.
D. Violation - Penalty: Any person who violates this section or any rule promulgated thereunder may be fined up to five hundred dollars
($500.00). Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
E. Seizure For Unlawful Use: If the Mayor, Chief of Police, or their duly authorized enforcement officers or designees have a reasonable basis to
believe that any small unmanned aircraft is or has been operating in violation of this section, said small unmanned aircraft may be seized by
such duly authorized enforcement official, followed by an opportunity for an administrative hearing, with notice to the owner within seven (7)
calendar days of such seizure, for the purpose of reviewing the appropriateness of the seizure, and shall be held by the Village until such
time that the owner of such small unmanned aircraft reimburses the Village for the actual cartage costs incurred in connection with the
seizure and pays to the Village twenty dollars ($20.00) for each day, or part of a day, that the small unmanned aircraft is in storage. If
criminal charges involving the use, condition or operation of the small unmanned aircraft are pending, the small unmanned aircraft shall be
held until disposition of the criminal charges. If it is determined at an administrative hearing, by a preponderance of evidence, that the seized
small unmanned aircraft was not operated in violation of this section, such small unmanned aircraft shall be returned to its owner without
charge. (Ord. 2017-34, 8-28-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 182/548
Chapter 6
MINORS
6-6-1: CURFEW:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following words shall be defined as follows:
CURFEW HOURS: 1. Between one minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Saturday;
2. Between one minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Sunday; and
3. Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
EMERGENCY: Any unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for such immediate action. The term
includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent
serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any
place of amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN: 1. A person who, by court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
2. A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
MINOR: Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
PARENT: A person who is:
1. A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person; or
2. At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
REMAIN: 1. To linger or stay; or
2. To fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the
premises.
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, disfigurement, or protracted loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
B. Offenses:
1. A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment during curfew hours.
2. A parent or guardian of a minor or other person in custody or control of a minor commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits the
minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment during curfew hours.
C. Defenses: It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B of this section that the minor was:
1. Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or other person in custody or control of the minor;
2. On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
3. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
4. Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
5. Involved in an emergency;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 183/548
6. On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor's presence;
7. Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental
agency, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any
detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or
governmental agency, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
8. Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech,
and the right of assembly; or
9. Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the emancipation of minors act1.
D. Enforcement: Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a law enforcement officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and
reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably
believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection C of this section
is present.
E. Penalties:
1. A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code; except, that
neither a person who has been made a ward of the court under the juvenile court act of 19872, nor that person's legal guardian, shall be
subject to the penalty.
2. In addition to or instead of the penalty imposed by subsection E1 of this section, the court may order a parent, legal guardian, or other
person convicted of a violation of subsection B of this section to perform community service as determined by the court; except, that the
legal guardian of a person who has been made a ward of the court under the juvenile court act of 1987 may not be ordered to perform
community service. The dates and times established for the performance of community service by the parent, legal guardian, or other
person convicted of a violation of subsection B of this section shall not conflict with the dates and times that the person is employed in his
or her regular occupation. (2012 Code)
6-6-2: VANDALISM:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the words and phrases "legal guardian", "minor" and "vandalism", whenever used herein, shall
have the meanings as are ascribed to them by this subsection:
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a circuit court of the state, but the term does not include a
person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the juvenile court act.
MINOR: A person who is above the age of eleven (11) years but not yet nineteen (19) years of age.
VANDALISM: The wilful or malicious breaking, defacing, injuring or destroying any property, whether owned by the state, county, village, or
any other governmental body, or which is owned by any private person or corporate entity.
B. Vandalism Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit vandalism within the village.
C. Responsibility Of Parent Or Guardian: A parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian shall
be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility, and said minor shall be
deemed to have committed the acts described in this subsection with the knowledge and permission of the parent or guardian, in violation of
this section, upon the occurrence of the following described events:
1. An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or
statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another
official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing
injury to a person or property; and
2. Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice thereof, substantially in the form shown in appendix I attached to
ordinance 76-44, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service, with a certificate of personal
service returned, from the village police department following said adjudication or nonjudicial sanction; and
3. If at any time following receipt of the notice set forth in subsection C2 of this section, said minor is either adjudicated to be in violation of
any ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection C1 of this section, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another
official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection C1 of this
section. (Ord. 76-44, 7-26-1976)
D. Penalty: Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code
for each offense. (Ord. 76-44, 7-26-1976; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 184/548
Chapter 7
GRAFFITI
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
GRAFFITI: In addition to its usual and customary meaning, the term graffiti shall mean any drawing, carving, or painting which shall include,
without limitation, any letter, numeral, figure, emblem, insignia, picture, character, spectacle, delineation, announcement, word, phrase, diagram,
symbol, sketch, inscription or other representation.
OWNER: Shall include, without limitation, that person or persons or legal entity which is the current titleholder of the property. (Ord. 96-07, 1-22-
1996)
6-7-2: PROHIBITIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful, and it is hereby declared a nuisance, to place graffiti or permit graffiti to remain upon any public or private property
including, without limitation, any sidewalk or street, tree, lamppost, utility box, utility pole, stanchion, postal mail receptacle, sign, hydrant,
fence, door, wall, window, garage or enclosure, vehicle, bridge, or pier.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant, or occupant of any property to place or give permission to place on such property, whether real or
personal, which is in public view, any graffiti which incites violence by reference to gang or criminal activity, depicts or expresses "obscenity"
as defined by the Statutes of the State of Illinois, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20, or contains defamatory material about a public or
private person. (Ord. 96-07, 1-22-1996)
6-7-3: REMOVAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Owner Responsibility:
1. It shall be the duty of the owner of any property upon which graffiti is present to remove, eradicate or otherwise eliminate such graffiti
within ten (10) days from the date such graffiti has been placed upon the owner's property. It shall also be the duty of the owner of any
such property upon which graffiti is present to promptly report the existence of the graffiti to the Police Department. This report to the
department may be either in writing or by telephonic message. The notice shall advise as to the location of the graffiti. (Ord. 96-07, 1-22-
1996)
2. The Director of Public Works may grant in writing to an owner an additional period of time to remove graffiti if the owner presents evidence
of one of the following conditions: (Ord. 96-07, 1-22-1996; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
a. Weather conditions make removal a substantial burden; or
b. The necessary chemicals for removal are not readily available, but that the owner is seeking to obtain such chemicals; or
c. The physical condition of the owner makes immediate removal a substantial burden to the owner; or
d. Such other condition which makes immediate removal an undue hardship to the owner.
B. Removal By Village:
1. The Village may remove the graffiti but is not obligated to undertake to do so. If the Village determines, in the discretion of the Village, that
the equipment and other resources available to the Village are not appropriate for removal of the particular graffiti, the owner of the
property shall remain responsible for the removal, eradication or elimination, including the placing of paint or covering over the graffiti.
2. The Village may remove graffiti from private property subject to the following conditions:
a. The owner has reported to the Police Department the existence of the graffiti; and
b. The owner has signed a written authorization giving permission to the Village to remove the graffiti and releasing and holding harmless
the Village from any claims for any damage to person or property resulting from the Village undertaking to remove the graffiti; and (Ord.
96-07, 1-22-1996)
c. The Director of Public Works has determined that the Village has the capability, through the use of equipment owned by the Village, to
remove the graffiti. (Ord. 96-07, 1-22-1996; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
6-7-4: REWARDS:
A. The Village does hereby offer a reward of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to any person who, without having an affirmative duty to report the
existence of graffiti, supplies information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person violating the provisions of this chapter. In the
event of multiple contributors of information, the reward amount shall be divided by the Village in the manner it shall deem appropriate.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 185/548
B. Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed through the Office of the Chief of Police who will make a recommendation to the Village
Administrator. Each claim shall:
1. State the date, location and kind of property involved.
2. Identify the name of the person who was convicted or admitted to the violation of this chapter.
3. Identify the court and date upon which the conviction was entered or the place and the date of the administrative finding of guilt.
C. All claims for rewards must be approved by the Village Administrator. (Ord. 96-07, 1-22-1996)
6-7-5: PENALTIES:
A. General Penalty; Other Sanctions: Upon a finding of guilty for violation of the provisions of this chapter, there shall be imposed a penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. In addition to any other relief, the Village may seek an injunction, or mandatory injunction, or a court
order directing the removal of any graffiti and for the court order to include an award of attorney fees. (Ord. 96-07, 1-22-1996; amd. 2012
Code)
B. Parental Responsibility: Parents of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be responsible for any violations of this chapter
committed by their child. This shall include payment for the costs of removal of graffiti as well as the cost for any damages incurred as a
result of the actions of their child in violating the terms of this chapter. The parents shall also be responsible for any fines, restitution
amounts, attorney fees and reimbursement of costs to the Village.
C. Community Service: Upon a finding that a person is guilty of violating any provisions of this chapter, the Village may request as relief, in
addition to any other penalty, that the person found guilty perform community service work as determined by the Village Administrator.
D. Interpretation: For purpose of this chapter, "incurring nonjudicial sanctions from an official agency" shall also be deemed a "conviction". (Ord.
96-07, 1-22-1996)
Chapter 8
FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
6-8-1: FIREWORKS:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
FIREWORKS: Means and includes any explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or any article prepared for
the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation,
and shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the
same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, bombs or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any
explosive compound; or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, or containing combustible substances producing
visual effects. The term "fireworks" shall not include snake or glow worm pellets; smoke devices; sparklers; trick noisemakers known as
"party poppers", "booby traps", "snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads" and "auto burglar alarms"; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or
other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing twenty five hundredths grain or less of explosive compound is used, provided they
are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic caps
which contain less than twenty five hundredths grain of explosive mixture.
SUPERVISED PUBLIC PYROTECHNICAL DISPLAY: A pyrotechnical display sponsored by a public taxing body and conducted by an
experienced pyrotechnician.
B. Possession, Sale, Distribution Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess, offer for sale, sell at retail, keep, expose
for sale, loan or give away any fireworks anywhere in the village. (Ord. 91-47, 9-23-1991)
C. Discharge Prohibited; Exception: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge anywhere in the village any of the articles enumerated in
subsection A of this section, definition of "fireworks"; provided, however, that the president and board of trustees may issue a permit for the
discharge of fireworks and for supervised public pyrotechnical displays as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 91-47, 9-23-1991; amd. 2012 Code)
D. Fireworks Displays:
1. Application For Permit; Nontransferability:
a. Application for permits for the discharge of fireworks or for supervised public pyrotechnical displays shall be in writing and shall state the
full name of the person, including middle initial, place of residence and date of birth, the place where it is proposed to give such public
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 186/548
display of fireworks, what experience the applicant has had, if any, in the discharge of fireworks, and the full name and date of birth of
the pyrotechnician and the types of fireworks being exploded, such application being sworn to before a notary public or other officer
authorized by law to administer oaths.
b. Applications for permits shall be made in writing at least fifteen (15) business days in advance of the date of the display. After such
privilege shall have been granted, sales, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose
only. No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable.
2. Eligibility For Permit: Applications for permits will be granted to public taxing bodies only and not to private individuals, private
corporations, or civic organizations.
3. Insurance Requirements: No pyrotechnical exhibition shall be held unless the proprietor thereof has in force a public liability insurance
policy in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). A certificate showing such insurance shall be filed with the clerk at least five (5)
days prior to such exhibitions. (Ord. 91-47, 9-23-1991)
4. Inspection Of Premises; Issuance Of Permit; Fee: The president shall, upon receipt of such applicant's statement, refer the same to the
chief of police and the chief of the fire protection district, who shall have an inspection made of the premises at the location given in said
application where it is proposed to give such public display of fireworks, and if, in the judgment of the chief of police and the chief of the
fire protection district, it would not be hazardous to surrounding property or dangerous to any person or persons to permit such public
display of fireworks at such location, they shall approve such application and return the same to the president and board, whereupon the
president shall issue a permit, giving the applicant permission to conduct such public display of fireworks. The size and explosive power of
the fireworks used, in proximity to residential or commercial buildings, the experience and safety history of the pyrotechnician and
fireworks provider, the ability to keep the public outside the restricted area, and the ability of emergency equipment to access the site if an
emergency arises will be just some of the issues considered in evaluating the application. Such permits shall designate the kinds and
quantities of fireworks to be used at such public display, and no other kinds and no greater quantities of fireworks than therein specified
shall be used at such public display. (Ord. 91-47, 9-23-1991; amd. 2012 Code)
5. Protected Areas: No fireworks shall be discharged, ignited or exploded at any point in the village within six hundred feet (600') of any
hospital, asylum, infirmary, nursing home or nursing facility. (Ord. 91-47, 9-23-1991)
6-8-2: NITROGLYCERINE AND TNT:
It shall be unlawful to keep or store any nitroglycerine or the explosive commonly known as "TNT" in the village in any quantities, excepting for
medicinal or laboratory purposes, and for such purposes, no more than one-fourth (1/4) ounce shall be stored in any one building or premises.
(Ord. 91-47, 9-23-1991)
6-8-3: RULES OF STATE FIRE MARSHAL GOVERN:
All explosives must be kept, stored, transported, or discharged in accordance with the rules of the state fire marshal, subject to the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 91-47, 9-23-1991)
6-8-4: PENALTIES:
Whoever fails to comply with or violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
Moreover, the village shall have the right to seek equitable legal relief to enforce this chapter and to protect the public safety and welfare. (Ord.
91-47, 9-23-1991; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 9
PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE BENEFITS ACT
6-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a fair and efficient method of determining the eligibility of an employee for the benefits enumerated
under the public safety employee benefits act1 through the process of an administrative hearing. All benefits provided employees pursuant to
the public safety employee benefits act (act) will be consistent with the act. (Ord. 2013-35, 11-25-2013)
6-9-2: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER:
The system of the administrative hearing shall be comprised of a hearing officer whose power and authority and limitations are as follows:
A. Power Of The Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall have all of the powers granted to him under common law relative to the conduct of an
administrative hearing including the power to:
1. Preside over all village hearings involving the public safety employee benefits act2;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 187/548
2. Administer oaths;
3. Hear testimony taken under oath or affirmation and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of eligibility under the public safety
employee benefits act3;
4. Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the parties
or their representatives;
5. Rule upon objections in the admissibility of evidence and other motions, including motions to intervene by interested parties;
6. Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits in evidence introduced at the hearing;
7. Issue a determination based on the evidence presented at the hearing, after entertaining arguments in either oral or written format, at the
hearing officer's discretion;
8. The determination shall be in writing and shall include a written finding of fact, decision and order.
B. Appointment Of Hearing Officer: The village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, is hereby authorized to appoint a
person to hold the position of a hearing officer for any hearing that shall be scheduled by the village.
C. Selection Of The Hearing Officer: In making the selection of a hearing officer, the village president shall consider all pertinent information
including, at a minimum, and as required by statute:
1. The candidate's ability to competently perform the services as set forth herein;
2. The candidate's background and service performance data made available to the village president on file with the village or otherwise
obtained by the village;
3. The candidate must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Illinois for at least three (3) years prior to appointment and have
knowledge of, and experience in, employment and labor law, general civil procedure, the rules of evidence, and administrative practice.
(Ord. 2013-35, 11-25-2013)
6-9-3: INITIATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURE:
The system of administrative hearings for determination of eligibility for benefits under the public safety employee benefits act4 shall be initiated
by the serving of a written notice on the village administrator by any sworn police department employee stating the following in full detail:
A. The nature of the employee's claim giving full particulars thereof, i.e., date, time, place, nature of injury;
B. Any other factual circumstances surrounding said incident giving rise to said claim;
C. A request for the benefits enumerated under the public safety employee benefits act5; and
D. A request for the scheduling of a hearing for the eligibility to receive said benefits. (Ord. 2013-35, 11-25-2013)
6-9-4: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
An administrative hearing shall be held to adjudicate and determine whether the subject sworn police department employee is eligible for
benefits under the public safety employee benefits act6. If the employee is found eligible, the employee benefits shall be consistent with the act.
A. Time And Date: Hearings shall be held on the date, time and place as established by the village with appropriate notice served upon the
subject sworn police department employee.
B. Record: All hearings shall be attended by a certified court reporter and a transcript of all proceedings shall be made by the certified court
reporter. The village shall pay for the court reporter's attendance fee and any copy of the transcript desired by the hearing officer and/or the
village, but if the subject sworn police department employee desires a copy of the transcript, it must be paid for by the subject sworn police
department employee.
C. Procedures: The village and the subject sworn police department employee shall be entitled to representation by counsel at said hearing and
may present witnesses, testimony and documents, may cross examine opposing witnesses, and may request the issuance of subpoenas to
compel the appearance of relevant witnesses or the production of relevant documents. Each party shall bear the cost of its own counsel and
witnesses.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 188/548
D. Evidence: Insofar as is practical, the rules of evidence as set forth in the Illinois code of civil procedure shall apply, however, the hearing
officer is not required to strictly follow the rules of evidence.
E. Final Determination: The determination by the hearing officer of whether the petitioning public safety employee is eligible for the benefits
under the public safety employee benefits act7 shall constitute a final determination for the purpose of judicial review under the common law
writ of certiorari. (Ord. 2013-35, 11-25-2013)
Title 7
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
TRAFFIC CODE; MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
7-1-1: TRAFFIC CODE:
A. Adoption Of State Vehicle Code: The Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted
by reference to be applied within the corporate limits of the village to the extent permitted by law and to the extent that its subject matter is
not regulated by the village code or inconsistent with any lawful provisions of the village code.
B. Interpretation: All references in sections of the Illinois vehicle code to "this code" shall be to sections of the Illinois vehicle code. References
to a state employee or official may be to a corresponding village employee or official where such reference is applicable or necessary. Any
provisions of the Illinois vehicle code adopted herein may be cited by placing "7-1" before the appropriate Illinois vehicle code section, i.e., 7-
1-11-501, Bloomingdale village code.
C. Offenses: The burden of proof for any offense classified as a "petty" offense or "business" offense in the Illinois vehicle code adopted herein
shall be by a preponderance of the evidence. Offenses classified therein as "misdemeanor" offenses shall be proven beyond a reasonable
doubt. (Ord. 97-38, 8-11-1997)
7-1-2: EQUIPMENT TO COMPLY WITH STATE LAW:
No person shall operate a vehicle in the village unless it is equipped with all the equipment required by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-100
et seq., and all such equipment is in good working order. (Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976; amd. 2012 Code)
7-1-3: TURNING MOVEMENTS:
A. Turning Around; U-Turns: The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction, upon any street or
part of any street where such turns are permitted, at any point closer than one hundred feet (100') to any street intersection nor when such
turn cannot be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic.
B. Obedience To No Turn Signs: Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left turn or turn in the opposite direction is
permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. (Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976)
7-1-4: VEHICLES UPON CERTAIN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE AREAS:
A. Definition: The term "motor vehicle", as used in this section, is defined as every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks
and "snowmobiles" as defined in the snowmobile registration safety act.
B. Sidewalks: No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area, except upon a permanent or duly authorized
temporary driveway.
C. Certain Engine Powered Vehicles:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or be in control of a motorized skateboard, a snow vehicle, go-ped, go-cart, minibike,
motorized scooter or any similar engine powered vehicle or device upon any public or private street, highway, parking lot, sidewalk, school
ground, bike path or any other public property within the village except as may be authorized by the village in areas other than the streets,
highways, or sidewalks. For the purpose of this subsection, a "motorized skateboard, scooter or go-ped" is defined as a board or other
horizontal surface having wheels which are operated by some type of motor, and the board is generally designed to hold one person.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 189/548
2. No person shall permit the operation of such a motor vehicle to be operated upon or within any of the prohibited areas.
3. Motor vehicles, as defined in subsection C1 of this section, are authorized to be operated upon any street or highway within the village,
provided the vehicle can be and is licensed by the state of Illinois.
4. This subsection does not apply to any vehicle moved exclusively by human power nor to any motorized wheelchair.
5. The operation of such a motor vehicle may be permitted on private property with the permission of the property owner.
D. Parks, School Grounds, Public Areas: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle or any motor driven device, in addition
to those prohibited by subsection C of this section, in or upon any park, parkway, school grounds, or other public area not designed or
improved or intended to accommodate the regular travel of motor vehicles, except:
1. In cases of emergency, if the presence of the motor vehicle on the roadway would constitute a hazard, or when directed by a police
officer; or
2. Motor vehicles operated by the village or person under a contract with the village while in the normal performance of his work.
E. Toy Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person upon skates, a coaster, sled or other toy vehicle to go upon any roadway other than at a
crosswalk. (Ord. 2002-24, 6-24-2002)
F. Responsibility Of Parent Or Guardian: The parent or legal guardian of any person under the age of sixteen (16) years who operates any
motor vehicle in violation of subsection B, C, D or E of this section shall be liable for any and all damages resulting from that individual's
operation of a "motor vehicle", as that term is defined in subsection A of this section, in violation of this section. Additionally, the parent or
legal guardian of any person under the age of sixteen (16) years who operates any motor vehicle in violation of subsection B, C, D or E of
this section shall be liable for any fine assessed for violation of this section.
G. Penalty: A violation of this section shall subject the violator or the parent or legal guardian of a violator less than sixteen (16) years of age to
the penalty provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each and every violation of this section. (Ord. 2002-24, 6-24-2002; amd. 2012 Code)
H. Confiscation Of Vehicles: Any vehicle operated by any person in violation of this section may be seized by the arresting officer and held as
evidence in the trial of a person charged with violating this section and may not be released to the owner or parent or legal guardian of an
owner until the completion of the trial of the cause arising out of the violation of this section. (Ord. 2002-24, 6-24-2002)
7-1-5: EQUESTRIANS:
The driver of any vehicle shall yield the right of way to a person riding a horse on bridle paths where such bridle paths cross roadways, when
signaled to do so by the raising of the arm of the rider. Nothing in this section shall relieve an equestrian from the duty of exercising due care
and of obeying official traffic control devices. (Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976)
7-1-6: VEHICLE BURGLAR ALARMS:
A. Activation Time Limited: In any vehicle equipped with a continuous or intermittent audible signal device which acts as a burglar alarm, such
device shall be limited in operation to ten (10) minutes after activation and shall be incapable of further operation until reset to become active
again.
B. Automatic Shutoff Required: No person shall install in or maintain or operate any vehicle within the village with audible signal device for use
as a burglar alarm unless the device is equipped with an automatic shutoff mechanism to terminate the alarm sound after ten (10) minutes
and an automatic reset mechanism to reengage the alarm for further operation.
C. Written Warning; Fine; Exception: Any person who violates this section shall first receive a written warning notice from the village. If any such
person should violate this section on a subsequent occasion within any three (3) month period, that person shall be subject to a fine of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each such offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues. It shall not be a violation of this section for a vehicle alarm to operate for a period of time in excess of ten (10) minutes if
the device is designed to and has been triggered by the unauthorized opening of the hood, trunk or door of the vehicle or by breaking of a
window.
D. Nuisance Declared; Abatement: Any vehicle burglar alarm which is audible for more than ten (10) minutes is hereby declared a public
nuisance which may be abated by the removal of such vehicle to an impound lot in accordance with the following procedure:
1. Prior to removing the vehicle from its location, the officer(s) investigating the activated alarm shall attempt to contact the owner of the
vehicle by securing the name and address of the registered owner of the vehicle from the Office of the Secretary of State and using said
information to telephone or directly contact the vehicle owner.
2. If the investigating officer(s) is (are) not able to contact the vehicle owner to have the alarm deactivated at the site, the officer shall have
the vehicle removed to an impound lot.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 190/548
3. If telephonic or personal contact is not made with the vehicle owner within twenty four (24) hours after it is towed, a certified letter, return
receipt requested, shall be mailed to the vehicle owner. Upon contact with the vehicle owner after the vehicle has been removed to the
impound lot, the vehicle owner shall be informed as to where the vehicle can be retrieved and that he/she is entitled to a post-tow hearing
by the Chief of Police or his designee either before or after retrieval of the vehicle. At the hearing, should the vehicle owner prove to the
Chief of Police or his designee that the vehicle was not in violation of this section when removed, the Village shall reimburse the vehicle
owner for the vehicle retrieval costs or, as the case may be, pay the vehicle retrieval costs.
4. A vehicle owner may appeal to the Village Administrator a finding by the Chief of Police or his designee that the vehicle was in violation of
this section when removed. The Village Administrator may overturn the decision of the Chief of Police or his designee, in which case, the
Village shall reimburse or pay the vehicle retrieval costs. (Ord. 94-07, 2-14-1994)
7-1-7: DEPOSIT OF SUBSTANCES FROM VEHICLES ONTO STREETS PROHIBITED:
A. Deposits Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to operate, park or maintain any vehicle on any public street or right-of-way within the
Village under circumstances or conditions whereby such operation, parking or maintenance results in the tracking or deposit of any soil, clay,
oil, tar or other substance (having a thickness of 1/8 inch or more) upon such street or right-of-way, except for the spreading of sand or other
abrasive material for purposes of traction.
B. Responsibility For Employees: If a person violates the provisions of subsection A of this section while acting or serving as an employee,
agent or servant, his employer, principal or master shall also be deemed in violation of subsection A of this section as to the same offense.
(Ord. 62-5, 5-9-1962)
C. Penalty: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 62-5, 5-9-1962; amd. 2012 Code)
7-1-8: TEMPORARY REGULATORY AND ADVISORY SIGNS (EMERGENCY):
In cases of declared or undeclared emergency, or construction activities, or road closures which cause local traffic problems that threaten the
safety of motorists using Village controlled streets or public ways, the Village Administrator may make or cause to be made an investigation of
the traffic or other conditions affecting the use of said streets or public ways to determine the type, location, and duration of such regulatory or
advisory signs as are required by this section, or that the Village Administrator, upon the advice of the Chief of Police or Director of Public Works
or Village Engineer, may deem appropriate to provide the public the information, directions, prohibitions or warnings for obedience to said
regulations enacted and in effect pursuant to this title to traffic upon such street or public way and for the protection and safety of persons and
property. The Village Administrator is authorized and directed to cause such regulatory and advisory signs determined to be necessary to be
erected and maintained for the necessary duration. All signage pursuant to this section shall comply with the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices". All regulatory and advisory signage installed pursuant to this section shall be subject to all appropriate obedience, enforcement, and
penalty provisions of this title. All actions by the Village Administrator, Police Chief or Director of Public Works or Village Engineer pursuant to
this section shall be ratified by the Village Board of Trustees at the next available Village Board meeting. (Ord. 2005-16, 4-11-2005; amd. 2012
Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
Chapter 2
PARKING REGULATIONS
7-2-1: METHOD OF PARKING:
A. Generally:
1. No person shall park a vehicle with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb, except on one-way streets.
2. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to allow such vehicle to stand or park in a street other than parallel with the
curb and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the regularly established curb line; except, upon streets
that have been marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks. (Ord. 76-56, 9-13-
1976)
B. Outside Business Or Residence District:
1. Outside a business or residence district, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon
the roadway when it is practicable to stop, park or so leave such vehicle off the roadway, but in every event, an unobstructed width of the
highway opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of such stopped vehicle shall be
available from a distance of two hundred feet (200') in each direction upon such highway.
2. The corporate authorities, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction or for the maintenance of which it is responsible, may place signs
prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on any highway where, in their opinion, such stopping, standing or
parking is dangerous to those using the highway or where the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere with the free
movement of traffic thereon. Any such regulations adopted by the corporate authorities regarding the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles upon any specific street, streets or highways become effective at the time of the erection of appropriate signs indicating such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 191/548
regulations. Any such signs may be erected either by the corporate authorities or by a local authority with the approval of the corporate
authorities. (Ord. 80-37, 5-28-1980)
7-2-2: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Vehicles For Sale; Sales From Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any street for the purpose of displaying it
for sale, or to sell goods and merchandise therefrom. (Ord. 76-56, 9-13-1976)
B. All Night Parking: No person shall park any vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than five (5) minutes between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of any day, except persons operating emergency vehicles responding to emergency calls.
(Ord. 76-56, 9-13-1976; amd. 2012 Code)
C. Alleys: No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10')
of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in
such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
D. Cab Stands And Bus Stands: No person shall park any vehicle, other than a licensed taxicab, in any area designated by ordinance as a cab
stand; nor shall any person park a vehicle, other than a bus, in a place so designated as a bus loading zone.
E. Private Property: It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle on private property without first obtaining
the consent of the owner of such property. (Ord. 76-56, 9-13-1976)
F. Residential Driveway Aprons: Parking upon any "residential driveway apron", defined as being the area of a residential driveway that is
between the curb and sidewalk and/or property line of the property, in a manner that places the vehicle parallel to the street or roadway shall
be prohibited. (Ord. 2006-52, 11-13-2006)
7-2-3: PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIC PLACES:
A. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device, no person shall:
1. Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
a. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
b. On a sidewalk.
c. Within an intersection.
d. On a crosswalk.
e. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety
zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings.
f. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
g. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel.
h. On any railroad tracks. A violation of this subsection A1h shall result in a mandatory fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fifty (50)
hours of community service.
i. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
j. On any controlled access highway.
k. In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers.
l. In a public parking area if the vehicle does not display a current annual registration sticker or current temporary permit pending
registration.
2. Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers:
a. In front of a public or private driveway.
b. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
c. Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection.
d. Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 192/548
e. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance (when properly signposted).
f. At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
3. Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property
or passengers:
a. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
b. At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
B. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(2012 Code)
7-2-4: TIME LIMIT PARKING:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle in a limited parking area, which has been appropriately so
marked, for a consecutive period of time longer than the time period specified therefor in section 7-3-6-2 of this title. (Ord. 76-56, 9-13-1976)
7-2-5: PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
A. Definition: A "person with a disability", as used in this section, shall mean a natural person who, as determined by a licensed physician, by a
physician assistant who has been delegated the authority to make this determination by his or her supervising physician, or by an advanced
practice nurse who has a written collaborative agreement with a collaborating physician that authorizes the advanced practice nurse to make
this determination: 1) cannot walk without the use of, or assistance from, a brace, cane, crutch, another person, prosthetic device,
wheelchair, or other assistive device; 2) is restricted by lung disease to such an extent that his or her forced (respiratory) expiratory volume
for one second, when measured by spirometry, is less than one liter (1 l), or the arterial oxygen tension is less than sixty (60) mm/hg on
room air at rest; 3) uses portable oxygen; 4) has a cardiac condition to the extent that the person's functional limitations are classified in
severity as class III or class IV, according to standards set by the American Heart Association; 5) is severely limited in the person's ability to
walk due to an arthritic, neurological, or orthopedic condition; 6) cannot walk two hundred feet (200') without stopping to rest because of one
of the above five (5) conditions; or 7) is missing a hand or arm or has permanently lost the use of a hand or arm.
B. Application Of State And Local Laws:
1. A motor vehicle bearing registration plates issued to a person with disabilities pursuant to section 3-616 or to a disabled veteran pursuant
to section 3-609 of the Illinois vehicle code, effective July 1, 1970, as amended, is exempt from any statute or ordinance imposing time
limitations on parking in a business district; but otherwise is subject to the laws which prohibit parking in "no stopping" and "no standing"
zones in front of or near fire hydrants, driveways, public building entrances and exits, bus stops and loading areas, and is prohibited from
parking where the motor vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard, and the motor vehicle must be moved at the instruction and request of a law
enforcement officer to a location designated by the officer. Any motor vehicle bearing registration plates specified in this section or such
devices as local authorities deem proper as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a person with a disability or disabled veteran
may park, in addition to any other lawful place, in any parking place specifically reserved, by posting of an official sign, for such vehicles.
2. Parking privileges granted by this section are strictly limited to the person to whom the special registration plates were issued and to
qualified operators acting under his express direction while the person with disabilities is present.
3. No person shall use any area for the parking of any motor vehicle pursuant to this chapter or where an official sign controlling such area
expressly prohibits parking at any time or during certain hours.
C. Special Decals:
1. The secretary of state of the state of Illinois shall provide for, by administrative rules, the design, size and color of a motorist with
disabilities decal or device which shall be used in the issuance thereof to a person with disabilities. This decal or device shall be the
property of such person with disabilities and may be used by that person to designate and identify a vehicle not owned or displaying a
registration plate as provided in sections 3-609 and 3-616 of the Illinois vehicle code to designate when the vehicle is being used to
transport said person with disabilities, and thus is entitled to enjoy all the privileges that would be afforded a person with disabilities
licensed vehicle.
2. Such decal or device shall be displayed in a conspicuous location and in plain view to an observer standing outside said vehicle for which
a person with disabilities seeks exemption from the parking restrictions of this title.
D. Unauthorized Use Of Parking Places Reserved For Persons With Disabilities: It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not
bearing registration plates issued to a person with disabilities pursuant to section 3-616 or to a disabled veteran pursuant to section 3-609 of
the Illinois vehicle code, or such devices as the village deems proper as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a person with
disabilities or disabled veteran, in any parking place specifically reserved, by the posting of an official sign, for motor vehicles bearing such
registration plates. (Ord. 80-43, 6-23-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
7-2-6: PARKING IN PARKING LOTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 193/548
A. Municipal Parking Lots: The Municipal parking lots now owned or hereinafter acquired by the Village shall be under the supervision of the
Chief of Police, and he shall cause signs to be erected indicating the direction in which traffic shall enter, proceed through, and exit from said
lots and signs indicating reserved parking and no parking. It shall be unlawful for traffic to move in a direction other than as indicated or to
park in areas restricted by signs. (Ord. 76-56, 9-13-1976)
B. Private Parking Lots: It shall be unlawful for any person not entitled to do so to park a vehicle in a private parking lot which has been
established voluntarily or pursuant to the Village zoning ordinance to provide off street parking facilities for those parties authorized by the
owner of said lot. (Ord. 2010-07, 3-8-2010)
7-2-7: TEMPORARY PARKING:
The Chief of Police may, in his discretion, under unusual and extraordinary circumstances, grant permission to the owner or operator of a
vehicle to park such vehicle in a manner which is contrary to the requirements of this title. (Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976; amd. 2012 Code)
7-2-8: WINTER PARKING; SNOW EMERGENCIES:
A. Limited Winter Parking: It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to park said vehicle on any street in the Village between
December 15 of each year and April 1 of the following year for a period of time longer than three (3) minutes for loading or unloading
passengers and for a period of time longer than thirty (30) minutes for loading, unloading or delivery of property between the hours of twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. (Ord. 76-56, 9-13-1976)
B. Snow Routes:
1. All public streets and alleys shall be considered snow routes. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to park such
vehicle on any street or alley in the Village whenever there exists an accumulation of snow and/or ice of two inches (2") or more on such
street or alley. (Ord. 89-2, 1-9-1989)
2. The Police Department is hereby authorized and empowered to remove any vehicle from a snow route whenever such vehicle becomes
stalled or inoperable thereon, and the owner or operator either refuses or fails to remove the same. (Ord. 76-56, 9-13-1976)
7-2-9: LOADING ZONES:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a passenger vehicle to park such vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the
loading or unloading of passengers, not to exceed three (3) minutes, and for the owner or operator of any freight carrying vehicles to park such
vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, in any place
designated by ordinance as a loading zone and marked as such or in any of the following designated places:
A. In front of any public building between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except on Sunday.
B. In front of any theater at any time the theater is open for business. (Ord. 76-56, 9-13-1976)
7-2-10: SIGNS POSTED:
The Director of Public Works or the Village Engineer or any other person authorized by the President and Board of Trustees shall cause signs to
be posted in all areas where parking is limited or prohibited, indicating such limitations or prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle in an area posted accordingly. (Ord. 76-56, 9-13-1976; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
7-2-11: PARKING VIOLATIONS:
A. The owner or operator of any vehicle who has been charged with committing any of the following offenses:
Leaving a motor vehicle running and unattended,
Overtime parking,
Parking in a fire lane,
Parking in a no parking zone or at a place where parking is otherwise prohibited,
Parking in a safety zone,
Parking in violation of subsection 7-2-1A of this chapter,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 194/548
Parking on any street between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. in violation of subsection 7-2-2B of this chapter,
may settle and compromise such charge without making a court appearance by paying the following fines:
1. The sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00), if paid within ten (10) days following issuance of a complaint therefor.
2. The sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), if paid after ten (10) days from the issuance of said complaint.
B. The owner or operator of any vehicle who has been charged with committing any of the following offenses: (Ord. 2010-06, 3-8-2010)
Improper parking in an area designated for parking by persons with disabilities only, (Ord. 2010-06, 3-8-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
may settle and compromise such charge without making a court appearance by paying the following fines:
1. The sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), if paid within ten (10) days following issuance of a complaint therefor.
2. The sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), if paid after ten (10) days from the issuance of said complaint.
C. Payment of the fines designated in subsections A and B of this section shall be made by mailing a check or money order for the required
amount, together with the violator's copy of the notice, to the Bloomingdale police department or by paying the same in person during regular
business hours. Checks or money orders should be made payable to the Bloomingdale police department.
D. The issuance of a delinquent notice shall increase the fines designated in subsections A and B of this section by the amount of the fines
initially imposed by subsections A and B of this section. Each subsequent issuance of a delinquent notice shall again increase the total fine
by the amount of the fines initially imposed by subsections A and B of this section. (Ord. 2010-06, 3-8-2010)
Chapter 3
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
7-3-1: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE INTERSECTIONS:
The following street intersections are hereby designated intersections through which traffic shall be regulated by traffic control devices. Any
person, firm or corporation convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for
each offense.
East Army Trail Road and Creekside Drive.
East Army Trail Road and Glen Ellyn Road.
East Army Trail Road and Regency Drive.
East Lake Street and Euclid Avenue and Lakeview Drive.
East Lake Street and Fairfield Way.
East Lake Street and Glen Ellyn Road.
East Lake Street and Medinah Road.
East Lake Street and North Circle Avenue.
East Lake Street and Springbrook Shopping Center.
Gary Avenue and entrance drive 5.
Gary Avenue and Glenwood Drive.
Gary Avenue and Lawrence Avenue.
Gary Avenue and Schick Road.
Gary Avenue and Scott Drive.
Lake Street and Bloomingdale Road.
Schick Road and Country Club Drive.
Schick Road and Springfield Drive.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 195/548
Schick Road and Stratford Promenade and Meijer.
Schmale Road and Bloomingdale Court.
South Bloomingdale Road and Bloomingdale fire department station 1.
South Bloomingdale Road and Edgewater Drive.
South Bloomingdale Road and Fairfield Way.
South Bloomingdale Road and Greenway Drive.
South Bloomingdale Road and Schick Road.
Springfield Drive and bike trail.
Springfield Drive and entrance drive 3.
West Army Trail Road and Bloomingdale Court.
West Army Trail Road and Butterfield Drive.
West Army Trail Road and Cardinal Drive.
West Army Trail Road and Gary Avenue.
West Army Trail Road and Knollwood Drive.
West Army Trail Road and Madsen Drive and Kuhn Road.
West Army Trail Road and Merbach Drive.
West Army Trail Road and Schmale Road and Skylark Drive.
West Army Trail Road and Springfield Drive.
West Lake Street and Rodenburg Road.
West Lake Street and Rosedale Avenue.
West Lake Street and Springfield Drive.
(Ord. 80-15, 3-11-1980; amd. 2012 Code)
7-3-2: STOP INTERSECTIONS:
The following street intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections in the manner hereinafter provided, and all vehicular traffic shall
stop before entering or crossing the intersections so designated:
Street/Site Direction Of Traffic Location Derivation
Acorn Lane Northwestbound Greenway Drive Ord. 80-24
Annalisa Court Westbound Medinah Road Ord. 2005-16
Applewood Lane Eastbound Glen Ellyn Road Ord. 80-24
Aprina Court Eastbound Bloomingdale Road 2012 Code
Army Trail Road Eastbound Gary Avenue Ord. 80-24
Westbound Gary Avenue Ord. 80-24
BFD station 4 Westbound Entrance drive 2012 Code
Westbound South Bloomingdale Road 2012 Code
Barron Drive Eastbound Springfield Drive 2012 Code
Southbound Stratford Drive 2012 Code
Bike path Eastbound Springfield Drive 2012 Code
Westbound Springfield Drive 2012 Code
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 196/548
Biscayne Street Eastbound Gary Avenue 2012 Code
Bloomfield Circle Southbound West Schick Road 2012 Code
Bloomfield Parkway Northbound West Schick Road 2012 Code
Bobolink Road Southbound Army Trail Road Ord. 80-24
Braintree Drive Northbound Schick Road Ord. 80-24
Brighton Drive Southbound West Army Trail Road 2012 Code
Broker Road Westbound North Circle Avenue Ord. 80-24
Brookdale Southbound Army Trail Road Ord. 80-24
Butterfield Drive Southbound Army Trail Road Ord. 80-24
Byron Avenue Eastbound Walter Court Ord. 80-24
Northwestbound Glen Ellyn Road Ord. 80-24
Cambridge Northbound Schick Road Ord. 80-24
Camden Drive Eastbound Gary Avenue 2012 Code
Westbound Covington Drive Ord. 2001-17
Canterbury Court Northbound East Schick Road 2012 Code
Cardinal Drive Northbound Schick Road Ord. 80-24
Southbound Army Trail Road Ord. 80-24
Carmela Court Westbound Rosedale Road Ord. 2005-16
Carriage Way Westbound Glen Ellyn Road 2012 Code
Castle Rock Lane Southbound Schick Road Ord. 87-15
Cavalry Drive Northbound West Army Trail Road 2012 Code
Chatham Court Southbound Fairfield Way 2012 Code
Chelsea Street Northbound Royal Lane Ord. 2005-16
Circle Avenue Eastbound Glen Ellyn Road Ord. 80-24
Eastbound, westbound, northbound and
southbound
Schick Road Ord. 81-15
Southbound Broker Road Ord. 80-24
College Drive Northbound Greenway Drive Ord. 80-24
Northeastbound Carthage Court 2012 Code
Southwestbound Carthage Court 2012 Code
Colony Green Drive Northeastbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-24
Constitution Drive Northbound West Schick Road 2012 Code
Country Club Drive Southbound Schick Road Ord. 87-15
Covington Drive Northbound West Schick Road 2012 Code
Southbound Brighton Drive Ord. 2001-17
Creekside Southbound Army Trail Road Ord. 80-24
Deer Glen Way Westbound Glen Ellyn Road Ord. 80-24
Donna Lane Eastbound Medinah Road Ord. 95-46
Dujardin School Eastbound Euclid Avenue 2012 Code
Entrance drive 2 Northeastbound Springfield Drive 2012 Code
Eagle Lane Northbound Raven Lane Ord. 80-24
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 197/548
Southbound Cardinal Drive Ord. 80-24
Edgewater Drive Eastbound Glen Ellyn Road Ord. 80-24
Eastbound Greenway Drive Ord. 80-24
Eastbound Lakeview Lane Ord. 97-23
Eastbound Winston Lane Ord. 89-48
Westbound Bloomingdale Road Ord. 80-24
Westbound Greenway Drive Ord. 80-24
Westbound Lakeview Lane Ord. 97-23
Westbound Winston Lane Ord. 89-48
Erie Circle Eastbound Medinah Road Ord. 2005-16
Euclid Avenue Northbound Ironwood Drive Ord. 80-24
Northbound Lake Street Ord. 80-24
Northbound Schick Road Ord. 80-24
Northbound Tee Lane Ord. 80-24
Southbound Ironwood Drive Ord. 80-24
Southbound Schick Road Ord. 80-24
Southbound Tee Lane Ord. 80-24
Euclid Court Westbound Euclid Avenue 2012 Code
Fairfield Way Northbound Braintree Drive Ord. 80-24
Northbound Schick Road Ord. 80-24
Southbound Braintree Drive Ord. 80-24
Southbound Schick Road Ord. 80-24
Westbound Bloomingdale Road Ord. 80-24
Fessler Drive Eastbound Bloomingdale Road Ord. 95-46
Foster Avenue Westbound Bloomingdale Road Ord. 80-24
Fox Court Eastbound Covington Drive Ord. 2001-17
Franklin Street Eastbound Bloomingdale Road Ord. 80-24
Westbound Bloomingdale Road Ord. 80-24
Frisco Street Westbound Cloverdale Road Ord. 95-46
Gary Avenue Northbound Army Trail Road Ord. 80-24
Southbound Army Trail Road Ord. 80-24
Glen Ellyn Road Northbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-24
Southbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-24
Greenway Drive Eastbound College Drive Ord. 80-24
Northeastbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-24
Westbound Bloomingdale Road Ord. 80-24
Westbound College Drive Ord. 80-24
Hamilton Woods Eastbound Medinah Road 2012 Code
Southwestbound East Lake Street 2012 Code
Harvard Lane Eastbound Glen Ellyn Road Ord. 80-24
Southbound Army Trail Road Ord. 80-24
Hawthorne Lane Westbound Euclid Avenue 2012 Code
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 198/548
Hearthside Drive Eastbound Glen Ellyn Road Ord. 80-24
Hillandale Drive Northbound Leslie Lane Ord. 2000-40
Northbound West Schick Road 2012 Code
Southbound Leslie Lane Ord. 2000-40
Ironwood Drive Eastbound Glen Ellyn Road Ord. 80-24
Westbound Euclid Avenue Ord. 80-24
Jackson Street Northbound Schick Road Ord. 80-24
Jefferson Street Northbound Schick Road Ord. 80-24
Johnston recreational
center
Northbound South Circle Avenue 2012 Code
Juliana Lane Eastbound Medinah Road Ord. 2005-16
Kildeer Road Southbound Army Trail Road Ord. 80-24
Lakeshore Lane Southbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-24
Lakeview Drive Southbound Lake Street Ord. 80-24
Lakeview Lane Northeastbound Circle Avenue Ord. 80-24
Southwestbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-24
Larchmont Lane Northbound Schick Road Ord. 80-24
Laurel Lane Northbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-24
Lawrence Avenue Eastbound Gary Avenue Ord. 80-24
Westbound Gary Avenue Ord. 80-24
Leslie Lane Eastbound Rosedale Court Ord. 91-27
Westbound Hillandale Drive Ord. 2000-40
Westbound Rosedale Court Ord. 91-27
London Northbound Greenway Drive Ord. 80-24
Longridge Drive Northbound Schick Road Ord. 80-24
Longview Drive Westbound Schmale Road 2012 Code
Lori Court Westbound Circle Avenue Ord. 2005-16
Lorraine Circle (East) Southbound West Schick Road 2012 Code
Lorraine Circle (West) Southbound West Schick Road 2012 Code
Los Lagos Drive Northbound West Schick Road 2012 Code
Maple Avenue Northbound Lake Street Ord. 80-24
Southbound Lake Street Ord. 80-24
Martin Lane Southbound Army Trail Road Ord. 80-24
Mayo Lane Eastbound Medinah Road 2012 Code
Meadowlark Road Southbound Army Trail Road Ord. 80-24
Millford Lane Southbound Fairfield Way 2012 Code
Millford Lane East Northbound Fairfield Way 2012 Code
Millford Lane West Northbound Fairfield Way 2012 Code
Munroe Drive Westbound Schmale Road 2012 Code
Nordic Road Eastbound Glen Ellyn Road Ord. 80-24
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 199/548
North Circle Avenue Northbound Broker Road Ord. 80-24
Southbound Lake Street Ord. 80-24
North Winden Lane Southeastbound Springfield Drive 2012 Code
Oak Street Southbound Schick Road Ord. 80-24
Oakwood Lane Eastbound Glen Ellyn Road Ord. 80-24
Old Gary Avenue Northbound Army Trail Road Ord. 86-14
Southbound Army Trail Road Ord. 86-14
Oriole Street Northbound Cardinal Drive Ord. 80-24
Southbound Army Trail Road Ord. 80-24
Park Avenue Eastbound Bloomingdale Road Ord. 80-24
Picton Road Eastbound Bloomingdale Road Ord. 80-24
Pinewood Lane Eastbound Glen Ellyn Road Ord. 80-24
Pleasant Avenue Northbound Schick Road Ord. 86-54
Southbound Schick Road Ord. 86-54
Prairie Avenue Northbound Lake Street Ord. 80-24
Northbound Schick Road Ord. 85-15
Southbound Schick Road Ord. 85-15
Public works Westbound Glen Ellyn Road 2012 Code
Westbound Works parking lot gate (2) 2012 Code
Raven Lane Eastbound Bloomingdale Road Ord. 80-24
Eastbound Tanager Drive Ord. 2016-29
Westbound Tanager Drive Ord. 2016-29
Redbird Road Southbound Army Trail Road Ord. 80-24
Regency Drive Southbound Army Trail Road Ord. 80-24
Regency Drive West Southbound Army Trail Road Ord. 80-24
Ridge Avenue Northbound Lake Street Ord. 80-24
Rose Drive Westbound Rosedale Road Ord. 2005-16
Rosedale Court Northbound West Schick Road 2012 Code
Southbound Leslie Lane Ord. 91-27
Rosedale Road Southbound Lake Street Ord. 80-24
Southbound Schick Road Ord. 80-24
Royce Drive Northeastbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-24
Schick Road Eastbound Bloomingdale Road Ord. 80-24
Eastbound Euclid Avenue Ord. 80-24
Eastbound Fairfield Way Ord. 80-24
Eastbound Gary Avenue Ord. 80-24
Eastbound Glen Ellyn Road Ord. 80-24
Eastbound Pleasant Avenue Ord. 86-54
Eastbound Prairie Avenue Ord. 2014-34
Westbound Bloomingdale Road Ord. 80-24
Westbound Euclid Avenue Ord. 80-24
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 200/548
Westbound Fairfield Way Ord. 80-24
Westbound Gary Avenue Ord. 80-24
Westbound Pleasant Avenue Ord. 86-54
Westbound Prairie Avenue Ord. 2014-34
Scott Drive Westbound Covington Drive Ord. 2001-17
Seneca Trail Northbound Lawrence Avenue 2012 Code
Southbound West Schick Road 2012 Code
Skylark Drive Southbound Army Trail Road Ord. 80-24
South Circle Avenue Eastbound Lakeview Lane Ord. 86-3
Northbound Lake Street Ord. 80-24
Southbound Johnston Recreational Center Parking
Lot
2012 Code
Westbound Lakeview Lane Ord. 86-3
South Prairie Avenue Southbound Marklund Parking Lot 2012 Code
South Windham Lane Northwestbound Springfield Drive 2012 Code
Stratford Place Drive Eastbound Butterfield Drive 2012 Code
Northbound Butterfield Drive 2012 Code
Superior Drive Eastbound Medinah Road Ord. 2005-16
Tamarack Drive Eastbound Glen Ellyn Road Ord. 80-24
Tanager Drive Southbound Raven Lane Ord. 2016-29
Tee Lane Eastbound Euclid Avenue Ord. 80-24
Eastbound Glen Ellyn Road Ord. 80-24
Westbound Euclid Avenue Ord. 80-24
Versailles Court Southwestbound Lorraine Circle 2012 Code
Villa Way East Southbound Schick Road Ord. 87-15
Villa Way West Southbound Schick Road Ord. 87-15
Village hall entrance Eastbound Parking lot 2012 Code
Northeastbound Parking lot 2012 Code
Southbound Fairfield Way 2012 Code
Village hall entrance
(north)
Westbound South Bloomingdale Road 2012 Code
Village hall entrance
(south)
Westbound South Bloomingdale Road 2012 Code
Village hall parking lot Westbound Village hall entrance 2012 Code
Walmart Westbound Schmale Road 2012 Code
Washington Street Eastbound Bloomingdale Road Ord. 80-24
Eastbound Third Street Ord. 96-4
Westbound Bloomingdale Road Ord. 80-24
Westbound Third Street Ord. 96-4
Wedgefield Lane Southbound Butterfield Drive 2012 Code
West Hampshire Drive Southeastbound Springfield Drive 2012 Code
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 201/548
West Road Southbound Schick Road Ord. 80-24
West Windsor Drive Eastbound Springfield Drive 2012 Code
Westminster Place Northeastbound West Lake Street 2012 Code
Wheaton Road Northbound Schick Road Ord. 80-24
Southbound Army Trail Road Ord. 80-24
William Way Northbound Lake Street (U.S. 20) Ord. 96-4
Willowbridge Westbound Glen Ellyn Road Ord. 80-24
Wimbledon Place Southeastbound Westminster Drive 2012 Code
Winston Lane Northbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-24
Northbound Fairfield Way Ord. 80-24
Southbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-24
Woodcrest Court Southeastbound Bloomingdale Road Ord. 80-24
First Avenue Northbound Lake Street Ord. 80-24
Southbound Schick Road Ord. 80-24
First Street Southbound Schick Road Ord. 81-37
Third Street Northbound Lake Street Ord. 80-24
Northbound Washington Street Ord. 80-24
Southbound Schick Road Ord. 80-24
Southbound Washington Street Ord. 80-24
7-3-3: YIELD RIGHT OF WAY INTERSECTIONS:
The following street intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections in the manner hereinafter provided, and all vehicular traffic shall
slow down to a reasonable speed for the existing conditions and yield the right of way to any vehicle in the intersection approaching on another
roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection, before entering
or crossing the intersection so designated: (Ord. 80-25, 4-22-1980)
Street Direction Of Traffic Intersection With Derivation
Acorn Lane Southeastbound Colony Green Drive Ord. 80-25
Alsace Court Northeastbound Lorraine Circle 2012 Code
Amherst Court Westbound College Drive Ord. 76-45
Ashfield Court Eastbound Wickham Avenue 2012 Code
Benton Lane Southeastbound Wentworth Circle 2012 Code
Biarritz Court Northbound Lorraine Circle 2012 Code
Birchwood Street Westbound Colony Green Drive Ord. 80-25
Biscayne Street Eastbound Gary Avenue 2012 Code
Bloomfield Circle Eastbound Woodside Drive Ord. 92-21
Bloomfield Lane Northbound Bloomfield Parkway Ord. 92-21
Southbound Parkway Avenue Ord. 92-21
Bloomfield Parkway Southbound Bloomfield Parkway traffic circle Ord. 92-21
Bourne Lane Eastbound Fairfield Way Ord. 80-25
Bradley Court Westbound College Drive Ord. 76-45
Carthage Court Northwestbound College Drive Ord. 80-25
Castle Rock Lane Northbound Royal Lane Ord. 2015-02
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 202/548
Chambord Court Northwestbound Lorraine Circle 2012 Code
Chelsea Street Westbound Castle Rock Lane 2012 Code
Chesapeake Drive Northbound Biscayne Street Ord. 95-46
Chesapeake Lane Northbound Biscayne Street Ord. 97-27
Northbound Frisco Street Ord. 97-27
Clare Drive Northbound Erie Circle 2012 Code
Clearbrook Lane Southwestbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-25
Clubhouse Drive Southbound Bloomfield Parkway Ord. 92-21
Westbound Benton Lane Ord. 92-21
Country Club Lane Northbound Royal Lane Ord. 2002-33
Creekside Drive Westbound Brookdale Drive 2012 Code
Cunningham Lane Northbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-25
Dawn Court Westbound Brookdale Drive Ord. 2005-16
Dijon Court Southeastbound Lorraine Circle 2012 Code
Driftwood Lane Westbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-25
Dublin Road Westbound Clare Drive 2012 Code
Duxbury Court Southwestbound Fairfield Way Ord. 80-25
Edgewater Court Northbound Edgewater Drive 2012 Code
Northeastbound Edgewater Drive 2012 Code
Esprit Court Southeastbound Versailles Court 2012 Code
Euclid Avenue Southbound South Circle Avenue 2012 Code
Euclid Court Westbound Euclid Street Ord. 80-25
Fairchild Court Northbound College Drive Ord. 76-45
Fairfield Court Northwestbound Fairfield Way 2012 Code
Galway Court Westbound Clare Drive 2012 Code
Garden Way Southbound William Way Ord. 96-4
Georgetown Court Northbound College Drive Ord. 80-25
Greenfield Drive Southbound Warwick Lane Ord. 92-21
Hampton Court Northbound College Drive Ord. 76-45
Hancock Lane Eastbound Jefferson Lane 2012 Code
Westbound Constitution Drive 2012 Code
Hillcrest Terrace Eastbound North Circle Avenue Ord. 80-25
Hingham Lane Eastbound Braintree Drive Ord. 98-43
Eastbound Fairfield Way Ord. 80-25
Westbound Braintree Drive Ord. 98-43
Huron Drive Northbound Erie Circle 2012 Code
Westbound Erie Circle 2012 Code
Indiana Court Southbound College Drive Ord. 80-25
Ivy Lane Southbound Circle Avenue Ord. 80-25
Kingston Lane Southbound Circle Avenue Ord. 80-25
Lakeshore Lane Northwestbound Lakeview Lane Ord. 80-25
Langton Court Southbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-25
Langton Lane Northbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-25
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 203/548
Larchmont Lane Southbound Longridge Drive 2012 Code
Laurel Lane Southbound Colony Green Drive 2012 Code
Lehigh Lane Northbound Longridge Drive 2012 Code
Leslie Lane Eastbound Longridge Drive 2012 Code
Lincoln Court Southbound College Drive Ord. 76-45
Lockwood Lane Northbound Freeport Drive 2012 Code
Southbound Circle Avenue Ord. 80-25
London Drive Northbound Greenway Drive 2012 Code
Longridge Drive Northbound Lynbrook Drive Ord. 80-25
Lynwood Circle Northeastbound Benton Lane 2012 Code
Lynwood Lane Eastbound Bloomfield Parkway Ord. 92-21
Southwestbound Benton Lane 2012 Code
Maple Court Southwestbound Oak Street Ord. 80-25; amd. 2012 Code
Michigan Court Northbound Superior Drive 2012 Code
Michigan Drive Northbound Erie Circle 2012 Code
Southbound Superior Drive 2012 Code
Millcreek Lane Southwestbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-25
Milton Court Northbound Greenway Drive Ord. 76-45
Mission Court Eastbound Biscayne Street Ord. 97-27
Mission Drive Westbound Biscayne Street 2012 Code
Morningside Drive Westbound Creekside Drive Ord. 2003-27
Nordic Road Eastbound Euclid Avenue Ord. 80-25
Westbound Euclid Avenue Ord. 80-25
North Bristol Drive Southbound West Windsor Drive Ord. 92-21
North Pleasant Avenue Northbound Broker Road Ord. 80-25
Northwestern Court Northbound Greenway Drive Ord. 76-45
Oakwood Westbound Colony Green Drive Ord. 80-25
Orchard Lane Eastbound South Windham Lane Ord. 92-21
Oxford Court Southbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-25
Oxford Lane Northbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-25
Park Avenue Westbound North Circle Avenue Ord. 80-25
Parkway Avenue Eastbound Wellington Drive Ord. 92-21
Pleasant Avenue Northbound Schick Road Ord. 80-25
Southbound Schick Road Ord. 80-25
Prairie Avenue Northbound Broker Road Ord. 80-25
Northbound Schick Road Ord. 80-25
Southbound Schick Road Ord. 80-25
Royal Lane Eastbound Royal Lane 2012 Code
St. Francis Court Northbound Broker Road Ord. 80-25
Salem Court Eastbound Fairfield Way 2012 Code
Salt Lake Drive Northbound Erie Circle 2012 Code
Scenic Drive Northbound William Way Ord. 96-4
South Circle Avenue Northbound Schick Road Ord. 80-25
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 204/548
Southbound Schick Road Ord. 80-25
Spring Valley Drive Westbound North Circle Avenue Ord. 80-25
Springbrook Drive Eastbound Fairfield Way 2012 Code
Westbound Ridge Avenue 2012 Code
Starling Court Southbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-25
Westbound Brookdale Drive Ord. 2005-16
Sterling Lane Northbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-25
Stoneybrook Lane Northbound Carriage Way 2012 Code
Southbound Deer Glen Way 2012 Code
Strathmore Lane Northbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-25; amd. 2012 Code
Southbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-25; amd. 2012 Code
Superior Drive Westbound Erie Circle 2012 Code
Swallow Avenue Northbound Cardinal Drive 2012 Code
Thrasher Street Northbound Cardinal Drive Ord. 80-25
Northbound Raven Lane Ord. 80-25
Warwick Lane Eastbound Wellington Drive Ord. 92-21
Westbound Bloomfield Parkway Ord. 92-21
West Sheffield Drive Eastbound North Windham Lane Ord. 92-21
Westbound West Hampshire Drive Ord. 92-21
Wedgefield Lane Northbound Wentworth Lane 2012 Code
Wendover Court Northwestbound Wellington Drive 2012 Code
Wentworth Circle Northeastbound Benton Lane 2012 Code
West Windsor Drive Eastbound West Hampshire Drive Ord. 92-21
William Way Northbound Garden Way Ord. 96-4
Willow Lane Southwestbound Edgewater Drive Ord. 80-25
Woodland Way Eastbound William Way Ord. 96-4
Woodside Drive Westbound Orchard Lane Ord. 92-21
7-3-4: SPEED LIMITS:
No person shall drive any vehicle upon any of the following streets at a speed in excess of that indicated in the following subsections:
A. Fifteen Miles Per Hour: No person shall drive any vehicle upon any of the following streets at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour:
Arquilla Court.
Atherton Court.
Billings Court.
Brewster Court.
Brewster Lane.
Briarwood Lane.
Chatham Court.
College Drive.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 205/548
Country Ridge Lane.
Crandon Court.
Darby Court.
Duxbury Court.
Epson Court.
Fairlane Court.
Glen Ridge Lane.
Golfview Court.
Lakeview Lane.
Lawford Court.
Meadowview Court.
Melbourne Court.
Millford Drive (Brewster to Fairfield Lane).
Millford Lane.
Montvale Lane.
Oak Knoll Lane.
Paxton Road.
Pemberton Way.
Quincy Court.
Rountree Court.
Stonington Drive.
Wildwood Lane.
(Ord. 76-56, 9-13-1956; amd. Ord. 77-20, 3-28-1977; Ord. 83-42, 12-29-1983; Ord. 2005-16, 4-11-2005; 2012 Code)
B. Twenty Miles Per Hour:
1. Streets Generally: No person shall drive any vehicle upon any of the following streets at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour:
Acorn Lane.
Applewood Lane.
Bayview Court.
Birchwood Lane.
Clearbook Lane.
Colony Green Drive.
Driftwood Lane.
Elmwood Lane.
Harbor Court.
Lakeshore Lane.
Laurel Lane.
Millcreek Lane.
Oakwood Lane.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 206/548
Pinewood Lane.
Spring Court.
Willow Lane.
(Ord. 83-42, 12-29-1983; amd. Ord. 2005-16, 4-11-2005)
2. School Zones: No person shall drive a vehicle within the following school posted speed zones at a speed which exceeds twenty (20) miles
per hour:
School Street
Direction
Of Traffic Location
Ordinance
Dujardin Euclid
Avenue
Northbound
From a point 100' south of Ironwood Drive to a point 200' north of Schick Road 86-55
Southbound
From a point 200' north of Schick Road to a point 100' south of Ironwood Drive 86-55
Tee Lane Eastbound From a point 500' west of Euclid Avenue to a point 500' east of Euclid Avenue 77-61
Westbound
From a point 500' east of Euclid Avenue to a point 500' west of Euclid Avenue 77-61
Erickson Springfield
Drive
Eastbound From a point 80' west of South Windham Lane to a point 750' east, northeast of
Garden Avenue
2014-23
Westbound
From a point 340' east, northeast of Garden Avenue to a point 70' east,
northeast of North Windham Lane
2014-23
Marklund Prairie
Avenue
Northbound
From dead end north to Schick Road 2014-35
Southbound
From Schick Road south to dead end 2014-35
Stratford Butterfield
Drive
Northbound
From a point 175' south of Whitehall Terrace to a point 70' south of Glen Garry
Drive
2014-23
Southbound
From a point 320' south of Stratford Place Drive to a point 160' south of
Lakemont Court
2014-23
Westfield Fairfield Way
Northbound
From Bourne Lane to a point 500' north of Schick Road 77-61
Southbound
From a point 300' south of Lake Street to Bourne Lane 77-61
Schick Road
Eastbound From a point 500' west of Fairfield Way to a point 500' east of Euclid Avenue 86-55
Westbound
From a point 500' east of Euclid Avenue to a point 500' west of Fairfield Way 86-55
Winnebago
Edgewater
Drive
Northbound
From Laurel Lane to Millcreek Lane 77-61
Southbound
From Millcreek Lane to Laurel Lane 77-61
Greenway
Drive
Eastbound From Plymouth Lane to Edgewater Drive 77-61
Westbound
From Edgewater Drive to Hemstead Lane 77-61
3. Park Zones: No person shall drive a vehicle within the following park zones at a speed which exceeds twenty (20) miles per hour:
Park Street Location
Ordinance
Bloomingdale park district Johnston Recreational Facility
property
South Circle
Avenue
From Schick Road south to dead
end
2017-01
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 207/548
C. Twenty Five Miles Per Hour: No person shall drive any vehicle upon any of the following streets at a speed in excess of twenty five (25) miles
per hour:
Alsace Court.
Alyssa Court.
Amberwood Court.
Annalisa Court.
Aprina Court.
Arbor Lane.
Argyle Avenue.
Ashfield Court.
Ashley Way.
Barron Drive.
Bedford Lane.
Benton Lane.
Biarritz Court.
Biscayne Court.
Biscayne Street.
Bloomfield Circle.
Bloomfield Lane.
Bloomfield Parkway.
Bobolink Drive.
Bobwhite Court.
Bobwhite Lane.
Bourne Lane.
Braintree Drive.
Brentwood Court.
Bridgewater Lane.
Broker Road, from Circle to Highland.
Brookdale Drive.
Bunting Lane.
Byron Avenue.
Cambridge Lane.
Canterbury Court.
Cardinal Drive.
Carey Court.
Carlton Drive.
Carmela Court.
Carriage Way.
Castlerock Lane.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 208/548
Cavalry Drive.
Cayuga Court.
Chambord Court.
Chelsea Street.
Chesapeake Lane.
Circle Avenue North.
Circle Avenue South.
Clare Drive.
Cloverdale Road.
Clubhouse Lane.
Collin Circle.
Colony Court.
Constitution Drive.
Country Club Drive.
Coventry Court.
Creekside Drive.
Crest Court.
Crestwood Lane.
Cunningham Drive.
Cunningham Lane.
Dawn Court.
Day Street.
Dee Court.
Deer Glen Way.
DePinto.
DeTrevi.
Dijon Court.
Dinah Road.
Donna Lane.
Douglas Drive.
Dover Court.
Downing Drive.
Dublin Road.
Durham Lane.
Eagle Court.
Eagle Lane.
Edgebrook Drive.
Edgewater Court.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 209/548
Edgewater Drive.
Eric Court.
Erie Circle.
Erie Court.
Esprit Court.
Essex Court.
Euclid Avenue.
Euclid Court.
Evergreen Lane.
Fairfield Court.
Fairfield Way.
Faith Court.
Falcon Court.
Felicia Court.
Fernwood Lane.
Fessler Drive.
Fonatine Court.
Founders Pointe.
Founders Pointe North.
Founders Pointe South.
Fox Court.
Franklin Street.
Freeport Drive.
Fremont Court.
Frisco Court.
Frisco Street.
Galway Court.
Garden Way.
Greenfield Drive.
Greenway Drive.
Hancock Drive.
Harvard Lane.
Hawthorne Drive.
Hearthside.
Hedgerow Drive.
Hempstead Drive.
Hempstead Lane.
Hillandale Court.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 210/548
Hillandale Drive.
Hillcrest Terrace.
Hingham Lane.
Huron Drive.
Independence Lane.
Ironwood Lane.
Ivy Lane.
Jackson Lane.
Jason Court.
Jefferson Lane.
Juliana Lane.
Juniper Lane.
Kensington Court.
Killdeer Road.
Kingston Lane.
Knollwood Drive.
Lakemont Court.
Lakeview Court.
Lakeview Drive.
Lakeview Lane.
Lakewoods Court.
Langton Court.
Langton Drive.
Langton Lane.
Larchmont Lane.
Lawrence Avenue.
Lehigh Lane.
Leslie Lane
Lockwood Lane.
Longridge Drive.
Lori Court.
Lorraine Circle.
Los Lagos Drive.
Lynbrook Drive.
Lynwood Circle.
Lynwood Lane.
Madsen Drive.
Manor Lane.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 211/548
Maple Avenue North.
Maple Avenue South.
Maple Court.
Martin Court.
Martin Lane.
Mayo Lane.
Meadowlark Road.
Michigan Court.
Michigan Drive.
Millford Court.
Millford Lane.
Mission Court.
Montabello.
Montego Court.
Morningside Drive.
Needham Drive.
Nordic Road.
North Bristol Drive.
North Manchester Lane.
North Sherwood Circle.
North Windham Lane.
North Windsor Circle.
Northwood Lane.
Norton Drive.
Norton Lane.
Oak Street.
Old Gary Avenue.
Old Mill Lane.
Oneida Court.
Orchard Lane.
Oriole Street.
Ostego Court.
Oxford Court.
Oxford Lane.
Oxford Place.
Park Avenue.
Parkway Avenue.
Pebble Creek.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 212/548
Pheasant Court.
Pheasant Lane.
Picton Road, from Bloomingdale Road to Roselle Boundary.
Pleasant Avenue North.
Pleasant Avenue South.
Plymouth Lane.
Prairie Avenue North.
Prairie Avenue South.
Radcliffe Court.
Raven Lane.
Redbird Court.
Redbird Road.
Redwing Court.
Regency Drive.
Ridge Avenue.
Ridgewood Drive.
Robin Court.
Rodenburg Road.
Rose Drive.
Rosedale Court.
Rosedale Road.
Royal Court.
Royal Lane.
Royce Court.
Royce Drive.
St. Francis Court.
Salem Court.
Salt Lake Drive.
Saranac Court.
Scenic Drive.
Schick Road, between Bloomingdale Road and Glen Ellyn Road.
Schick Road, east of Bloomingdale Road.
Seneca Trail.
Sicilia.
Signature Drive.
Skylark Drive.
Spring Valley Road.
Springbrook Drive.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 213/548
Springdale Lane.
Stanyon Court.
Stanyon Lane.
Starling Court.
Sterling Court.
Sterling Drive.
Sterling Lane.
Stoneybrook Lane.
Strathmore Court.
Strathmore Lane.
Sunset Terrace.
Superior Drive.
Surrey Drive.
Surrey Lane.
Sutherland Lane.
Sutton Court.
Swallow Avenue.
Tamarack Drive.
Tanager Drive.
Tee Lane.
Terry Lane.
Thorn Road.
Thrasher Street.
Torrington Drive.
Toscana.
Tuttle Drive.
Valley View Road.
Veneto.
Versailles Court.
Villa Way.
Walter Court.
Warren Avenue.
Warwick Lane.
Washington Street.
Wedgefield Lane.
Wedgewood Circle.
Wellington Drive.
Wendover Drive.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 214/548
Wentworth Circle.
Wentworth Lane.
West Bristol Court.
West Hampshire Court.
West Hampshire Drive.
West Road.
West Scarborough Court.
West Sheffield Drive.
West Windsor Drive.
Westminster Drive.
White Hall Terrace.
Wickham Avenue.
William Way.
Willow Bridge Way.
Wimdledon Place.
Windham Lane.
Winston Lane.
Woodcrest Court.
Woodland Way.
Woodside Drive.
Wren Drive.
First Street.
Third Street.
(Ord. 76-56, 9-13-1976; amd. Ord. 83-42, 12-29-1983; Ord. 92-21, 3-23-1992; Ord. 95-46, 8-14-1995; Ord. 96-4, 1-22-1996; Ord. 97-26, 7-
14-1997; Ord. 97-27, 7-14-1997; Ord. 2005-16, 4-11-2005; 2012 Code)
D. Thirty Miles Per Hour: No person shall drive any vehicle upon any of the following streets at a speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour:
Butterfield Drive.
Glen Ellyn Road, between Army Trail Road and Lake Street.
(Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976; amd. 2012 Code)
E. Thirty Five Miles Per Hour: No person shall drive any vehicle upon any of the following streets at a speed in excess of thirty five (35) miles
per hour:
Brighton Drive.
Camden Drive.
Covington Drive.
Schick Road (East) (between Bloomingdale Road and Gary Avenue).
Scott Drive.
Springfield Drive.
(Ord. 92-37, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 215/548
7-3-5: ONE-WAY STREETS AND AREAS:
A. Streets Generally:
Street Location/Days And Hours Direction Ordinanc e
Bloomfield Circle Between 335 and 343 Bloomfield Circle Westbound 92-21
B. Divided Streets:
Divided Street Location Of One-Way Traffic Ordinance
Colony Green Drive Along and upon and to the right side of the drainage ditch which divides Colony Green Drive 77-20
C. Other Areas:
Location Direction Ordinance
Westfield School parking lot North entrance Eastbound 78-41
South entrance Westbound 78-41
7-3-6: PARKING:
7-3-6-1: PARKING PROHIBITED ON SPECIFIC STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to permit such vehicle to stand in any of the following streets, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or when otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic control device:
Street Side Location Ordinance
Acorn Lane 77-20
Applewood Lane 77-20
Bayview Court 77-20
Birchwood Lane 77-20
Bloomingdale Road 76-49
Clearbrook Lane 77-20
Colony Green Drive 77-20
Driftwood Lane 77-20
Edgewater Drive North Between Bloomingdale Road and Glen Ellyn Road 76-49
South Between Bloomingdale Road and Oxford Court 76-56
South Between Bloomingdale Road and Oxford Lane 76-49
Elmwood Lane 77-20
Fairfield Way Between Lake Street on the north and Schick Road on the south 77-8
Both Between Millford Lane and Bloomingdale Road 77-20
Glen Ellyn Road Between Army Trail Road and Lake Street 76-49
From Schick Road to Lake Street 91-6
Harbor Court 77-20
Lake Street (U.S. 20) 76-49
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 216/548
Lakeshore Lane 77-20
Laurel Lane 77-20
Millcreek Lane 77-20
North Circle Avenue Both Within 250 feet from the painted stop bar at Lake Street (U.S. 20) 86-22
Oakwood Lane 77-20
Pinewood Lane 77-20
Schick Road Between Gary Avenue and Bloomingdale Road 76-49
South Circle Avenue West Between Schick Road and 172 South Circle Avenue, the Johnston recreation center 2003-36
Spring Court 77-20
Springfield Drive 85-26
Willow Lane 77-20
Winston Lane West Between Edgewater Drive and Fairfield Way 76-56
7-3-6-2: TIME LIMIT PARKING:
A. One Hour:
Street Location Ordinance
North Circle Avenue From Lake Street to East Park Avenue 76-56
7-3-6-3: SCHOOLS:
A. During School Hours: Between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M., Monday through Friday, both inclusive,
except legal holidays, and during the months of July and August each year, parking is prohibited at the following locations:
School Street Location Ordinanc
e
Westfield
Fairfield
Way
From a point 20 feet south of the south entrance to the parking lot, north to a point 100 feet north of
the north entrance to the parking lot
78-41
B. Other Specific Locations:
1. Winnebago School:
a. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit any vehicle to stop, stand or park in the semicircular one-way drive
entrance of the Winnebago School in the village; said semicircular one-way drive being that drive which is connected to Greenway
Drive, a public street, by the two (2) westernmost access curb breaks located upon the school property and being the principal entrance
to the Winnebago School.
b. School buses, police and fire vehicles and all other emergency vehicles are hereby expressly exempt from this subsection B1. (Ord. 76-
14, 3-8-1976)
c. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating this subsection B1 shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code
for each offense. (Ord. 76-14, 3-8-1976; amd. 2012 Code)
7-3-6-4: PARKING WITHIN A BUSINESS PARK:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, general welfare and best interests of the residents of the village by
provisions designed:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 217/548
1. To increase safety and lessen congestion on public streets;
2. To meet the need for loading and parking facilities generated by the development of land and the associated increase of automobile and
truck usage;
3. To minimize the on street parking of vehicles;
4. To require adequate protection for contiguous property against undesirable effects from the creation and operation of parking areas and
adjacent public streets; and
5. To protect and preserve the appearance and character of business parks within the village through the elimination of on street parking of
motor vehicles.
B. Prohibited Parking Streets Designated: No parking of vehicles, including trailers (whether idling; standing; queued for loading, unloading or
delivery; attended; unattended; occupied; unoccupied; with the engine operating or not operating) is allowed at any time on any day on any
of the public streets located within a business park, identified as follows:
Brighton Drive.
Camden Drive.
Covington Drive.
Fox Court.
Madsen Drive.
Scott Drive.
C. Temporary Parking Permits: The village reserves the right, through the police department, to issue temporary parking permits, upon request,
to allow limited on street parking for special events or occasions for a duration not to exceed eight (8) hours.
D. Violations; Vehicle Impoundment And Tow: A vehicle violating this section shall be subject to immediate impoundment and towing at the
direction of the village police department. (Ord. 2002-07, 2-25-2002)
E. Penalties:
1. Any person violating the terms and conditions of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
2. The penalty shall be assessed against the owner or operator of the vehicle. (Ord. 2002-07, 2-25-2002; amd. 2012 Code)
7-3-6-5: SPECIFIC PARKING SIGNS POSTED:
Parking signs shall be installed at the following locations in the village:
Street
Location Of
No Parking Signs/
No Parking Provisions
Location
Of Permitted
Parking Signs
Ordinance
Amherst
Court
Southwest and northeast corners - "No Parking In This Court" signs 76-45
Bradley
Court
Southwest, east and northwest corners Midpoint on the
south side
76-45
Carthage Southwest and northeast corners Southwest side 76-45
College
Drive
No parking in front of 185 College Drive to the right of the planter, no parking in front of
the planter, to the south of 186 and 188 Lincoln Court, in front of 203 College Drive, to
the east of 241, 243, and 242 Milton Court. No parking along the entire south side of
College Drive
East of 205
College Drive, to
the east of 305
Milton Court
76-45
Dartmouth Southernmost, northernmost and southwest corners Northwest corridor
76-45
Emerson
Court
Northernmost corner and the midpoint on the east - "No Parking In This Court" signs 76-45
Fairchild
Court
Northwest corner - "No Parking In This Court" sign 76-45
Georgetown No parking on the west side, southeast corner and northeast corridor 76-45
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 218/548
Court
Hampton
Court
No parking at the northwest and northeast corners Southern corridor
76-45
Kendall
Court
Entrance - 2 no parking signs 76-45
Lincoln Court
No parking at the southeastern and northwestern corners Western and
northern corridors
76-45
Milton Court No parking at the northwest and northeast corners Eastern corridor 76-45
Northwestern
Court
No parking at the northwest, northeast and southeast corners Eastern corridor 76-45
Any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code
for each offense. (Ord. 76-45, 7-26-1976; amd. 2012 Code)
7-3-7: TURNING MOVEMENTS:
A. Right Turns Prohibited:
1. At Red Light: Right hand turns on red are prohibited at the following locations in the Village:
From To Ordinance
Glen Ellyn Road northbound Lake Street eastbound 92-21
B. Left Turns Restricted: It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn left at the following intersections, except as specified herein:
(Ord. 88-52, 12-12-1988)
1. Between the hours of four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. and six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M., Monday through Friday, except for school buses
operating in their official capacity, from westbound Byron to southbound Glen Ellyn Road. Any person violating the terms and conditions of
this subsection B1 shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each and every violation hereof. (Ord. 88-52, 12-12-
1988; amd. 2012 Code)
2. Between four o'clock (4:00) P.M. and six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M., Monday through Friday:
From To Ordinance
Fairfield Way northbound Springbrook Drive westbound 93-36
West truck access serving the Springbrook Shopping Center 93-36
7-3-8: SIGNS POSTED:
The Director of Public Works and the Village Engineer is hereby authorized to install appropriate traffic control signs as provided by law
pursuant to the provisions imposed by this chapter. (2012 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
Chapter 4
BICYCLES
7-4-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The regulations contained in this chapter are applicable to bicycles and shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any
public way set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to any exceptions herein stated. (Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976)
7-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 219/548
No person residing within the village shall ride or propel a bicycle on any street or public way set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles unless
such bicycle has been licensed and such license is affixed thereto. (Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976)
7-4-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The application for a bicycle license shall be made to the chief of police upon a form provided by the village. The application for a bicycle license
shall stipulate the color, make, model, tire size and serial number of the bicycle, as well as any special equipment. (Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976; amd.
Ord. 2002-13, 4-8-2002)
7-4-4: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
A. The chief of police, upon receipt of a proper application, is authorized to issue a bicycle license. (Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976; amd. Ord. 2002-13,
4-8-2002)
B. The chief of police, however, shall not issue a license for any bicycle when he knows, or has reasonable grounds to believe, that the
applicant is not the owner of or entitled to the possession of such bicycle, or when such bicycle does not meet the requirements of this
chapter. (Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976)
C. The chief of police shall keep a record of the number of each license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom issued
and the number on the frame of the bicycle being licensed. (Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976; amd. Ord. 2002-13, 4-8-2002)
7-4-5: LICENSE DECAL:
A. The chief of police shall issue a license in the form of a decal showing the number of the license and the name of the village, which he shall
cause to be affixed to the bicycle frame in a position where it is plainly visible.
B. No person shall remove such license from a bicycle during the period for which it is issued except upon a transfer of ownership or in the
event the bicycle is dismantled or inoperative. (Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976)
7-4-6: INSPECTION OF BICYCLES:
Each bicycle, before being licensed, shall be inspected by the chief of police or any officer assigned such responsibility, and no license shall be
issued for a bicycle which he determines is not in safe mechanical condition. (Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976)
7-4-7: TRANSFER OF BICYCLE OWNERSHIP:
Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle, the licensee shall remove the license, and if he acquires another bicycle, a license shall be
issued therefor. (Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976; amd. Ord. 2002-13, 4-8-2002)
7-4-8: RENTAL AGENCIES:
A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless there is a license affixed thereto and it is equipped so as to comply with all
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976)
7-4-9: DEALER REGULATIONS:
Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or secondhand bicycles shall make a report to the chief of police of every bicycle
purchased or sold by such dealer, giving the name and address of the person from whom purchased or to whom sold, a description of such
bicycle by name or make, the number on the frame, and the number of the license, if any, found thereon. (Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976)
7-4-10: TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY; OBEDIENCE REQUIRED:
A. Every person riding a bicycle upon a street shall conform to the traffic laws and regulations of the village and the state of Illinois applicable to
the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this chapter and those provisions of laws and ordinances which, by their nature,
can have no application to bicycles.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 220/548
B. Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
C. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turns are permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the
direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, and in that event, such person shall
then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. (Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976)
7-4-11: OPERATION OF BICYCLES:
A. Riding On Bicycles:
1. A person operating a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
2. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
B. Riding On Streets And Bicycle Paths:
1. Every person operating a bicycle upon a street shall ride as near to the right hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care
when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
2. Persons riding a bicycle upon streets shall not ride more than two (2) abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.
3. Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a street, riders shall use such path and shall not use the street.
C. Speed Limit: No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
D. Emerging From Alley, Driveway Or Building: The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching
the sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right of way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or
sidewalk area, and upon entering the street, shall yield the right of way to all approaching vehicles.
E. Clinging To Vehicles Prohibited: No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle.
F. Carrying Articles: No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one
hand upon the handlebars.
G. Parking Regulations: No person shall park a bicycle upon a street at any time, or upon the sidewalk except in a rack designed to support the
bicycle, or against a building in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
H. Riding On Sidewalks:
1. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district.
2. When public safety requires it, the chief of police is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk or street prohibiting the riding of bicycles
thereon, and no person shall disobey the signs.
3. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian, and shall give audible
signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. (Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976)
7-4-12: EQUIPMENT:
A. Lights And Reflectors: Every bicycle, when operated at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light,
visible at a distance of at least five hundred feet (500') to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear which shall be visible in the beams of
headlights on motor vehicles at all distances from fifty feet (50') to three hundred feet (300'). A lamp emitting a red light which is visible from
a distance of five hundred feet (500') may be used in addition to the red reflector.
B. Signal Device: No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a
distance of at least one hundred feet (100'); except, that no bicycle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a bicycle, any horn
or whistle.
C. Brake: Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean
pavement. (Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 221/548
7-4-13: VIOLATIONS; RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN:
A. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this chapter.
B. The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 76-49, 7-26-1976)
Chapter 5
SNOWMOBILES
7-5-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
A certain public record, the "snowmobile registration and safety act"1, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the village clerk, is
hereby adopted by this reference and incorporated herein as fully and to the same extent as if set out at length herein, as the regulations
governing the use, operation, and equipment of snowmobiles in the village. (Ord. 72-39, 8-23-1972; amd. 2012 Code)
7-5-2: PROHIBITED HOURS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any snowmobile on private property between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
daily. (Ord. 72-39, 8-23-1972)
7-5-3: RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN:
It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, or other person to knowingly permit any person in his custody or control under the age of
eighteen (18) years to violate any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 72-39, 8-23-1972)
7-5-4: PENALTY:
Any person who shall be convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for
each offense. (Ord. 72-39, 8-23-1972; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 6
ABANDONED, LOST, STOLEN OR UNCLAIMED VEHICLES
7-6-1: ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED; IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Abandonment Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to cause an abandoned vehicle or any part thereof to remain on private or public
property anywhere in the village except on property of the owner or bailee of such abandoned vehicle.
B. Impoundment:
1. Public Property: A vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on public property may be towed and removed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
2. Private Property: A vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private property may be authorized for removal by the police department
upon a request of the owner of record of such property in that instance or pursuant to a private agreement previously entered into between
such owner and the village. (Ord. 2010-07, 3-8-2010)
7-6-2: ABANDONED, LOST, STOLEN OR UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
A. When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person in the village who is not
the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the police department. Upon receipt of such notification, the police department
will authorize a towing service to remove and take possession of the vehicle. The towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its
contents, maintain a record of the tow until the vehicle is claimed by the owner or any other person legally entitled to possession thereof or
until it is disposed of as provided in this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 222/548
B. When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially dismantled vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because of its position in
relation to a highway or street, or its physical appearance is causing the impeding of traffic, its immediate removal from the highway or
street, or private property adjacent to the highway, by a towing service may be authorized by the police department. (Ord. 2010-07, 3-8-
2010)
7-6-3: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
A. Any abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle of seven (7) years of age or newer that remains unclaimed by the registered owner,
lienholder or other person legally entitled to the possession thereof for a period of thirty (30) days after notice has been given in accordance
with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-208 shall be sold as after notice is provided in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-
208. When the identity of the registered owner, lienholder or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost, stolen or
unclaimed vehicle of seven (7) years of age or newer cannot be determined by: 1) the registration files of the state of Illinois or registration
files of a foreign state; or 2) the Illinois state police, the vehicle may be sold as provided in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-208 without
notice to such persons whose identity cannot be determined.
B. When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age is impounded as specified by this chapter, it shall be kept in custody or
storage for a minimum of ten (10) days for the purpose of: 1) determining the identity of the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally
entitled persons; 2) contacting the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled persons by U.S. mail and certified mail, return receipt
requested, with a description of the vehicle, the license plate and vehicle identification numbers for a determination of disposition; and 3) an
examination of the Illinois state police stolen vehicle files for theft and wanted information. At the expiration of such ten (10) day period,
without the benefit of disposition information being received from the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled persons, the police
department may authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk or salvage.
C. Notwithstanding subsections A and B of this section, a vehicle classified as an antique vehicle may be sold to a person desiring to restore it.
(Ord. 2010-07, 3-8-2010)
Chapter 7
IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
7-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings stated in this section. Any term not defined herein shall have the
meaning ascribed thereto in other ordinances of the village, and if not defined in any other village ordinances, it shall have the meaning ascribed
thereto by the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq.
ABANDONED VEHICLE: A. A vehicle parked or otherwise located on the public way and:
1. In such state of disrepair that it is incapable of being driven; or
2. That has been unmoved for a period of at least twenty four (24) hours and, because of its condition or the period during which it has not
been moved or some other circumstance, appears to have been, and will be presumed to have been, abandoned by its owner; or
B. A vehicle defined as abandoned, or capable of being towed, by any other ordinances of the village, and which does not constitute a
"hazardous vehicle" or "unlawful vehicle" as defined by this section and, therefore, is not subject to an immediate tow.
HAZARDOUS VEHICLE: A. A vehicle that has been involved in an accident and is inoperable or cannot be immediately moved by the owner or
operator of the vehicle; or
B. A vehicle that presents an immediate danger to the health or welfare of the members of the public, as determined by the police
department in its sole, reasonable discretion; or
C. An abandoned or inoperable vehicle on a public street, way or alley that is impeding the orderly flow of traffic or poses a potential danger
to pedestrians and/or operators of vehicles, as determined by the village in its sole, reasonable discretion; or
D. A vehicle that must be moved to allow for proper municipal snow removal from a public street, way or alley, as determined by the police
department in its sole, reasonable discretion; or
E. A vehicle that is parked in a fire lane, no parking zone, loading zone, or other such area of prohibited or regulated parking on private
property; provided, that the village has entered into a specific agreement with the owner of said property with respect to the enforcement
of such violations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 223/548
OWNER OR REGISTERED OWNER: A person who holds legal title to the vehicle or the right of possession of the vehicle.
VEHICLE: Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, highway or any public way,
except devices moved by human power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and snowmobiles. (Ord. 2010-07, 3-8-2010)
7-7-2: IMPOUNDMENT AUTHORIZED; RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS:
A. The village police department is hereby authorized to cause a vehicle to be towed, without prior notice to the registered owner and lienholder
thereof, if applicable, from any public way to the police department vehicle storage lot or such other place of safety as determined and
designated by the police department when: 1) a vehicle upon any public way is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction of traffic; 2) a
vehicle or the driver thereof is believed to have caused an offense identified hereinafter; 3) the vehicle is a "hazardous vehicle", as defined in
section 7-7-1 of this chapter, as determined and by the village police department in its sole, reasonable discretion; 4) a vehicle is discovered
to be stolen; 5) a vehicle is illegally parked or appears to have been abandoned, as defined by this chapter, and the registered owner and
lienholder thereof, if applicable, cannot be identified because the license plate and vehicle identification numbers have been removed or
otherwise made illegible; or 6) an emergency arises necessitating the removal of a vehicle from any public way, as determined by the police
department in its sole, reasonable discretion.
B. When a vehicle is towed and removed from either public or private property in accordance with this chapter, the registered owner of such
vehicle will be responsible for all applicable towing and storage costs. (Ord. 2010-07, 3-8-2010)
7-7-3: ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY; VEHICLE POSSESSION:
A. A vehicle may be seized, towed and impounded by the village police department without prior notice to the registered owner and lienholder
thereof, if applicable, when such vehicle or the operator thereof is believed to have caused any of the following violations. The village shall
not be liable for any damage to any vehicle which occurs as a result of the towing and storage of any vehicle under the provisions of this
chapter. In addition to all applicable towing and storage costs, an administrative penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed
on the registered owner (but not a vehicle lienholder or vehicle leasing company, in which case, the lessee of the vehicle shall be
responsible) of any such vehicle towed or impounded as a consequence of the following violations. Such fee or bond posted in lieu thereof
shall be subject to refund or return, as the case may be, in the event of a finding of no violation at a hearing conducted to contest such
violation as further prescribed in this chapter.
1. a. 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-303 (driving while driver's license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or
revoked), as amended, except where said violation is in regard to a person whose driver's license, permit or privilege to operate a motor
vehicle is suspended only for a violation of the emissions inspection laws as set forth in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/13C-1 et seq., as
amended;
b. 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-204 (fleeing or attempting to elude a peace officer), as amended;
c. 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-401 (motor vehicle accidents involving death or personal injuries), as amended;
d. 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-402 (motor vehicle accident involving damage to vehicle), as amended;
e. 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-403 (duty to give information and render aid), as amended;
f. 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-404 (duty upon damaging unattended vehicle or other property), as amended;
g. 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501 (driving under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or
compounds or any combination thereof), as amended;
h. 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501.8 (a person under age 21 driving with a blood alcohol level greater than 0.00 - zero tolerance),
as amended;
i. 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-503 (reckless driving or aggravated reckless driving), as amended;
j. 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-506 (street racing), as amended; or
k. The stopping of a vehicle driven by a person against whom a warrant has been issued by a circuit court for that person's failure to
appear to answer charges that such person was:
(1) Operating a motor vehicle while that person's license was suspended or revoked in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-
303, as amended; or
(2) Operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds or any
combination thereof in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501, as amended.
2. a. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-6 (indecent solicitation of a child), as amended;
b. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-1 (assault), as amended;
c. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-2 (aggravated assault), as amended;
d. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-3 (battery), as amended;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 224/548
e. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-4 (aggravated battery), as amended;
f. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-4.2 (aggravated battery with a firearm), as amended;
g. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-4.3 (aggravated battery of a child), as amended;
h. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-4.6 (aggravated battery of a senior citizen), as amended;
i. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16A-3 (retail theft), as amended, when the value of the merchandise exceeds one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00);
j. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18-1 (robbery);
k. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18-2 (armed robbery), as amended;
l. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/19-1 (burglary), as amended;
m. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/19-3 (residential burglary), as amended;
n. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/20-1 (arson), as amended;
o. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/20-1.1 (aggravated arson), as amended;
p. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/20-2 (possession of explosives or explosive or incendiary devices), as amended;
q. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-1 (criminal damage to property), as amended; or
r. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/25-1 (mob action), as amended.
3. a. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/401 (manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance), as amended;
b. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/401.1 (controlled substance trafficking), as amended; or
c. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/402 (possession of a controlled substance), as amended.
4. a. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/4(d) (possession of more than 30 grams of any substance containing cannabis), as amended;
b. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/5 (manufacture or delivery of cannabis), as amended;
c. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/5.1 (cannabis trafficking), as amended;
d. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/5.2 (delivery of cannabis on school grounds), as amended; or
e. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/8 (unauthorized production or possession of Cannabis sativa plant), as amended.
5. a. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1 (unlawful use of weapons), as amended;
b. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-3.1 (unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition), as amended; or
c. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-3.3 (unlawful sale or delivery of firearms on the premises of any school), as amended.
This subsection A5 shall not apply when any of the exemptions set forth in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-2, as amended, are met.
(Ord. 2010-07, 3-8-2010)
6. a. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-14 (prostitution), as amended;
b. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-14.1 (solicitation of a sexual act), as amended;
c. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-18 (patronizing a prostitute), as amended; or
d. 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-18.1 (patronizing a juvenile prostitute), as amended. (Ord. 2010-07, 3-8-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
7. a. The motor vehicle is otherwise subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/36-1 (seizure), as
amended; or
b. A violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101 (drivers must have licenses or permits), as amended, except where the violation is
for a license which has been expired for less than twelve (12) months or for a license which is invalid because of curfew (as in the case
of a graduated license); or
c. Any other felony violation, where the vehicle was used in the commission of a crime.
B. The administrative penalty imposed pursuant to this section shall constitute a debt due and owing the village. A vehicle towed and
impounded pursuant to this chapter shall remain impounded until:
1. The administrative penalty is paid to the village, and all applicable towing fees at the prevailing rate charged for towing or moving the
vehicle to a place of safety or authorized garage, as applicable, are paid to the towing agent; and if applicable, storage charges at the
prevailing rate at the garage in which said vehicle is stored are paid; in which case, the owner of record shall be given possession of the
vehicle; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 225/548
2. A bond in the amount of the administrative penalty is posted with the police department to satisfy the administrative penalty, and all
applicable towing fees at the prevailing rate charged for towing or moving the vehicle to a place of safety or authorized garage, as
applicable, are paid to the towing agent; and if applicable, storage charges at the prevailing rate at the garage in which said vehicle is
stored are paid, at which time, such vehicle will be released to the owner of record thereof; or
3. The vehicle is deemed abandoned pursuant to the definition of "abandoned vehicle" in section 7-7-1 of this chapter, in which case, the
vehicle shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of abandoned vehicles; or
4. A finding of impropriety is made at a posttow impoundment hearing as to such towing and impoundment for which such administrative
penalty was imposed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-07, 3-8-2010)
7-7-4: REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE:
Before the owner or person entitled to possession of any legally impounded vehicle shall be permitted to remove same from the custody of the
police department, he shall:
A. Furnish evidence of his identity;
B. Show evidence of his ownership of the vehicle or right to possession thereof;
C. Sign a receipt for the vehicle;
D. Show proof of having satisfied the village administrative penalty fee, unless a finding of impropriety is made as to the towing for which such
administrative penalty was imposed, all as set forth in section 7-7-3 of this chapter;
E. Pay all vehicle storage charge(s) at the prevailing rate at the garage in which the said vehicle is stored, if applicable, and furnish proof of
such payment satisfactory to the village; and
F. Pay the prevailing rate charged for towing or moving the vehicle to a place of safety or authorized garage, as the case may be, and furnish
proof of such payment satisfactory to the village. (Ord. 2010-07, 3-8-2010)
7-7-5: PRETOW NOTICE AND HEARING PROCEDURES:
A. Notice And Hearing: Any vehicle that is subject to towing, other than a towing for which no prior notice is required in accordance with this
chapter, shall have a tow notice applied thereto, and a pretow warning notice shall be sent to the registered owner and the lienholder, if
applicable. Such pretow warning notice shall include a description of the vehicle, the license plate and vehicle identification numbers (VIN), if
available and legible, and notice that a hearing as to the propriety of the towing will be granted, if requested. If, after ten (10) days, there has
been no response to the pretow warning notice, the vehicle may be towed. A posttow notice shall be sent to the owner and the lienholder, if
applicable, no more than five (5) business days after the vehicle is towed, and shall include a copy of the village tow order. This notice must
also include the opportunity for a posttow hearing. If a hearing is requested after a vehicle is towed, it will be granted in accordance with the
posttow hearing procedures set forth in this chapter. All notices shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of
the registered owner and lienholder, if applicable, of the vehicle as recorded with the secretary of state of Illinois. If the vehicle is registered
in a state other than Illinois, the village police department shall send appropriate notice in accordance with this chapter to the address of the
registered owner and lienholder, if applicable, as recorded in such other state registry of motor vehicles.
B. Request For Preimpoundment Hearing: Requests for pre-impoundment hearings are to be made to the police department and addressed to
the chief of police. The request must be in writing and be served on the police department personally or by mail. Forms for such request
shall be made available at the police department.
C. Nature Of Preimpoundment Hearing; Hearing Officer: The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer and be informal in nature. The
rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing will not be determinative of or adjudicate any citation issued, any criminal violation charged, or
any ordinance violation charged relative to the proposed tow and impoundment. After receiving all relevant evidence, the hearing officer shall
make a written decision based upon the preponderance of the evidence as to whether the tow and impoundment of the vehicle were
authorized by this chapter. The owner of the vehicle shall be provided with a copy of the written decision. The hearing officer shall have the
authority under applicable laws of the state of Illinois to conduct such hearings. If a registered owner or lienholder requests a hearing but
fails to appear at such hearing, the hearing officer shall enter an order of default in favor of the village in the amount of the hearing fee.
D. Scheduling Preimpoundment Hearing: If a preimpoundment hearing is requested, it will be granted within five (5) business days after the
request for a hearing and held during normal business hours, unless the owner requests a later date convenient to all parties. The hearing
shall take place at designated dates and times to be determined by the police department in conjunction with the hearing officer. (Ord. 2010-
07, 3-8-2010)
7-7-6: POSTTOW HEARING PROCEDURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 226/548
A. Opportunity For Hearing: Provided that a pretow hearing was not first held, the registered owner and the lienholder, if applicable, of a vehicle
impounded by or pursuant to the authority of the village police department, as set forth in this chapter, shall be provided the opportunity for a
postimpoundment hearing to determine the validity of such impoundment and any administrative penalty, towing or storage charges. Notice
of such opportunity for a hearing shall be provided within five (5) business days after a vehicle is seized, towed and impounded pursuant to
this chapter. Such posttow notice shall include a description of the vehicle, the license plate and vehicle identification numbers (VIN), if
available and legible, and notice that a hearing as to the propriety of the towing will be granted, if requested. All notices shall be served by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the registered owner and lienholder, if applicable, of the vehicle as recorded with
the secretary of state of Illinois. If the vehicle is registered in a state other than Illinois, the village police department shall send appropriate
notice in accordance with this chapter to the address of the registered owner and lienholder, if applicable, as recorded in such other state
registry of motor vehicles. The hearing will not be determinative of or adjudicate any citation issued, any criminal violation charged, or any
ordinance violation charged relative to the impoundment. The owner shall be deemed to have waived any right to a postimpoundment
hearing, unless a hearing is requested within fourteen (14) days of the mailing or delivery of the postimpoundment notice, as provided in this
section.
B. Request For Postimpoundment Hearing: Requests for postimpoundment hearings are to be made to the village police department and
addressed to the chief of police. The request must be in writing and must be served on the police department personally or by mail. Forms
for such request shall be made available at the police department.
C. Nature Of Hearing; Hearing Officer: The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer and shall be informal in nature. The rules of
evidence shall not apply. The hearing will not be determinative of or adjudicate any citation issued, any criminal violation charged, or any
ordinance violation charged relative to the impoundment. After receiving all relevant evidence, the hearing officer shall make a written
decision based upon the preponderance of the evidence as to whether the impoundment and/or towing of the vehicle was authorized by this
chapter. The owner of the vehicle shall be provided with a copy of the written decision. The hearing officer shall have the authority under
applicable laws of the state of Illinois to conduct such hearings. If the hearing officer does not determine, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the impoundment and/or towing of the vehicle was authorized by this chapter, the officer shall enter a finding in favor of the
owner and order the immediate return of the vehicle and, if paid, administrative penalty, bond and/or hearing fee, as the case may be. If a
registered owner or lienholder requests a hearing but fails to appear at such hearing, the hearing officer shall enter an order of default in
favor of the village in the amount of the administrative penalty and hearing fee.
D. Scheduling Postimpoundment Hearing: If a postimpoundment hearing is requested, it will be granted within ten (10) business days after the
request for a hearing and held during normal business hours, unless the owner requests a later date convenient to all parties. The hearing
shall take place at designated dates and times to be determined by the police department in conjunction with the hearing officer.
E. Hearing Fee: In addition to the administrative penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter, any person found liable for such penalty following a
hearing on a contested violation regarding same shall further be subject to a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), which fee shall be: 1) separate and
distinct from the administrative penalty imposed for the towing and removal of a vehicle pursuant to this chapter; and 2) imposed not as a
penalty but instead to partially offset those costs incurred by the village in the village's conduct of such hearing. (Ord. 2010-07, 3-8-2010)
Title 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
8-1-1: PURPOSE; SCOPE; INTERPRETATION:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the village
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village
rights of way and the village as a whole.
B. Intent: In enacting this chapter, the village intends to exercise its authority over the rights of way within the village and, in particular, the use of
the public ways and property by any utility, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by a utility's facilities, including,
without limitation:
1. Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;
2. Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
3. Prevent interference with the operation of any village facilities and of any other facilities lawfully located within the village rights of way;
4. Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees and landscaping, from the installation of facilities;
5. Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
6. Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 227/548
7. Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined, landscaped parkways that characterize the village residential neighborhoods;
8. Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities within the rights of way; and
9. Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to facilities.
C. Scope: This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way within the jurisdiction of the
village. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date hereof may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as
presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
D. Franchises, Licenses And Similar Agreements:
1. The village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require a utility to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the
privilege of locating its facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village rights of way. Any utility that is not
required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the
village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this chapter.
2. In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the village, such
franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and have control over the provisions of this chapter during the term of such franchise,
license or similar agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
3. In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any franchise, license or
similar agreement between the village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
E. Conflicting Provisions:
1. This chapter supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted by the village prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent
of such conflict.
2. In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter, each utility shall comply with
the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
F. Sound Engineering Judgment: The village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the
standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit
the ability of the village to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
8-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed thereto in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30
unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association Of State Highway And Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society For Testing And Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as a carrier pipe, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may
consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear runout area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic
volumes and speeds and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside Design Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 228/548
CODE: The village code of the village of Bloomingdale.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or
abandonment in place of facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITIES: Any facilities that cross one or more boundaries of a right-of-way.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for
its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or
permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to facilities required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way, or
immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITIES: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas,
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term "facilities" shall not
include any facilities owned or operated by the Village.
FREESTANDING FACILITIES: Any facilities that are not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter
station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a
highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is
determined by the Village Engineer to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the
ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases,
poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any Federal or State
law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and
appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle, pedestrian and bicycle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable
and video competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by more than one utility.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under rights of way.
PARALLEL FACILITIES: Any facilities that are generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by a street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facilities or for the construction of facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 229/548
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to section 8-1-4 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline,
distillates, propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe, expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at the local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of facilities.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic
or other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location
of facilities other than those of the village. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include any real or personal village property that is not
specifically described in this definition and shall not include village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in
connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the
retailer for its use or consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to subsection 8-1-5C of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for
emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through the use of local, toll and wide area
telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio
services, cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable oneway
or two-way communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among
points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive
service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels,
from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in
which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than
transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end to end
communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the cable
communications act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject
to an open video system fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal communications
commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be
used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined in
this section.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of underground facilities.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any facilities.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-201(v).
VILLAGE: The village of Bloomingdale.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: The Village Engineer or his or her designee.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
(Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 230/548
8-1-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies a right-of-way within the Village shall register on January 1 of each year with the Village Engineer, providing the
utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf
of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right-of-way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for
each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in subsection 8-1-5A of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord.
2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
8-1-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required; Exemptions: No person shall construct any facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any Village rightof-
way which: 1) changes the location of the facilities within that right-of-way; 2) adds new facilities; 3) disrupts the right-of way; or 4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facilities on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right-of-way
without first filing an application with the Village Engineer and obtaining a permit from the Village therefor, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customer premises where there will be no
disruption of the right-of-way. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
B. Application For Permit:
1. All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be filed on a form approved by and acceptable to the Village and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the Village may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that
it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such
materials accordingly.
2. The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
a. The utility's name, contact person, address, telephone and telecopy numbers;
b. The applicant's name, contact person, and address, if different than the utility, its telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and
interest in the work that is the subject of the applicant's application;
c. The names, contact persons addresses, telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any,
advising the applicant with respect to the application;
d. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facilities and the uses to which the facilities will be put.
The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special
emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
e. Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the Village:
(1) A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to
efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and
(2) An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction
and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification
to the Village and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for
emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the Village finds that additional information or
assurances are needed;
f. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
g. Evidence of insurance as required in subsection 8-1-5A of this chapter;
h. Evidence of posting of the Security Fund as required in subsection 8-1-5C of this chapter;
i. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this chapter (see section 8-1-15 of this chapter); and
j. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the Village.
3. In addition to the requirements of subsection B2 of this section, the permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to
the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
a. In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that
the applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional
authority;
b. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;
c. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water
Supplies, have been satisfied;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 231/548
d. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control, have been satisfied; or
e. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and
the design standard to be followed.
4. Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to
information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the Village within thirty (30) days after the change
necessitating the amendment.
C. Fees; Exemption: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter
shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00). No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity
utility that is paying the Municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Law.
(Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
D. Action On Applications:
1. Review Of Applications; Grant Or Denial Of Permit: Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be
examined by the Village Engineer within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Village Engineer shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If
the Village Engineer is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes,
laws, rules, and regulations, the Village Engineer shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty
of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in
full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
2. Additional Village Review Of Telecommunications Retailers' Applications:
a. Pursuant to section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the
Village that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such
notice shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities,
and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the Village not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work
requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Village Engineer
shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facilities may be placed, used and constructed.
b. In the event that the Village Engineer fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: 1) ten
(10) days after service of notice to the Village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new
construction; or 2) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving
excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
c. Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a permit is required for work pursuant to subsection A of this section, the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the Village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facilities to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection
D1 of this section.
3. Additional Review Of Holders Of State Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law: Applications by a utility that is a holder
of a State issued authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days after
submission to the Village, unless otherwise acted upon by the Village, provided the holder has complied with all applicable Village codes,
ordinances, and regulations.
E. Effect Of Permit:
1. A permit from the Village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this chapter on Village rights-ofway,
and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest
in the rights-of-way.
2. No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
3. No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors
and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be held at
a date, time and place designated by the Village Engineer with such Village representatives in attendance as the Village deems
necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit and reviewing special considerations necessary in
the areas where work will occur including, without limitation, presence or absence of other facilities in the area and their locations,
procedures to avoid disruption of other facilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent
property owners. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
4. The issuance of a permit by the Village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the Village and
applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
F. Revised Permit Drawings: In the event that, upon construction, the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the
locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of
drawings or plans to the Village within ninety (90) days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 232/548
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the
permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance with section 8-1-15 of
this chapter. If the Village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facilities from the right-of-way or
modify the facilities so as to conform to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor.
G. Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit:
1. Grounds: The Village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
a. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
b. Noncompliance with this chapter;
c. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of
way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
d. Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
2. Notice Requirements: The village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to the permittee under this subsection.
3. Options Of Permittee:
a. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
(1) Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
(2) Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the village within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
(3) Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way and restore the
rights of way to the satisfaction of the village, providing written proof of such removal to the village within ten (10) days after receipt of
the written notice of revocation.
b. The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection G3.
4. Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately
upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection G1 of this section.
5. Failure Or Refusal Of Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection G3 of this section, the village
or its designee may, at the option of the village: a) correct the deficiencies; b) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee,
remove the subject facilities or equipment; or c) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the
noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all costs of
removal. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
8-1-5: INSURANCE; INDEMNITY; SECURITY:
A. Insurance Requirements:
1. Coverages And Limits:
a. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying a right of way or constructing any facilities
in the right of way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming
the village and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in
subsections A1a(1) and A1a(2) of this section:
(1) Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly
referred to as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
(A) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
(B) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
(C) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability;
(2) Automobile liability insurance for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for personal injury and property damage for each accident;
(3) Workers' compensation insurance in accordance with statutory limits; and
(4) Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
b. If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors
and subcontractors shall comply with this subsection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 233/548
2. Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this subsection may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella
policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following form basis such that when
any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to
cover such loss.
3. Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this subsection to the village within ten (10) days
following receipt of a written request therefor from the village.
4. Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages:
a. The insurance policies required by this subsection shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days
after receipt by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village
Administrator of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
b. Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the
utility shall obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this subsection.
5. Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A1 of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of
additional insureds under subsection A1 of this section, or the requirements of subsections A2, A3 and A4 of this section. A utility that
elects to self-insure shall provide to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage
and limit requirements required under subsection A1 of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the
workers' compensation act.
6. Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this subsection shall not be limited by such insurance
policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
7. Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this subsection shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by
insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be
rated "A-" or better and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company.
B. Indemnification: By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the
village and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all
injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense,
arising out of, resulting from, or alleged to arise out of or result from, the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or
misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed
or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations
hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the
negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.
C. Security:
1. Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this subsection. The security fund shall
be continuously maintained in accordance with this subsection at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work
authorized under the permit. The security fund shall serve as security for:
a. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this chapter;
b. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules,
regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the Village issued pursuant to this chapter; and
c. The payment by the permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee in violation of this chapter including, without limitation, any damage to public property or
restoration work the permittee is required by this chapter to perform that the Village must perform itself or have completed as a
consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the Village from the permittee pursuant
to this chapter or any other applicable law.
2. Form: The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the Village in the form, at the Village's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the Village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the Village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this subsection C2 shall, at a minimum:
a. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the Village and the permittee;
b. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the Village of any amounts covered thereby; and
c. Provide a location convenient to the Village and within the State of Illinois at which it can be drawn. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
3. Amount: The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way
to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the Village Engineer, and may
also include reasonable, directly related costs that the Village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such
restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the Village,
with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 234/548
phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Village Engineer may, in
the exercise of his sole discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the
construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would
have been required under the provisions of this subsection C3 for any single phase. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord.
2017-42, 11-13-2017)
4. Withdrawals: The Village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice to the permittee, clearly stating the reason for, and its intention
to exercise withdrawal rights under this subsection C4, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund; provided, that the permittee has
not reimbursed the Village for such amount within the fourteen (14) day notice period. A withdrawal notice from the Village to the permittee
shall be sent via certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the utility stated on the permittee's application and shall be
deemed received upon the earlier of actual receipt or three (3) business days from the date of mailing thereof. Withdrawals may be made
if the permittee:
a. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
b. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
c. Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the Village has been compelled to pay or incur by
reason of any action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
d. Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the Village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the
Security Fund.
5. Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the Village that any amount has been withdrawn from the
Security Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in subsection C3 of this section.
6. Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by
the Village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the Village; provided, that any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund
below the minimum balance required in subsection C3 of this section.
7. Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the
return of the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets
necessary to compensate the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. In
the event of any revocation of the permit, the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the
Village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the Village as a result of said revocation;
provided, that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.
8. Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the Village with respect to the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the Village,
whether reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said
Security Fund shall affect any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village shall not be entitled to a double
monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
8-1-6: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP, IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
A. Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the Village no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facilities in the
right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facilities shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed
by the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to
the work and facilities in the right-of-way.
B. Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a
new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and
conditions of the current permit if the new owner uses the facilities or allows them to remain on the Village right-of-way.
C. Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
8-1-7: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Standards And Principles: All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable Village ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations, practices and policies and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering
judgment as determined by the Village Engineer in his sole discretion, and, where applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the
following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time: (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
1. "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction";
2. "Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions";
3. "Highway Design Manual";
4. "Highway Standards Manual";
5. "Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items";
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 235/548
6. "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. Adm. Code section 545);
7. "Flagger's Handbook"; and
8. "Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations". (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
B. Interpretation Of Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the Village Engineer shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply, and such decision shall
be final. If requested, the Village Engineer shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of
a facility in the future. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
8-1-8: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
A. Minimum Requirements: The Village's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic
Control Devices" and this Code.
B. Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable Federal, State, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility workers when
performing any work on the rights-of-way.
C. Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
D. Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of
such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 8-1-14 of this chapter, the utility shall provide
such notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
E. Compliance Required: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to
the utility's attention by the Village. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
8-1-9: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of facilities, all facilities, regardless of type, shall be
subject to the general location requirements of this subsection. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
1. Interference With Village Facilities Prohibited: No facilities shall be placed in any location if the Village Engineer determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the Village facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the Village facilities. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
2. Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-ofway
and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with, the rights and reasonable convenience of property
owners who adjoin said right-of-way.
3. Interference With Travel Prohibited: No facilities shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual, intended and customary
pedestrian and vehicular travel on such right-of-way.
4. No Limitations On Visibility: No facilities shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
5. Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals,
and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.
B. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities: Overhead parallel facilities may be located only on existing poles that are within the right-of-way of a
highway. If no poles exist within the portion of the right-of-way proposed to be utilized for placement of overhead parallel facilities, then
such overhead parallel facilities shall be placed underground in accordance with this chapter unless otherwise permitted pursuant to this
chapter.
2. Underground Parallel Facilities: Underground parallel facilities may be located within the right-of-way of a highway only if:
a. The facilities are located as near the right-of-way boundary as practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to
the right-of-way boundary;
b. Facilities may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in an existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
c. In the case of an underground power or communications line, all facilities shall be located as near the right-of-way boundary as
practicable and not more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right-of-way boundary, and any aboveground appurtenance shall be located
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 236/548
within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way boundary or as near as practicable.
C. Facilities Crossing Highways:
1. No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch boundary or curb boundary of Village
highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or
future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
2. Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
3. Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as
practicable.
4. Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or communication facility may not cross a roadway or highway.
5. Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or communication facility may cross a roadway or highway only if:
a. The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance free service life; and
b. Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
6. Markers: The Village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-way boundary where any underground facilities other than
a power or communication facility crosses a roadway or highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an
emergency phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707 (1989)).
D. Location Within Particular Rights-Of-Way: The Village may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
E. Freestanding Facilities:
1. The Village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facilities located within a right-of-way as determined by the Village
Engineer.
2. The Village may require any freestanding facilities located within a right-of-way to be screened from view as determined by the Village
Engineer. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
F. Aboveground Facilities: Aboveground facilities may be installed only if: (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code)
1. New underground installation is not technically feasible, as determined by the Village Engineer in his sole discretion; and
2. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety, as determined by the Village Engineer in his sole
discretion. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of
conductors and cable. Existing utility poles shall be used wherever practicable. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42,
11-13-2017)
G. Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facilities are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent
poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities
transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential,
present high degrees of risk, and such installations are not permitted.
2. A utility shall include in its request to accommodate the installation of facilities on a bridge or roadway structure, supporting data
demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for attachment of facilities to a bridge or
roadway structure will be based upon the following considerations:
a. The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and
property in the event of damage to or failure of the facilities;
b. The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;
c. The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
d. The proposed method of attachment;
e. The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facilities;
f. The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
g. The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
h. The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 237/548
H. Appearance Standards:
1. The Village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality and streetscape aesthetics.
(Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
2. Facilities may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being
traversed as determined by the Village Engineer in his sole reasonable discretion. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-
42, 11-13-2017)
8-1-10: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
A. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods:
1. Boring Or Jacking:
a. Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the
Village Engineer from the edge of the pavement of the adjacent roadway or right-of-way. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no
more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or
jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be
designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed
upon it during the boring or jacking operation. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
b. Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under a roadway or highway.
c. Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger
and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1")
(25 mm).
d. Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking,
guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
e. Tree Preservation: Any facilities located within the drip line of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved or protected shall be
accomplished by boring under or around the root system pursuant to the "Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice
Manual", as interpreted by the Village Engineer or his designee.
2. Trenching: If approved by the Village Engineer, trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in
accord with the applicable portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction".
a. Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing. Only onehalf
(1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special written permission is obtained from the Village
Engineer. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
b. Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of
the "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the
roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway.
Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off road location. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
c. Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved pursuant to the
"Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice Manual", as interpreted by the Village Engineer or his designee. (Ord. 2008-11,
1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
3. Backfilling:
a. Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction". When excavated
material is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
b. For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of facilities is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area whether paved or vegetated that has settled due to construction of the facilities. If so ordered by the Village
Engineer, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facilities, place and
properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalks, recreational paths, curbs, and driveways to the proper
grades, as determined by the Village Engineer.
4. Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for installation or repair of facilities shall be permitted on a highway only if approved in writing by the
Village Engineer, and that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is
permitted under section 8-1-15 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
a. Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10
gradation, as designated by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
b. Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be
provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 238/548
Village.
c. All saw cuts shall be full depth.
d. For all rights-of-way that have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years prior to cutting, or resurfaced
in the last three (3) years prior to cutting, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other
work considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE
locate. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
5. Encasement:
a. Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous
either by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved in writing by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008;
amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
b. The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way boundary. No aboveground vent pipes
shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012
Code)
c. In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village
approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and
carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the Village Engineer in writing. Bell and spigot type pipe shall
be encased regardless of the installation method. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
d. In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
e. In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be
eliminated only if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair; and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is
provided.
f. If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
6. Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table
for minimum cover for the type of facility:
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover
Electric lines 30 inches (0.8 m)
Communications, cable or video service lines 18 to 24 inches (0.46 m to 0.6 m, as determined by the Village)
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m)
Water lines Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage lines Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
B. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
1. Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
a. Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities within Village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and
maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois Administrative Code part 305 (formerly general order 160 of the Illinois
Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
b. Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction, and where practicable, joint use of
poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed.
Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
c. Underground Facilities:
(1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing; provided, that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage
when crossing improved entrances and side roads.
(2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be
eliminated only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the
earth to make the opening for cable installation; or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to
roadway construction.
(3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
d. Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also
known as snow drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the Village
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 239/548
Engineer. Weather permitting, each utility shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days after
placement. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
2. Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines may be installed by:
a. The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
b. Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway or roadway;
c. Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to highway or roadway construction;
or
d. Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation,
part 192, "Transportation of Natural and Other Gas By Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards" (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's
"Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI
"Standard Code for Pressure Piping" (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5. Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Sewer Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois". (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
6. Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-ofway,
shall be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The
vegetation free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the
Village Engineer. With the approval of the Village Engineer, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation
free area. The housing for ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color approved by the Village Engineer to blend with
the surroundings. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
C. Materials:
1. General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", the requirements of
the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry. (Ord.
2008-11, 1-28-2008)
2. Storage On Right-Of-Way: No material shall be stored on the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Village Engineer. When
such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to
and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-ofway
and other property. If material is to be stored on the right-of-way, prior written approval must be obtained from the Village Engineer.
3. Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the Village Engineer shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved
in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
D. Operational Restrictions:
1. Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the Village Engineer, be required to be discontinued when such
operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be
discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
2. These restrictions may be waived by the Village Engineer when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
3. Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the permitted hours of construction of any facilities are those set forth in section 5-5-2 of this
Code, being seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M., or as determined by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd.
2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
E. Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the Village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and location of
existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The Village will make its
permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the
Village or by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and
holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act1. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
8-1-11: VEGETATION CONTROL2:
A. Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations and, additionally, with such local franchise or other
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 240/548
agreement with the Village as permitted by law. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
B. Other Utilities; Tree Trimming:
1. Permit Requirements:
a. Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois
laws and regulations specifically governing same shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the
application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required pursuant to this chapter and chapter 2 of this title,
the Village tree replacement provisions. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code)
b. Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers, with
supervision, who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
2. Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for
cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The Village will require compensation for or replacement of trees
extensively damaged and for trees removed without written Village authorization in accordance with the standards and requirements set
forth by the Village tree replacement ordinance3. The Village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical
pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition, as determined by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012
Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
C. Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The Village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or
trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
D. Chemical Use:
1. Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or
vegetation in the Village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
2. Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of
the Village Engineer that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code;
Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
8-1-12: REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
A. Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the Village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the Corporate
Authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair,
maintenance, or installation of any Village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or upon, the rights-of-way.
B. Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the Village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facilities or
related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances from the
rights-of-way. All unauthorized facilities are subject to removal in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
2. If the facilities were constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;
3. If the facilities were constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
4. If the facilities were constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
C. The Village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-way of the Village, as the Village may
determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful, in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the Village
shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing its facilities and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing
its facilities. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
D. Upon abandonment of facilities within the rights-of-way of the Village, the utility shall notify the Village within ninety (90) days. Following
receipt of such notice, the Village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facilities if the Village Engineer determines that
such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the Village does not direct the utility that
abandoned the facilities to remove them, by giving notice of abandonment to the Village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent
to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facilities by another utility or person. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord.
2017-42, 11-13-2017)
8-1-13: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the right-of6/
5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 241/548
way is disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the Village. This includes
restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the Village
Engineer. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, repaving or any other requirement
to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period
provided in this section may be extended by the Village Engineer for good cause shown. Failure of the utility to cause restoration of the right-ofway
within ten (10) days shall be cause for the Village to restore the disturbed area at the expense of the utility or permittee pursuant to
subsection 8-1-5C of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
8-1-14: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS:
A. General Maintenance Requirements: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or
for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the Village and at the utility's expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit.
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard
does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment
required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be
permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the Village Engineer or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the Village police shall be
notified immediately. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to
the traveling public. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code)
C. Emergency Repairs: The utility must file with the Village Engineer, in writing, a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within
forty eight (48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
8-1-15: VARIANCES:
A. Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the Village
Engineer as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and
the reasons why a variance should be granted.
B. Authority To Grant Variances: The Village Engineer shall decide, in his sole discretion, whether a variance is authorized for each provision of
this chapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
C. Conditions:
1. The Village Engineer may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that: (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008;
amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
a. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way boundary) create a
special hardship that would make compliance with the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the
provision; and
b. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested
are impracticable in relation to the requested approach. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
2. As a condition for authorizing a variance, the Village Engineer may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable
standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the purposes and intent of
this chapter.
D. Appeals: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Village
Engineer under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the Village Administrator. The application for appeal shall be
submitted in writing to the Village Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Village Engineer. The Village Administrator shall commence his or her consideration of the appeal within not more than thirty (30) days after
the date that the written application for appeal is submitted to the Village Clerk, and the Village Administrator shall prepare his or her written
determination on the appeal not more than ten (10) business days after completing his or her consideration of the appeal. Any utility
aggrieved by the written determination of the Village Administrator shall have the right to appeal to the Village Board of Trustees. The
application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of written determination of the
Village Administrator. The Village Board of Trustees shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the Village Board's next regularly
scheduled meeting occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The Village Board of Trustees shall timely decide the
appeal upon presentation of all relevant facts. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 242/548
8-1-16: PENALTIES:
A. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. There may be times when the Village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims,
because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the
cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the Village costs of damages and its costs of installing,
maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission
may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the Village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the
costs apportioned thereto. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this
chapter. (Ord. 2008-11, 1-28-2008)
Chapter 2
TREES1
8-2-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The regulations of this chapter have been adopted to:
A. Establish regulations and permit requirements for the planting, maintenance, removal and replacement of trees in Village owned public
places and parkways. (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995)
B. Identify the Public Works Department as the appropriate Village agency to administer the planting, maintenance, removal and replacement of
trees in Village owned public places and parkways. (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this section. Where
applicable, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include singular, and words in the singular include the plural.
The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is permissive.
ARBORICULTURAL SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS OF PRACTICE MANUAL: The document prepared and maintained by the Director
of Public Works or his designee containing regulations and standards for the planting, maintenance and removal of trees upon Village owned
property.
PARKWAY: That part of a street or highway, not covered by sidewalk or other paving, lying between a property line and the curb of a street or
highway.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC PLACES: All grounds owned by the Village of Bloomingdale, DuPage County, Illinois, including, but not limited to, parkways and public
property.
PUBLIC TREES: All shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter growing on any street, parkway or any other public places as defined by this
chapter.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width of a public way or right-of-way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of
right, for the purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
8-2-3: PLANTING, MAINTENANCE AND REMOVAL AND/OR REPLACEMENT OF TREES ON PUBLIC AREAS:
This section establishes the Public Works Department as the agency responsible for prescribing regulations relating to the planting,
maintenance, and removal of trees in parkways and public places as set forth in this chapter. This section also provides regulations for the
issuing of permits for the planting, maintenance and removal of trees in public places and parkways and the pruning of trees on private property
which endanger public safety by overhanging or obstructing public property. (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
8-2-3-1: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS OR HIS DESIGNEE AS ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
A. Duties:
1. The Director of Public Works or his designee shall have the authority to and shall cause provisions of this chapter to be enforced, as
follows: (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 243/548
a. Promulgate the rules and regulations of the "Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice Manual" governing the planting,
maintenance, removal, fertilization, pruning, and bracing of trees in parkways and other public places in the Village;
b. Direct, regulate, and control the planting, maintenance, and removal of all trees growing now or hereafter in any parkway or public place
in the Village; and
c. Direct efforts to educate and encourage the public to plant and maintain trees in parkways. (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995; amd. 2012 Code)
2. These duties may be the temporary responsibility of a qualified alternate designated by the Director of Public Works or his designee.
B. Authority:
1. The Director of Public Works or his designee shall have the authority and jurisdiction of regulating the planting, maintenance, and removal
of trees in parkways and other publicly owned property to ensure safety or preserve the aesthetics of such public places.
2. The Director of Public Works or his designee shall be responsible for the preparation, maintenance, or modifications of the "Arboricultural
Specifications and Standards of Practice Manual".
3. The Director of Public Works or his designee shall have the authority and responsibility to supervise or inspect all work done under a
permit issued in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
4. The Director of Public Works or his designee shall have the authority to affix reasonable conditions to the granting of a permit in
accordance with the terms of this section 8-2-3.
5. a. The Director of Public Works or his designee shall have the authority to formulate a Master Street Tree Plan with the advice of, a
hearing by, and approval of the Village President and Board of Trustees. The Master Street Tree Plan shall specify the species of tree to
be planted within parkways or any other public places in the Village. From and after the effective date of the Master Street Tree Plan, or
any amendment thereto, all planting shall conform thereto.
b. The Director of Public Works or his designee shall consider all existing and future utility and environmental factors when recommending
a specific species for each of the streets and other public places of the Village.
c. The Director of Public Works or his designee, with approval of the Village President and Board of Trustees, shall have the authority to
amend or add to the Master Street Tree Plan at any time that circumstances make it advisable.
C. Interference Prohibited: No person shall hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere with the Director of Public Works or his designee or any of his/her
assistants while engaged in carrying out the execution or enforcement of this chapter; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be
construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of
property rights by the owner of any property within the Village. (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
8-2-3-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Planting, Maintenance Or Removal Of Trees:
1. Permits Required: A tree planting, maintenance or removal permit shall be required to plant, remove, prune or otherwise maintain trees in
public places or public parkways. (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995; amd. 2012 Code)
2. Applications For Permits:
a. General Requirements:
(1) Except for the Director of Public Works or his designee, or agents or contractors hired by the Village, no person shall plant, spray,
fertilize, preserve, prune, remove, cut aboveground, or otherwise disturb any tree on any existing or proposed street, parkway, or
Municipal owned property without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the Director of Public Works or his designee or
otherwise specified Village authority. The person receiving the permit agrees to abide by the provisions of this section 8-2-3 and the
"Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice Manual". (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-
2017)
(2) Applications for permits must be made at the Village offices not less than forty eight (48) hours (2 working days) in advance of the
time the work is to be done. (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995; amd. 2012 Code)
b. Additional Requirements For Planting Applications: The application required herein shall state the number of trees to be set out; the
location, grade, species, cultivar or variety of each tree; the method of planting; and such other information as the Director of Public
Works or his designee shall find reasonably necessary to make a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. Unless
written approval is obtained from the Director of Public Works or his designee, species and cultivars selected for planting shall be limited
to those appearing on the approved species list maintained by the Director of Public Works or his designee.
c. Additional Requirements For Maintenance Applications: The application required herein shall state the number and kinds of trees to be
sprayed, fertilized, pruned or otherwise preserved; the kind of treatment to be administered; the composition of the spray material to be
applied; and such other information as the Director of Public Works or his designee shall find reasonably necessary to make a fair
determination of whether a permit should be issued.
d. Additional Requirements For Removal Applications: No person or property owner shall remove a tree from the parkway for the purpose
of construction, or for any other reason, without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the Director of Public Works or his
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 244/548
designee, and without replacing the removed tree or trees in accordance with the adopted arboricultural specifications. Such
replacement shall meet the standards of size, species, and placement as provided in a permit issued by the Director of Public Works or
his designee. The person or property owner shall bear the cost of removal and replacement of all trees removed.
3. Issuance Of Permit; Expiration And Invalidity: The Director of Public Works or his designee shall issue the permit provided herein if, in
his/her judgment, the proposed work is desirable and the proposed method and workmanship thereof are of a satisfactory nature. Any
permit granted shall contain a definite date of expiration, and the work shall be completed in the time allowed on the permit and in the
manner as therein described. Any permit shall be void if its terms are violated.
4. Notice For Inspection: Notice of completion shall be given within five (5) days to the Director of Public Works or his designee for his/her
inspection.
B. Excavations/Construction: No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches or lay any drive within a radius of ten feet (10') from any
public tree without first obtaining a written permit from the Director of Public Works or his designee.
C. Fees And Bonds: Required permits will be issued to the applicants after payment of the permit fee pursuant to the permit fee schedule2. The
Director of Public Works or his designee reserves the right to require a performance bond in the form of cash or a letter of credit to assure
compliance with permit conditions. (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
8-2-3-3: PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANIES3:
Public utility companies shall notify the Director of Public Works or his designee prior to the initiation of pruning cycles which will involve trees in
parkways or on Village owned property for the purpose of maintaining safe line clearance. The notice shall state the estimated time frame of the
pruning cycle as well as the planned locations in the Village where the work will be performed. All pruning work shall be carried out in
accordance with accepted arboricultural standards. Public utility companies shall also notify the Director of Public Works or his designee prior to
the installation or maintenance of underground utilities if such activity will occur within the drip line of trees located in parkways or on Village
owned property. In the case of severe storms, natural disasters or other emergency situations, a public utility company may perform any
required pruning or underground utility maintenance necessitated by such situation and, thereafter, notify the Director of Public Works or his
designee of the work performed. (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
8-2-3-4: REMOVAL, REPLANTING AND REPLACEMENT:
Wherever it is necessary to remove a tree or trees from a parkway in connection with the paving of a sidewalk or the paving or widening of the
portion of a street or highway used for vehicular traffic, the Village shall replant (or cause to replant) such trees or replace (or cause to replace)
them. In situations where conditions prevent planting on parkways, this requirement will be deemed to be satisfied if an equivalent number of
trees of the same size and species as provided in the arboricultural specifications are planted in an attractive manner on the adjoining property.
(Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995)
8-2-3-5: OBSTRUCTIONS; PRUNING REQUIRED:
A. Pruning Required; Height Above Public Ways: It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real property bordering on
any street upon which property there may be trees, to prune such trees in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade the streetlights,
obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs, or obstruct views of any street or alley intersection. The
minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be ten feet (10') over sidewalks and twelve feet (12') over all streets except
truck thoroughfares, which shall have a clearance of sixteen feet (16'). (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995)
B. Notice To Prune: Should any person or persons owning real property bordering on any street fail to prune trees as provided in subsection A
of this section, the Director of Public Works or his designee, through the offices of the Village Attorney, shall order such person or persons,
within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice, to so prune such trees which are determined to be a public nuisance compromising the
public health, safety and welfare. The order required herein shall be served by mailing a copy of the order to the last known address of the
property owner, by certified mail. (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
C. Failure To Comply: When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply within the specified time, it shall be lawful for the Village
to prune such trees, and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the property owner, as provided by law. (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995)
8-2-3-6: PROTECTION OF TREES:
All trees on any street or other publicly owned property near any excavation or construction of any building, structure, or street work shall be
guarded with a good substantial fence, frame, or box not less than four feet (4') high and eight feet (8') square, or at a distance in feet from the
tree equal to the diameter at breast height (41/2 feet above grade) of the trunk in inches, whichever is greater, and all building material, dirt or
other debris shall be kept outside the barrier. (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995)
8-2-3-7: IMPROPER PLANTING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 245/548
Whenever any tree shall be planted or set out in conflict with the provisions of this section 8-2-3, it shall be lawful for the Director of Public
Works or his designee to remove or cause removal of the said tree, and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the responsible person as
provided by law. (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
8-2-3-8: ABUSE OR DAMAGE TO PROHIBITED:
Unless specifically authorized by the Director of Public Works or his designee, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant, or
remove any tree; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivance to any tree; allow any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance,
which is harmful to such trees, to come into contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure
any portion of any tree; or cause reasonably avoidable damage to the root system by excavation, trenching or tunneling. (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-
1995; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
8-2-3-9: PLACING MATERIALS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
No person shall deposit, place, store, or maintain upon any public place of the Village any stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other materials which
may impede the free passage of water, air, or nutrients to the roots of any tree growing therein, except by written permit of the Director of Public
Works or his designee. (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
8-2-4: PENALTIES:
A. Fines And Restitution:
1. Fines: Any person, firm, or private or public corporation failing to comply with any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each separate offense, and each day during which any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall occur constitutes a separate
offense, and/or all activity shall terminate, if applicable, until such time as all provisions of this chapter have been met to the satisfaction of
the Director of Public Works or his designee. (2012 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
2. Restitution:
a. If, as a result of any violation of any provision of this chapter that causes the injury, mutilation, damage or death of a tree, shrub or other
plant located on Village owned property or right-of-way, the cost of restitution to remediate, repair or replace such tree, shrub or other
plant shall also be borne by the party in violation. (2012 Code)
b. Said means to remediate, repair or replace such injured, mutilated, damaged or dead tree, shrub or other plant and the value thereof
shall be determined by the Director of Public Works or his designee as follows: (2012 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
(1) The value to repair the injury, mutilation, or damage of such trees, shrubs or other plants shall be equal to the total actual costs of
remediation or repair, plus the cost of restoration and Village overhead and administrative charges, as applicable.
(2) The value to replace irreparably damaged or removed trees six inches (6") in diameter or less shall be equal to the greater of either
the cost to replace said six inch (6") diameter or less tree, or the cost to replace said six inch (6") diameter tree with a minimum of two
(2) 3-inch caliper trees, plus the cost of removal, restoration and Village overhead and administrative charges, as applicable.
(3) The value to replace irreparably damaged or removed trees greater than six inches (6") in diameter shall be determined per tree
based on the value as determined by the "Trunk Formula Method" as published by the International Society of Arboriculture in the
"Guide for Plant Appraisal" (current edition), as follows, plus the cost of removal, restoration and Village overhead and administrative
charges, as applicable: (2012 Code)
V = B x S x C x L, where:
V
=
Removed tree value
B
=
Basis tree value as determined by the Director of Public Works or his designee
S
=
Tree species rating as determined by the Director of Public Works or his designee
C
=
Tree condition rating as determined by the Director of Public Works or his designee
1.00 = excellent
0.80 = good
0.50 = fair
0.30 = poor
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 246/548
L
=
Tree location rating as determined by the Director of Public Works or his designee after considering the site, contribution and
placement of the subject tree
(2012 Code; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
B. Suspension Of Permits: The Director of Public Works or his designee may suspend any and all permits issued for a parcel of land if the
Village determines that the provisions of this chapter are not being adhered to. Suspension of permits shall be repealed only at such time as
it is determined by the Director of Public Works or his designee, or appointed designee, that the owner of the property, or his or her
designee, is in compliance with the approved tree preservation plan. (Ord. 95-61, 10-23-1995; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
Chapter 3
VILLAGE OPEN SPACE
8-3-1: CONSENT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITIES:
In the use of the open space, it shall be unlawful for any person to do or conduct, as the case may be, any of the following activities without the
prior written consent of the duly appointed village administrator, or his or her designee:
A. Engage in any business or commercial purpose (such as, by way of example and not limitation, races or events; filming movies or
commercials; or equipment demonstrations). Individuals engaging in still camera photography are exempt.
B. Drive, putt, or in any other fashion play or practice golf or use golf balls or golf clubs.
C. Operate, drive, park or ride upon any motorcycle, snowmobile, off highway vehicle, farm tractor, or any other motorized conveyance or
device.
D. Operate or ride a bicycle, except on officially designated trails and only when those areas are not posted to prohibit such use.
E. Leave any garbage, trash, cans, bottles, papers or other refuse elsewhere than in the receptacles provided therefor; use any village trash or
waste receptacles by depositing yard clippings or other garbage or trash generated on private property.
F. Encroach into the open space with any private improvements including, but not limited to, gardens, landscaping, fences, paths or compost
piles, or store any personal property on the open space.
G. Use, distribute, or consume any alcoholic beverages.
H. Light or maintain a fire, grill, or stove; except, that fires in pits established and maintained by the village for that purpose are permitted. If,
however, such fire constitutes a threat to public safety in the opinion of the police or fire chief, the fire shall be extinguished.
I. Set up or erect any tent or shelter in or run or string any public service utility into, upon or across any portion of the open space.
J. Enter, be or remain on the open space while under the influence of alcohol or narcotics.
K. Violate any official posted regulatory sign. (Ord. 2008-36, 8-11-2008)
8-3-2: GROUP USE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: A group use permit is required for use of the open space by any group of twenty five (25) or more persons.
B. Request For Permit: Written requests shall be submitted to the chief of police at least twenty one (21) calendar days in advance of the date
requested for group use of any portion of the open space, and must include the group affiliation, date and time of use, trails or areas to be
used and other details of the requested group use.
C. Police Chief Recommendation: Within seven (7) calendar days of his/her receipt of a written request for a group use permit, the chief of
police shall submit such request and a recommendation of approval or denial thereof to the village administrator.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 247/548
D. Administrator Imposition Of Fee Or Denial Of Permit: If, in the opinion of the village administrator, the requested group use will cause
significant impact to the natural environment or will require significant departmental resources, the village administrator may prescribe a fee
that includes the costs expected to be incurred by the village in connection with the requested group use, or deny permission for the conduct
of the requested group use. (Ord. 2008-36, 8-11-2008)
8-3-3: HOURS OF USE:
A. Unless otherwise posted, the open space shall be open daily from one hour prior to sunrise until one hour after sunset. Except for employees
of the village acting in the performance of their duties, no person shall be or remain in the open space at any other time, unless a written
permit allowing occupancy for extended hours is obtained in advance from the village administrator. There is no camping or setting up of
tents allowed on the open space. Automobiles and other conveyances may not be parked, abandoned, or otherwise remain on the open
space parking lots during closed hours, except as follows:
1. During attendance at a function conducted or sponsored by the village.
2. During attendance at a function which has been issued a group use permit pursuant to section 8-3-2 of this chapter.
3. By a village employee acting in the performance of such employee's duties.
4. In areas as otherwise posted.
B. Vehicles in violation of this section shall be subject to being towed away at the owner's expense. (Ord. 2008-36, 8-11-2008)
8-3-4: CLOSURES:
The village board may designate all or any portion of the open space as closed temporarily, permanently, or for an indefinite period of time. Also,
the village administrator may from time to time close all or a portion of the open space to the public or to certain animals, or both, as the village
administrator determines necessary or desirable. A closure by the village administrator may be for a temporary, fixed period of time or for an
indefinite period of time. Within two (2) business days of making a decision to close the open space or any portion thereof, the village
administrator shall send notification of the closure to the village board. The village board may, at a regularly scheduled meeting, ratify, rescind or
modify the closure decision of the village administrator. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to enter any portion of the open space
that is closed. All closures, whether temporary, permanent, or indefinite, and whether by the village administrator or by the board, shall be
posted at the open space subject to the closure. (Ord. 2008-36, 8-11-2008)
8-3-5: ADMINISTRATIVE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. The village administrator is authorized to promulgate administrative rules and regulations that supplement the provisions of this chapter,
when such rules or regulations are determined necessary and appropriate. All persons shall comply with such rules and regulations, which
shall take effect upon their adoption by the village.
B. The village administrator shall, within two (2) business days of promulgating any administrative rules or regulations pursuant to this section,
send notification to the village board of such action. The village board shall, at a regularly scheduled meeting, ratify, rescind or modify the
rules or regulations promulgated by the village administrator.
C. Rules and regulations promulgated by the village administrator, as they may be modified by the village administrator or the village board,
shall remain in full force and effect until specifically rescinded by the village board. (Ord. 2008-36, 8-11-2008)
8-3-6: ENFORCEMENT OF, COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
A. The village administrator and any law enforcement officers acting in the line of duty shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this
chapter and shall have the authority to eject from the open space any person acting in violation of the provisions of this chapter or other
ordinances of the village. Further, the village shall have the authority to deny use of the open space to individuals or groups who refuse to
comply with the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the village.
B. All persons entering the open space shall abide by the rules and regulations of the village, as provided in this chapter and elsewhere in this
code, the rules and regulations promulgated by the village administrator, and the instructions and directions of duly authorized agents,
employees or law enforcement officers of the village acting in their official capacity. (Ord. 2008-36, 8-11-2008)
8-3-7: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
A. Penalty: It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2008-36, 8-11-2008; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 248/548
B. Additional Remedies: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair or limit any civil or criminal prosecution for any violation of this
chapter, or limit or impair the penalties that may be imposed in connection therewith. (Ord. 2008-36, 8-11-2008)
Chapter 4
STORM DITCHES
8-4-1: DEFINITION:
The term "storm ditch" shall mean open storm drainage facilities, or any storm drainage facilities which were open when first constructed,
contained in the right of way of the municipal highway system, as defined in 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-104, or contained in public
drainage easements. (Ord. 75-10, 3-24-1975)
8-4-2: DUTY TO MAINTAIN STORM DITCHES:
A. It shall be the duty of the village to maintain all residential storm ditch facilities located within public rights of way or within public easements
in their original condition to ensure proper drainage.
B. Pursuant to the subsequent provisions of this chapter, it shall be the duty of every property owner and lessee of property in the village with a
storm ditch facility located abutting his property, that has altered or who alters in the future the original condition of such ditch, to maintain the
storm ditch so that the drainage capacity remains equal to or greater than the maximum capacity that the ditch could previously handle.
(Ord. 75-10, 3-24-1975)
8-4-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person, firm or corporation shall obstruct, interfere with or in any way alter any storm ditch in the village of Bloomingdale without first
securing a permit as required herein. Application for such permit shall be made in writing to the village clerk on forms to be supplied by the
village, a copy of which is attached to the ordinance codified herein, marked as exhibit A, and by reference is made a part hereof. (Ord. 75-10,
3-24-1975)
8-4-4: STANDARDS REQUIRED:
Any such improvements must be approved prior to the issuance of a permit by the village engineer on the basis of inspection of plans and on
site inspection by the village. The village engineer shall approve those applications which, in his judgment, will result in a drainage flow at least
as large as that handled by the existing unobstructed storm ditch at each particular site. Any improvement which is substantially identical to the
proposed drainage facility plan attached to the ordinance codified herein, marked as exhibit B and by reference made a part hereof, will be
presumed to be adequate, subject to on site inspections and approval of the plans by the village engineer. (Ord. 75-10, 3-24-1975)
8-4-5: COVENANTS REQUIRED:
In addition to the requirements of sections 8-4-3 and 8-4-4 of this chapter, no permit shall be issued until the applicant has executed an
agreement containing the following terms. Such agreement shall be in consideration for the issuance of permit as provided herein, and shall
provide: a) to the best of the applicant's knowledge and belief, the proposed improvement will provide drainage equal to the storm ditch in its
original condition; b) the applicant will maintain the improved drainage facility so that drainage remains unimpaired at all times; c) if the applicant
ever fails to maintain the ditch, the village may, at the village's option, maintain the facility or remove the improvement and restore the ditch to its
original condition, at the expense of the applicant; d) the applicant will place a copy of these agreements of record with the DuPage County
recorder's office with respect to the property abutting the ditch for which a permit is issued. (Ord. 75-10, 3-24-1975)
8-4-6: FINAL APPROVAL:
Such permit shall be effective only for a period of six (6) months and actual construction of the improvement shall begin within this period. After
such six (6) month period, a new permit shall be required. The completion of any such improvement must be reported to the village for the
purpose of a final inspection by the village engineer to determine that the improvement is as indicated in the application. If so, final approval
shall be granted. If the village engineer determines that the improvement as constructed differs from the plans submitted by the applicant in
such a manner that drainage will be impaired, the applicant shall have thirty (30) days to correct the improvement as indicated by the engineer.
Failure to either correct or restore the ditch to its original condition within said thirty (30) days shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 75-
10, 3-24-1975)
8-4-7: PERMIT FEE:
There shall be a permit fee established by the village, payable at the time of application for the permit. Such fee is for the purpose of recovering
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 249/548
the cost of inspection and approval of the improvement, and is nonrefundable. (Ord. 75-10, 3-24-1975)
8-4-8: PERMITS FOR DITCHES ALTERED PRIOR TO THE EFFECTIVE DATE HEREOF:
Except where a valid, existing contract with the village provides otherwise, all property owners who have previously altered storm ditches
abutting their property shall obtain a permit for such alteration as hereinbefore provided within six (6) months after the effective date hereof. If an
application for such permit is not made within the required time, the village may give notice to such owners that if application is not made within
thirty (30) days of the date of notice, the village may restore the ditch to its original condition in order to facilitate maintenance of free drainage
by the village. (Ord. 75-10, 3-24-1975)
8-4-9: SUBSEQUENT OWNER:
When any subsequent owner of land abutting a storm drainage ditch altered pursuant to this chapter neglects or refuses to maintain the facility,
the village may give notice that the ditch will be restored to its original condition by the village if an agreement as provided in section 8-4-5 of
this chapter is not executed by such owners in thirty (30) days. (Ord. 75-10, 3-24-1975)
8-4-10: VIOLATIONS:
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of this chapter, shall, upon
conviction, be fined a maximum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense. Each day a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute
a separate offense. (Ord. 75-10, 3-24-1975)
Chapter 5
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
8-5-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations, standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for
commercial or industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, Public Act 100-0585.
B. Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This chapter supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict. As to the subject matter hereof, this title is hereby superseded as to any other conflicting sections
thereof, but remains in force for sections that do not conflict.
C. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or
State laws or regulations. (Ord. 2018-30, 7-23-2018)
8-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes
the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support
structure or utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24),
as amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as
amended; or wireless service other than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as
defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 250/548
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed
in the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who
has been delegated the authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance
with section VI.D.1.a.i through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b)
designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village pursuant to a preservation
program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such
certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15")
in width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in public rights-of-way.
PERMIT: A written authorization required by the Village to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose
district located in whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other
emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE: A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for
compatible use. Right-of-way does not include Village-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure
of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed
elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a
utility pole associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated
ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the
connection of power and other services.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution,
lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications
network, including: a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable,
regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facility includes small
wireless facilities. Wireless facility does not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or
b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable
that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs
wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless
services provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made available on a
nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other
existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a
utility pole. (Ord. 2018-30, 7-23-2018)
8-5-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
A. Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
subsection C9 of this section regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated: 1)
in rights-of-way in any zoning district, or 2) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 251/548
B. Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the Village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements:
1. Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the following information to the Village, together with the Village's Small
Wireless Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or
wireless support structure:
a. Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
b. The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or
location where utility poles or structures would be installed. This should include an "as-built" depiction;
c. Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice
Act of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed;
d. The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
e. A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
f. Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge.
g. In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
2. Application Process: The Village shall process applications as follows:
a. Priority: The first completed application shall have priority over applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
b. Existing Utility Pole: An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within
ninety (90) days after the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village
in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five (75) days after the submission of a
completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the
receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial
of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
c. New Utility Pole: An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed
on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within one hundred twenty
(120) days after the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village
in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a
completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after
the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village's
denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
d. Denial: The Village shall deny an application which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions contained in this chapter require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced before the requested
collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the provider.
The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the Village denies an application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after
notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The Village shall approve or deny the revised
application within thirty (30) days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised
application within thirty (30) days of denial shall require the applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees, and
recommencement of the Village's review period.
The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which
may be submitted with the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not
apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless
equipment associated with the small wireless facility.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 252/548
e. Pole Attachment Agreement: Within thirty (30) days after an approved permit, the Village and the applicant shall enter into a Master
Pole Attachment Agreement, provided by the Village. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small wireless facility on a
Municipal utility pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement.
3. Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the Village must determine whether the application is
complete and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must specifically identify the missing information. An
application shall be deemed complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days after all documents,
information and fees specifically enumerated in the Village's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the Village.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information.
4. Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
a. An express written agreement by both the applicant and the Village; or
b. A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes the delay.
5. Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed,
at the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small
wireless facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of
structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the Village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application
and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for
consolidated treatment or that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated
application.
6. Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for
equivalent durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply
with the applicable Village codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
If PA 100-0585 is repealed as provided in section 90 of the Act, renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable Village Code
provisions or regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
7. Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit applications, supporting information and notices to the Village by personal
delivery at the Village's designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means,
including electronic mail.
C. Collocation Requirements And Conditions:
1. Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village may reserve space on Municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village's
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village
reasonably determines that the Municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
2. Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition
and good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its
employees, agents or contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in
accordance with all applicable industry and governmental standards and regulations.
3. No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a
public safety agency's communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations
addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency.
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the
public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement
and resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR
22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675.
The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with
the Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a
public nuisance.
4. Certain Restrictions On Collocation: The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are part of
an electric distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the
pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the Village
utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work
involving the top of the pole.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 253/548
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone"
have the meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers.
5. Compliance With Public Safety Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions or
regulations that concern public safety.
6. Compliance With Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that are generally applicable for
decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a Village ordinance, written
policy adopted by the Village, a comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way,
including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
7. Alternate Placements: With respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the
Village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one
hundred feet (100') of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on
reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as
determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
8. Height Limitations: The Village maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or
wireless support structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
9. Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height in excess of ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply for a special use permit in conformance
with procedures, terms and conditions set forth in the Village of Bloomingdale's zoning ordinance and Zoning Code. A special use permit,
when granted, shall limit the height of any proposed wireless facility to the higher of:
a. Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on
the date the application is submitted to the Village, that is located within three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole
or wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village
may designate which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures
shall control the height limitation for such facility; or
b. Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
10. Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after
issuance of the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work
for a Municipal utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless provider has made
a timely request within sixty (60) days after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time
to complete installation does not exceed three hundred sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void
unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
D. Application Fees: Application fees are imposed as follows:
1. Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on
an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a
consolidated application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
2. Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
3. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
4. The Village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or require any fees or other charges, from a communications service
provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
a. Routine maintenance;
b. The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment specifications for the
replacement of equipment consistent with subsection B1d of this section; or
c. The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
5. Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane
closures.
E. Exceptions To Applicability: Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
1. Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the Village or another unit of local government that is not located
within rights-of-way, or a privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure without the consent of the property owner;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 254/548
2. Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an
affected district that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code;
or
3. Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public
commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier,
public commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's
wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-
108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in
this chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: a) to obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer
cable service or video service or b) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other
than small wireless facilities subject to this chapter.
F. Pre-Existing Agreements: Existing agreements between the Village and wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless
facilities in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018,
remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before
June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply with
this chapter.
A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Village on the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that
the Village makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the
collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two (2) or more years after the effective date of the Act
by notifying the Village that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable
termination provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to
applications submitted to the Village before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this paragraph.
G. Annual Recurring Rate: A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village
utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals: 1) two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year or 2) the actual, direct and reasonable costs
related to the wireless provider's use of space on the Village utility pole.
If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first
day after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date
thereafter.
H. Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned.
The owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying
the wireless provider of the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the
removal of such facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Municipal utility poles or through whatever actions are
provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village.
Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider. (Ord. 2018-30, 7-23-2018)
8-5-4: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Eighteenth Judicial Circuit Court of DuPage County, Illinois shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small
Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on Municipal utility
poles within the right-of-way, the Village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) per year per Municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute. (Ord. 2018-30, 7-23-2018)
8-5-5: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage
resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the Village improvements or right-of-way associated with such
improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this chapter
and the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and
losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any
claims that they may have against the Village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the
theory of liability. (Ord. 2018-30, 7-23-2018)
8-5-6: INSURANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 255/548
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and expense, the following insurance:
A. Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all risks;
B. Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
C. Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the Village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum
protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of Village improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily
injury and property damage.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and
documentation of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirement required by the Village. A wireless provider
that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this
section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to selfinsure
the insurance coverage limits required by the Village. (Ord. 2018-30, 7-23-2018)
Title 9
WATER AND SEWER
Chapter 1
GENERAL WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS; RATES AND CHARGES
9-1-1: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE; APPROVAL AND CONNECTION:
A. Application For Service: No water from the Village water supply shall be turned on for service, nor shall any dwelling unit, building, structure,
or premises be connected to any sanitary sewer until the owner or occupant of such dwelling unit, building, structure, or premises has filed
an application therefor with the Village Finance Director-Treasurer or his designee, and has paid all connection fees and meter fees required
by this chapter. The application shall be made on the form provided by the Village Finance Director-Treasurer or a designee or by such other
means acceptable to the Village. By making application to the Village for the right to connect to and use the water and sewer facilities of the
Village, the applicant agrees to abide by the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances and regulations of the Village
relating to the Village water and sewage disposal service.
B. Application Fee: In addition to other fees included herein to be paid by an applicant to the Village at the time of filing an application for the
right to connect to and use the water or sewer facilities of the Village, such applicant shall be assessed an application fee of ten dollars
($10.00), which fee shall be used to defray the costs of handling the application for connection and for turning on such services. Said
application fee will be assessed and added to the applicant's utility account. (Ord. 2011-19, 5-23-2011)
C. Security Deposit: Each application for connection to the Village water or sewer system shall be assessed a security deposit in the sum of one
hundred dollars ($100.00), which deposit shall be held in the Village Treasury as security for the payment of all future charges made and
assessed to the applicant by the Village for use of the water or sewer facilities of the Village. Said security deposit will be assessed and
added to the applicant's utility account. A security deposit is required for each utility account established on the books and records of the
Village or, in the case of a multi-dwelling unit building, for each dwelling unit serviced by a single water meter. The security deposit will be
refunded to the applicant, without interest, upon the termination of service to the applicant's dwelling unit, building, structure or premises;
provided, that all fees and charges due and owing the Village for water or sewer service have been paid in full to the Village. If any fees or
charges are unpaid and are outstanding at the time of such termination, then the deposit shall be forfeited to the Village, at its option, in
partial satisfaction of the applicant's unpaid account. (Ord. 2012-20, 4-23-2012)
D. Connection To System: Upon receipt of notification from the Finance Director-Treasurer or a designee that the application provided for in this
section has been approved, and that all connection and meter fees have been paid, the Building Commissioner or a designee shall connect
the affected dwelling unit, building, structure, or premises to the waterworks and sewerage system, or to the appropriate part thereof. (Ord.
2011-19, 5-23-2011; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
9-1-2: COMPLIANCE WITH VILLAGE REGULATIONS:
No connection to the waterworks and sewerage system, or any part thereof, shall be made for service to any dwelling unit, building, structure, or
premises in which the plumbing does not comply with the ordinances of the Village; provided, that water may be turned on for construction work
in unfinished buildings, subject to the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances and regulations of the Village concerning
water and sewer services. (Ord. 2011-19, 5-23-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 256/548
9-1-3: CONNECTION FEES:
A. Requirements For Connections: No direct or indirect connections to or use of the Village waterworks or sewerage system shall be made
without the issuance of all necessary permits, the payment of all applicable fees and charges, and only after at least forty eight (48) hours'
notice is given to the Building Department by the permittee. (Ord. 2012-45, 11-26-2012; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
B. Connection Fees Applicable: The connection charges included in this chapter are applicable to all connections made to the Village
waterworks and sewerage system and are intended to reasonably compensate the Village for the cost of construction, expansion and
extension of the works of the system, as authorized by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-150-1, said fees being based on the determination
of the Village Board that the fees set out herein are reasonable calculations of the amount each new user should equitably pay to reimburse
the Village as described above. In addition to other fees included in this chapter, the applicant for water and sewer service shall pay to the
Village, at the time of filing the permit application for water or sewer service, a connection fee in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 2012-45, 11-26-2012)
9-1-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the determination of an applicable connection fee:
BUSINESS, COMMERCIAL, GOVERNMENTAL, INSTITUTIONAL, RELIGIOUS, NOT FOR PROFIT OR INDUSTRIAL CONNECTION: Any
structure intended and zoned for uses other than residential.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT: Any residential structure which does not meet the definition of a "single-family dwelling unit" as defined in
this section. The term multiple-family dwelling unit includes duplexes, townhomes, condominiums and apartments.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT: Any structure intended as a residence of one family, and as properly located within a single-family zoning
district or area also commonly known as a "detached single-family unit". (Ord. 2012-45, 11-26-2012)
9-1-3-2: FEES ESTABLISHED:
Effective for connection fees on or after September 1, 2015, the following shall apply in the determination of an applicable connection fee:
A. Single-family dwelling unit:
1. Water and sewer: Eleven thousand seven hundred forty dollars ($11,740.00) per unit.
2. Water only: One thousand one hundred forty dollars ($1,140.00) per unit.
3. Sewer only: Ten thousand six hundred dollars ($10,600.00) per unit.
B. Multiple-family dwelling unit:
1. Water and sewer: Eight thousand eight hundred five dollars ($8,805.00) per unit.
2. Water only: Eight hundred fifty five dollars ($855.00) per unit.
3. Sewer only: Seven thousand nine hundred fifty dollars ($7,950.00) per unit. (Ord. 2015-39, 8-10-2015)
C. Business, commercial, governmental, institutional, religious, not for profit, or industrial connection: Connection fees for these types of
structures and uses, as determined by classification under the Village Zoning Code, shall be calculated by the Village Engineer or designee
according to standard engineering practices relative to the determination of population equivalents (PE), using comparable water
consumption data, number of employees, land area, and/or the water and sewer demand characteristics of such uses being thereby served.
The water connection fee shall be two hundred eighty five dollars ($285.00) per PE. The sewer connection fee shall be two thousand six
hundred fifty dollars ($2,650.00) per PE.
D. Expansion of business, commercial, governmental, institutional, religious, not for profit, or industrial uses: Connection fees for these types of
structures and uses, as determined by classification under the Village Zoning Code, that are issued a building permit for expansion shall pay
an additional connection fee for the use of the Village waterworks or sewerage system. The connection fee for such an expansion shall be
calculated by the Village Engineer in the same manner as described in subsection C of this section. (Ord. 2015-39, 8-10-2015; amd. Ord.
2017-42, 11-13-2017)
9-1-3-3: DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES/NEW CONNECTION FEES:
A. Disconnections And Reconnections To The Village's Waterworks And Sewerage System Due To Demolition Of Structures: When any type of
structure or use, listed in section 9-1-3-1 of this chapter, that is connected to the Village's waterworks and sewerage system is to be
completely demolished, and all utilities, including, but not limited to, water, sanitary sewer, electric, and natural gas must be physically
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 257/548
exposed by way of excavation, a water and sewer connection fee will be applied, as calculated by the Village Engineer or designee
according to standard engineering practices relative to the determination of population equivalents (PE) using comparable water
consumption data, number of employees, land area, and/or the water and sewer demand characteristics of such uses being thereby served,
due to, and in consideration of one or more of the following factors: (Ord. 2015-39, 8-10-2015; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
1. Increases in nonresidential water connection sizes made necessary by the Village's fire suppression requirements as provided in section
10-10-1 et seq., of this Code;
2. Increases in the residential water connection sizes made necessary by the general increase in the number of fixtures and fixture units in
new homes; (Ord. 2015-39, 8-10-2015)
3. Any overall increase to the demand on the Village's water and/or sewerage system by all new or modified uses as calculated by the
Village Engineer according to standard engineering practices relative to the determination of population equivalents (PE) using
comparable water consumption data, number of employees, land area, and/or the water and sewer demand characteristics of such uses
being thereby served; and (Ord. 2015-39, 8-10-2015; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
4. Various Village water and sewerage capital improvement plans.
The water and sewer connection fee amounts will be assessed according to the provisions of section 9-1-3-2 of this chapter. A minimum
fee of four (4) PE will be assessed to all business, commercial, governmental, institutional, religious, not for profit, or industrial uses. This
requirement for water and sewer connection fees shall not apply to a structure which is to be rebuilt in substantially the same manner after
having been destroyed by fire, wind or some other "act of God". (Ord. 2015-39, 8-10-2015)
B. Other Voluntary Disconnections And Reconnections: A water and sewer connection fee shall not be applied to any type of structure or use,
listed in section 9-1-3-1 of this chapter, for reasons other than what is described in subsection 9-1-3-2D of this chapter, that would require
the disconnection or relocation of the water and/or sanitary sewer service, such as accommodating a driveway or surface parking
rehabilitation or relocation.
C. Disconnection From Other Municipal Systems: Whenever any property owner applies for connection to the Village's water and sewerage
system and, at the time of such application has an existing water and sewer service connection to another Municipal water and sewerage
system, then the water and sewer connection fee required by this section may be waived by the Village Board if the property owner
disconnects from the other Municipal water and sewer system, prior to or at the time of connection to the Village's water and sewer system.
All other applicable fees, charges, or expenses otherwise contained in this Code shall be paid, and the property owner shall comply with the
applicable laws, codes, rules, regulations, and ordinances. (Ord. 2012-45, 11-26-2012)
9-1-4: METERS AND FEES:
A. Meter Fee:
1. In addition to other fees included herein, the applicant for water and sewer service shall pay to the Village, at the time of filing the
application for water or sewer service, a meter fee in accordance with this section. Said meter fee is intended to reimburse the Village for
the cost of a water meter, radio transmitter (MXU) and all ancillary hardware required for the installation and maintenance thereof. Said
water meter, and MXU and hardware are essential to the proper operation of the waterworks and sewerage system, and are the property
of the Village. Meter fees shall be:
Meter Size Meter Fee
5/8" x 3/4" $ 500.00
1" 575.00
11/2" 925.00
2" 2,575.00
3" 3,200.00
4" 5,015.00
(Ord. 2012-20, 4-23-2012)
2. The Building Commissioner or a designee shall determine the required meter size. (Ord. 2012-20, 4-23-2012; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-
2017)
B. Location Of Meter: All water meters, MXUs and related appurtenances related to the measuring of water usage will be located in the interior
of the building being served unless otherwise approved by the Building Commissioner or a designee.
C. Maintenance Requirements: The Village shall be responsible for the maintenance of all water meters and MXUs and, as such, shall have
access, upon providing reasonable notice to the occupant or property owner of the premises, to the water meter and MXU located thereon. If
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 258/548
the occupant or property owner of the premises declines to grant access to the Village for the purpose of maintaining the water meter or
MXU, the Village may suspend, cut off or otherwise terminate water service to the premises upon providing reasonable notice thereof and an
opportunity to discuss the matter with the Director of Public Works, until access is granted. All fees and charges contained herein shall apply
to reinstate water service. (Ord. 2011-19, 5-23-2011; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
9-1-5: TEMPORARY CONNECTIONS:
In those instances in which connections are intended for the purposes of supplying water for use in construction or other similar use on a
temporary basis, the following regulations shall apply:
A. Such connections may be made to three-fourths inch (3/4") diameter (or smaller) lines only and only after filing an application for hydrant
meter rental. (Ord. 2011-19, 5-23-2011)
B. In addition to all other fees provided herein, and in addition to all charges for the consumption of water, the user shall pay to the Village a fee
of twenty dollars ($20.00) to be used to defray the costs of handling the hydrant meter rental application and ten dollars ($10.00) per each
day such temporary connection is in place. As a condition precedent to the issuance of the permit for such temporary connection, the
applicant for the permit shall deposit with the Village the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) to secure the payment of fees related to
such connection. (Ord. 2012-20, 4-23-2012)
C. No such temporary connection may be in place for a period in excess of thirty (30) days. A temporary meter shall be installed in such
connection, and a permanent meter shall be installed as soon thereafter as is reasonably possible.
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to water connections made where the use of the water is primarily intended for purposes of
performing services of direct benefit to the Village and pursuant to a contract with the Village for such services.
E. The user of any temporary meter is responsible for the replacement cost of the meter in the event the meter is lost, stolen or damaged. (Ord.
2011-19, 5-23-2011)
9-1-6: RATES AND CHARGES:
A. Within Corporate Limits:
1. Metered Charges:
a. Effective for water use on or after September 1, 2017, the following charges are established for water and sewerage service:
Residential:
First 2,500 gallons per month or any portion thereof (minimum bill) $20.03 $11.15
Next 9,500 gallons per month (per 1,000 gallons) 8.01 4.46
All over 12,000 gallons per month (per 1,000 gallons) 8.01 0.00
Non-residential:
First 2,500 gallons per month or any portion thereof (minimum bill) 22.43 11.15
All over 2,500 gallons per month (per 1,000 gallons) 8.97 4.46
b. Effective for water use on or after June 1, 2018, the following charges are established for water and sewerage service:
Residential:
First 2,500 gallons per month or any portion thereof (minimum bill) $20.20 $11.15
Next 9,500 gallons per month (per 1,000 gallons) 8.08 4.46
All over 12,000 gallons per month (per 1,000 gallons) 8.08 0.00
Non-residential:
Water Sewer
Water Sewer
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 259/548
First 2,500 gallons per month or any portion thereof (minimum bill) 22.60 11.15
All over 2,500 gallons per month (per 1,000 gallons) 9.04 4.46
(Ord. 2018-24, 6-11-2018)
2. Nonmetered Users; Flat Rate: All nonmetered residential and nonresidential users shall pay a flat rate charge per month for sewer use
that is equivalent to six thousand (6,000) gallons multiplied by the sewer rate in effect at the time the utility bill is rendered. In the event
use of the sewerage facilities is determined by the Village to be in excess of six thousand (6,000) gallons per month, the Village may
require such flat rate user to install metering devices on the water supply or sewer main to measure the amount of service provided. (Ord.
2016-20, 5-9-2016)
3. Multiple Housing Units: All multiple housing unit types, such as duplex buildings, townhouses, apartment buildings and buildings
containing flats shall be charged for services in accordance with the number of units contained in said duplex buildings, townhouses,
apartment buildings and buildings containing flats, at the residential user rate established herein.
B. Outside Corporate Limits: Effective for usage billed on or after April 1, 1999, all users outside the corporate limits of the Village of
Bloomingdale shall be billed one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the rates set forth herein. (Ord. 2011-42, 12-12-2011)
9-1-7: VOLUME OF FLOW:
A. The volume of flow used for computing user charges shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of one
thousand (1,000) gallons. Should a discrepancy exist between a read from a remote reading device and a read from an inside reading
device, the inside reading device shall govern. (Ord. 2011-19, 5-23-2011)
B. If the person, firm, corporation or other entity discharging waste into the public sewers procures some or all potable water from sources other
than the Village waterworks system, all or part of which is discharged into the Village sewers, the person, firm, corporation or other entity
shall install and maintain, at its expense, water meters of a type approved by the Building Commissioner for the purpose of determining the
volume of water obtained from these other sources.
C. Devices for measuring the volume of sewage discharged may be required by the Building Commissioner if these volumes cannot otherwise
be determined from the metered water consumption records.
D. Metering devices for determining the volume of sewage shall be installed, owned, and maintained by the person, firm, corporation or other
entity. Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled, without the written consent of the
Building Commissioner. (Ord. 2011-19, 5-23-2011; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
9-1-8: BILLS FOR SERVICE; LIABILITY; DELINQUENCIES:
A. Rendition Of Bill; Payment Due: It is hereby made the duty of the Finance Director-Treasurer or a designee to render bills for service and for
rates and charges in connection therewith and to collect all monies due thereon. Said bills shall specify separately the amounts due for water
and for sewer service.
1. "Active" Account Billings: Bills for water and/or sewer service shall be prepared and mailed bimonthly succeeding the period for which
service is being billed. Bills shall be due and payable fifteen (15) days after being mailed.
2. "Final" Account Billings: Final bills for water and/or sewer service shall be prepared and mailed at least monthly. Bills shall be due and
payable fifteen (15) days after being mailed.
B. Liability For Service: The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay
for the service on such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the village upon the condition that the owner of the
premises and the occupant and user of the services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the village. (Ord. 2011-19, 5-23-2011)
C. Delinquent Bills And Charges:
1. "Active" Account Billings:
a. In the event the charges for services are not paid within fifteen (15) days after being mailed, such charges shall be deemed and are
hereby declared to be delinquent, and a ten percent (10%) late charge fee, calculated off of and based on the amount of the most
recently rendered bill, shall be added thereto, and a reminder notice shall be mailed notifying the resident that payment for water service
is due. Thereafter, such delinquencies shall constitute liens upon the real estate for which such service is supplied, and the finance
director-treasurer or a designee is hereby authorized and may file sworn statements in the office of the county recorder of deeds
showing such delinquencies, and the filing of such statements shall be deemed notice for the payment of such charges for service.
Water Sewer
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 260/548
b. In the event charges for services are not paid within thirty (30) days after being mailed, a final notice shall be mailed, notifying the
resident of an opportunity to discuss the matter with the village administrator, and that the water service will be discontinued. Said notice
shall specify the date the water service will be shut off, which shall be not less than ten (10) days from the day said final notice was
mailed. A fifteen dollar ($15.00) charge shall be added to the bill if the final notice of delinquency is mailed via certified mail, return
receipt requested.
c. In the event charges for services are not paid within ten (10) days of mailing the aforementioned final notice, further notice of
delinquency shall be served to the property by physically placing notice at the subject property. Said notice shall specify the date the
water service will be discontinued, which shall be no less than one day from the day the notice was physically placed at the subject
property. A forty dollar ($40.00) charge shall be added to the bill if said further notice is physically placed at the subject property.
d. If the charges for services, plus arrearage, plus all late charges and related fees, are not paid in full before the discontinuation date
specified in the notice mentioned in subsection C1c of this section, the water service may be discontinued without further notice. To
reinstate water service during office hours Monday through Friday, there shall be an additional sixty dollar ($60.00) charge, payable in
advance, for reinstating the water service during office hours Monday through Friday. To reinstate water service during hours other than
office hours Monday through Friday, there shall be an additional one hundred twenty dollar ($120.00) charge, payable in advance.
2. "Final" Account Billings: In the event the charges for services are not paid within fifteen (15) days after being mailed, such charges shall
be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and a ten percent (10%) late charge fee, calculated off of and based on the amount
of the most recently rendered bill, shall be added thereto. Thereafter, such delinquencies may constitute liens upon the real estate for
which such service is supplied, and the finance director-treasurer or a designee is hereby authorized and may file sworn statements in the
office of the county recorder of deeds showing such delinquencies, and the filing of such statements shall be deemed notice for the
payment of such charges for service. Further, the finance director-treasurer or a designee is authorized to pursue collection of said
charges in accordance with the village written procedures then in place, up to and including submitting any delinquent accounts to a third
party collection agent for processing and collection. If said collection agent assesses a fee for processing or collection, the village may add
up to one hundred percent (100%) of said fee to the charge for services, plus arrearages, plus all late charges. Said fee is due and
payable in addition to all charges for services, arrearages and late charges previously assessed and added to the account. (Ord. 2012-20,
4-23-2012)
9-1-9: REVENUES:
The village finance director-treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the combined waterworks and sewerage system and all other funds
and monies incident to the operation of such system, as the same may be delivered to him, and deposit the same in a separate fund designated
as the "waterworks and sewerage fund of the village", and the finance director-treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the
manner pursuant to the village home rule powers and as provided in the ordinances and policies of the Village. (Ord. 2011-19, 5-23-2011)
9-1-10: ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING:
A. The Village Finance Director-Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in
which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the combined waterworks and sewerage system, and at
regular annual intervals, he shall cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system. The adequacy of the water and wastewater charges shall be reviewed not less often than annually.
The water and wastewater charges shall be revised periodically as necessary to reflect changes in local capital costs or operation,
maintenance and replacement costs. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the annual audit report shall include the
following: (Ord. 2011-19, 5-23-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
1. Flow data showing total gallons received at the water reclamation facility for the current fiscal year.
2. Water pumpage from all sources delivered to consumers for the current fiscal year.
3. Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year.
4. Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
5. Number of users connected to the system.
6. Number of nonmetered users.
7. A list of users discharging nondomestic and industrial wastes and volume of waste discharged.
B. The users of the wastewater treatment service will be notified annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the
user charges which are attributable to the wastewater operation, maintenance and replacement. (Ord. 2011-19, 5-23-2011)
9-1-11: INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records
of the Village which are applicable to the Village system of user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and
transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any State grant. (Ord. 2011-19, 5-23-2011)
9-1-12: NOTICE OF RATES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 261/548
A copy of this chapter, properly certified by the Village Clerk, shall be filed in the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds and shall be deemed
notice to all owners of real estate of their liability for water and sewer service supplied to any occupant or user of the service of the combined
waterworks and sewerage system of the Village on their properties. (Ord. 2011-19, 5-23-2011)
9-1-13: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Resale Of Water: No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the Village supply to any premises other than that for
which application has been made and the meter installed, except in those cases of an emergency nature wherein the Director of Public
Works has given his specific approval to do so.
B. Tampering With, Damage To System: It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, alter, cover, uncover, bury, obstruct or injure any part
or appurtenance of the Village waterworks and sewerage system including, but not limited to, mains, valves, b-boxes, meters, equipment
and facilities, unless specific authority to do so has been given by the Director of Public Works.
C. Turning On Service Without Authority: It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the Director of Public Works or a designee, to turn on
water and/or connect any dwelling unit, building, structure, or premises to a sanitary sewer unless and until notification from the Village
Finance Director-Treasurer or a designee has been received that the application provided in this chapter has been received and approved
and until all required fees and charges have been paid and required security deposits have been made. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016; amd.
Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
9-1-14: CONNECTION PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating any provision of this chapter pertaining to connecting to the waterworks and sewerage
system shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 2011-19, 5-23-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 2
WATER USE AND SERVICE
9-2-1: JOINT WATERWORKS SYSTEM:
The village hereby determines and elects to acquire and operate jointly with the following units of local government (or such of same which shall
likewise elect):
Village of Addison
City of Aurora
Village of Bensenville
Village of Carol Stream
Village of Clarendon Hills
City of Darien
Village of Downers Grove
County of DuPage
City of Elmhurst
Village of Glen Ellyn
Village of Glendale Heights
Village of Hillsdale
Village of Itasca
Village of Lisle
Village of Lombard
City of Naperville
Village of Oak Brook
City of Oakbrook Terrace
Village of Roselle
Village of Villa Park
City of West Chicago
Village of Westmont
City of Wheaton
Village of Willowbrook
City of Wood Dale
Village of Woodridge
to acquire and operate jointly a waterworks system and a common source of supply of water under the provisions of division 135 of article 11 of
the Illinois municipal code, as amended. The means of such joint enterprise shall be through the DuPage water commission. (Ord. 83-5, 2-28-
1983; amd. 2012 Code)
9-2-2: WATER CONSERVATION AND CONTROL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 262/548
A. Automatic Mechanical Watering Device Restrictions: Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to use the public water supply at any time during the months of May through September for purposes of sprinkling or watering
lawns, gardens and other outside vegetation by means of any automatic mechanical watering device, except:
1. For lots, tracts or parcels of land having odd numbered street addresses, except for units of government, commercial, industrial,
manufacturing, or office buildings, and multi-family residential dwellings, such use of the public water supply will be permitted only on
Monday, Wednesday and Saturday between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
2. For lots, tracts or parcels of land having even numbered street addresses, except for units of government, commercial, industrial,
manufacturing, or office buildings and multi-family residential dwellings, such use of the public water supply will be permitted only on
Tuesday, Thursday and Sunday between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or five o'clock (5:00) P.M. and
nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
3. Notwithstanding subsections A1 and A2 of this section, it shall be lawful to use the public water supply for purposes of sprinkling or
watering newly sodded or seeded lawns, gardens and other outside vegetation by means of automatic mechanical watering devices for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or five o'clock
(5:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., daily, following the issuance of a watering permit as provided in subsection D of this section.
4. For units of government, commercial, industrial, manufacturing or office buildings and multi-family residential buildings, such use of the
public water supply will be permitted only on Tuesday, Thursday and Sunday between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. or five o'clock (5:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
B. Handheld Watering Device Restrictions:
1. The use of handheld watering devices is permitted without restriction for the purposes of sprinkling or watering lawns, gardens and other
outside vegetation or washing cars, except:
a. For hoses left running while unattended or open ended hoses with no device designed to control the flow of water at the point of
discharge.
b. For handheld devices that do not shut off automatically when the hose is set down for any length of time.
2. Usage of the public water supply in the manner described in subsections B1a and B1b of this section shall be unlawful. (Ord. 90-30, 5-14-
1990)
C. Water Shortage Emergencies: Whenever, upon the advice of the Village Administrator and the Director of Public Works, the Village President
determines that a water shortage is imminent, the Village President is hereby authorized to further restrict and limit the utilization of the
public water supply for purposes of sprinkling and watering of lawns, gardens and other outside vegetation, including the power to ban such
utilization for periods not to exceed thirty (30) days until such water shortage has been eliminated.
D. Watering Permit: Upon application duly made to the Village President and after approval by the Building Commissioner, the Village President
is authorized to issue a watering permit for purposes of allowing sprinkling or watering of newly sodded or seeded lawns, gardens and other
outside vegetation between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or five o'clock (5:00) P.M. and nine o'clock
(9:00) P.M., daily, for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date of issuance. (Ord. 90-30, 5-14-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-
42, 11-13-2017)
E. Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, and not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) for the second or succeeding offense. (Ord. 90-30, 5-14-1990; amd. 2012 Code)
9-2-3: GROUNDWATER AS POTABLE WATER PROHIBITED:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
GROUNDWATER: Water within the earth that supplies wells and springs.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns.
POTABLE WATER: Any water used for human or domestic consumption including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing,
swimming, washing dishes, or preparing foods. (Ord. 2005-45, 11-28-2005)
B. Prohibited:
1. Prohibition Near 201 East Lake Street: The use or attempt to use groundwater as a potable water supply by the installation or drilling of
wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited from properties within the corporate limits located within a two thousand five hundred
foot (2,500') radius area of 201 East Lake Street (the property formerly known as the "Shell Property"), and the adjacent Circle Avenue
right-of-way, generally bounded by Sunset Terrace on the north, Glen Ellyn Road on the east, and Freeport Drive on the south, as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 263/548
graphically illustrated in exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein, including the use or attempts to use groundwater at points of
withdrawal by the Village.
2. Prohibition Near 102 East Lake Street: The use or attempt to use groundwater as a potable water supply by the installation or drilling of
wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited from properties within the corporate limits of the Village as listed on exhibit B attached to
the ordinance codified herein, and as graphically illustrated on exhibit C attached to the ordinance codified herein, including the use or
attempts to use groundwater at points of withdrawal by the Village. (Ord. 2013-34, 11-25-2013)
C. Penalty: Any person violating the terms and conditions of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord.
2005-45, 11-28-2005; amd. 2012 Code)
9-2-4: FIRE HYDRANTS:
A. Prohibitions:
1. Unauthorized Use: It shall be unlawful for any person, except members of a Fire Department for the uses and purposes of such
department, and except such Village employees as are specifically authorized in writing by the Director of Public Works, to open any
public fire hydrant or attempt to draw water from the same. (Ord. 72-7, 2-9-1972; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
2. Damage To, Interference With: It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or carelessly break, injure, or interfere with any of the public
fire hydrants in the Village.
3. Obstructing: It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to obstruct the use of any public fire hydrant, or place any material or
vehicle in front thereof, or within fifteen feet (15') thereof at any curb; said distance to be measured from that point on the curb
perpendicular to the exact location of the public fire hydrant. (Ord. 72-7, 2-9-1972)
B. Penalty: Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. (Ord. 72-7, 2-9-1972; amd. 2012 Code)
9-2-5: PRIVATE WATER WELLS:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
GROUNDWATER: Water within the earth that supplies wells and springs.
POTABLE WATER: Any water used for human or domestic consumption including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing,
swimming, washing dishes, or preparing foods.
WATER WELL: An excavation or structure created in the ground by digging, driving, boring or drilling to access groundwater from
underground aquifers.
B. Prohibition On The Construction Or Use Of Private Wells: The use, as a potable water supply, of groundwater from within the corporate limits
of the Village, by the installation or drilling of water wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited, including at points of withdrawal.
C. Exemption: Private wells that were established as of November 1, 2012, are exempt from the usage prohibition contained within subsection
B of this section provided that the well is operated and maintained in compliance with all applicable laws, codes, rules and regulations of the
State of Illinois, the DuPage County Health Department, and the Village. In the event that the private well fails to comply with said applicable
laws, codes, rules and regulations, then the well shall be sealed and capped pursuant to this section.
D. Disconnection Of A Private Well: Immediately, upon the Village's determination that any private water well has been kept or maintained in
violation of this Code, including, but not limited to, any cross connection between the Village's water system and the property owner's private
water well, the Village shall order the disconnection of the property from the Village's water supply system and take any and all other actions
as may be necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the users of the Village's water system, including, disconnecting the
property from the Village's water supply system, in which case the cost thereof shall be charged to the property owner and paid to the Village
by the property owner. Within seven (7) days after any such determination by the Village, the property owner shall cause the private water
well to be sealed and capped by an Illinois licensed water well contractor pursuant to applicable rules and regulations of the DuPage County
Health Department.
E. Amortization: In addition to the disconnection provisions as described in subsection D of this section, any private water well, regardless of
when it was established, shall be sealed and capped when the use of the site changes or the structure that is being served is demolished,
reconstructed and/or expanded to the following degree:
1. The water well would have to be relocated due to demolition;
2. The water well would have to be relocated due to the reconstruction or expansion of the structure;
3. Significant plumbing work would need to be completed in order to provide for the continued adequate potable water service in a manner
that protects life, health and safety.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 264/548
F. Reconnection Of Water Service: Reconnection to the village's water system shall be permitted only upon certification that the well has been
sealed and capped by a licensed water well contractor in accordance with this code and the rules and regulations of the DuPage County
health department, as they exist when the well is sealed and capped, and that there are no other violations of this code and the rules and
regulations of the DuPage County health department with respect to the groundwater supply and/or potable water system on the property.
G. Village Costs: Prior to reconnection, the property owner shall reimburse the village for any and all reasonable costs and expenses, including
reasonable attorney fees and costs of litigation, which the village has incurred or will incur because of a violation of this section. In
addressing any violation of this code and the rules and regulations of the DuPage County health department, the village shall have all legal
and equitable remedies available to it, including specifically the remedies of injunction and specific performance.
H. Penalty: Any person violating the terms and conditions of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord.
2012-46, 11-26-2012)
9-2-6: WATER USE CONSERVATION; FIXTURES AND EQUIPMENT:
A. Plumbing Fixtures: New and replacement plumbing fixtures to be connected to village water service shall be labeled as "WaterSense"
product, as specified by USEPA.
B. Air Conditioning Systems: Air conditioning systems installed in new construction, remodeling or equipment system replacement shall be
closed system type.
C. Lavatories: Lavatories for public use in new construction, remodeling or fixture replacement shall be equipped with metering or self-closing
faucets.
D. Car Washes: Car wash equipment installations in new construction, remodeling or equipment replacement shall be equipped with a water
recycling system.
E. Penalty: Any person violating the terms and conditions of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord.
2016-13, 3-14-2016)
ARTICLE A. CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
9-2A-1: CROSS CONNECTIONS RESTRICTED:
No person, firm or corporation shall establish, or permit to be established or permit to be, any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or
emergency water supply, other than the regular public water supply of the Village, enters the supply or distribution system of the Village, unless
such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply, and method of connection and use of such supply, shall have been approved by the Director
of Public Works or authorized agents and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. (Ord. 90-51, 8-27-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42,
11-13-2017)
9-2A-2: SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS:
It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to cause surveys and investigations to be made of the industrial and other properties served
by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and
investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years, or as often as the Director of Public
Works shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for a period of at least five (5) years. (Ord. 90-51, 8-
27-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
9-2A-3: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
If, in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the Director of Public Works or authorized agents, an approved backflow
prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the Director of Public Works will give notice to the water
customer to install such an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his own expense, install such an approved device at a
location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code and all applicable local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests
made of such approved devices as required by the Illinois Plumbing Code and local regulations. (Ord. 90-51, 8-27-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord.
2017-42, 11-13-2017)
9-2A-4: INSPECTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 265/548
The approved cross connection control device inspector shall have the right to enter, at any reasonable time, any property served by a
connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the Village for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross
connections, and the Director of Public Works or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served
by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the Village for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer
regarding the required cross connection control inspection. On demand, the owner, lessee or occupants of any property so served shall furnish
to the Director of Public Works any information which he may request regarding the piping system or systems, or water use on such property.
The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, in the discretion of the Director of Public Works, be deemed evidence of the presence
of improper connections as provided in this article. (Ord. 90-51, 8-27-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
9-2A-5: VIOLATIONS; DISCONNECTION OF WATER SERVICE; RECONNECT FEE:
The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service
to any property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this article is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary
measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to
such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this article, and
until a reconnection fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) is paid to the Village. Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected
when the Director of Public Works is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such
action shall be followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection. (Ord. 90-51, 8-27-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-
2017)
9-2A-6: RESPONSIBILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS:
The consumer responsible for back siphoned material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system
occurs through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, shall
bear the costs of cleanup of the potable water supply system. (Ord. 90-51, 8-27-1990)
Chapter 3
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
9-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATOR: The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
AMMONIA-NITROGEN (NH3-N): Nitrogen present in the form of ammonia determined by standard laboratory procedures and expressed in
milligrams per liter.
BOD: Biochemical oxygen demand, which is defined as the quantity of oxygen used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five (5)
days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), determined by standard laboratory test procedures and expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 m) outside
the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater and storm, surface, and ground water drainage;
construction of "combined sewers" is prohibited.
COMMERCIAL USER: Places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services, including transit lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments.
CONTROL MANHOLE: A structure specifically designed and constructed for sampling and metering industrial wastes discharged to a public
sewer.
COUNTY: DuPage County, Illinois, its departments and divisions.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The sworn Village official or his duly authorized representative(s), responsible for the enforcement of this
chapter.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
EFFLUENT CRITERIA: See definition of NPDES permit.
FEDERAL ACT: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of
amendments of 1972 (Public Laws 92-500 and 93-243).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 266/548
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with
the collection system.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and
sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL USERS: Establishments engaged in manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of
substance into products.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: The wastewater discharged, permitted to flow, or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business
establishment or process, or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from employee wastes or
wastewater from sanitary conveniences.
INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER: Schools, churches, penal institutions, and users associated with federal, state, and local
governments.
INTERFERENCE: An inhibition or disruption of the sewerage works, treatment processes or operations, or sludge processes use or disposal
which is a cause of or significantly contributes to either a violation of any requirement of the village NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation), or to the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the treatment plant in accordance with the
following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): section 405 of the clean
water act, the solid waste disposal act (SWDA) (including title II more commonly referred to as the resource conservation and recovery act
[RCRA], and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the
clean air act, and the toxic substances control act. A user significantly contributes to such a violation or prevention of sludge use or disposal in
accordance with above cited authorities whenever such user:
A. Discharges a daily pollutant loading in excess of that allowed by federal, state, or local law.
B. Discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature or constituents from the user's average discharge.
C. Knows or has reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would result in the village
sewage treatment plant permit violation or prevent sewage sludge use or disposal in accordance with the above cited authorities as they
apply to the village's selected method of sludge management.
mg/l: Milligrams per liter, a unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent used in reporting the results of water and wastewater
analysis. One milligram per liter (1 mg/l) is 0.001 gram of the constituent in one thousand milliliters (1,000 ml) of water.
MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY: An industrial user of the publicly owned treatment works that:
A. Has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average workday; or
B. Has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the flow carried by the municipal system receiving the waste; or
C. Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under section 307(a) of the federal act; or
D. Is found by the permit issuant authority, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works
receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or
upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the administrator, or, where appropriated by the director, after
enactment of the federal clean water act, to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to section 402 of the federal act.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water.
NONRESIDENTIAL USERS: All users excluding those in the residential class.
ppm: Parts per million by weight.
PASS-THROUGH: The discharge of pollutants through the village sewage treatment plant into navigable waters in quantities or concentrations
which are a cause of or significantly contribute to a violation of any requirements of the village NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation). A user significantly contributes to such permit violation whenever such user:
A. Discharges a daily pollutant loading in excess of that allowed by federal, state, or local law.
B. Discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature and constituents from the user's average discharge.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 267/548
C. Knows or has reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would result in a permit
violation.
D. Knows or has reason to know that the sewage treatment plant is, for any reason, violating its final effluent limitations in its permit and that
such user's discharge, either alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, increases the magnitude or duration of the
sewage treatment plant's violations.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, company, public or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
pH: The logarithm (base-10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in gram molecular weight (moles) per liter.
POPULATION EQUIVALENT: The term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population
equivalent is one hundred (100) gallons of wastewater per day, containing 0.17 pound of BOD and 0.20 pound of suspended solids.
PRETREATMENT: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before discharge into the public sewer.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: Garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in the public sewer, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights of connection and use, and is operated, maintained and
controlled by the village.
RESIDENTIAL, OR COMMERCIAL, OR NONINDUSTRIAL USER: Any user of the sewerage works not classified as an industrial user or
excluded as an industrial user. Each dwelling unit of a residential building having two (2) or more dwelling units shall be considered a separate
and individual single-family residential user. Each commercial establishment in a commercial building having two (2) or more commercial
establishments shall be considered a separate and individual commercial user.
RESIDENTIAL USER: All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, apartments, and permanent multi-family dwellings.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that conveys sewage and polluted industrial wastes, and to which stormwater, surface drainage, groundwater or
unpolluted wastewater is not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE: A combination of the wastewater from residential, commercial, industrial and institutional buildings, together with such groundwater
infiltration and surface water inflow that may be in the sewers.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: An arrangement of devices, structures and processes for treating sewage.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other wastewater, including stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage.
SEWERAGE WORKS: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage and industrial wastes.
SHALL; MAY: "Shall" means mandatory; "may" means permissive.
SLUG: Any discharge of sewage, industrial waste or other wastewater which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow,
exceeds, for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of
flows during normal operation.
STATE ACT: The Illinois environmental protection act1 effective July 1, 1970.
STORM SEWER OR STORM DRAIN: A sewer that conveys stormwater runoff and surface water drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted
industrial wastes.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: That portion of precipitation which is not absorbed into the ground and which is drained from the ground surface to a
natural outlet or watercourse.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastewaters,
the quantity of which is determined by standard laboratory filtering test procedures and referred to as nonfilterable residue expressed in
milligrams per liter.
TTO: Total toxic organics, which means the summation of all quantified values greater than 0.01 milligram per liter for the toxic organic
chemicals commonly called USEPA priority pollutants listed under section 307 of the clean water act, as amended.
UNPOLLUTED WASTEWATER: Wastewater that would not cause any violation of water quality standards of the water pollution regulations of
Illinois when discharged to a natural outlet or watercourse.
VILLAGE: The village of Bloomingdale, DuPage County, Illinois.
WASTEWATER: The wastewater from any domestic, commercial, industrial and institutional uses.
WATER QUALITY STANDARDS: Defined in the water pollution regulations of Illinois.
WATERCOURSE: Any stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, slough, gulch, ditch, reservoir, lake, pond, or other natural
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 268/548
or manmade drainageway in or into which stormwater runoff and surface water drainage flow either continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 92-31,
5-26-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
9-3-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
A. Discharge Of Human And Animal Wastes: It shall be unlawful for any person or place to deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary
manner on public or private property within any area under the jurisdiction of the Village any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste.
B. Treatment Required: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet or watercourse within any area under the jurisdiction of the Village
any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Private Systems: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
D. Connection To Sewer System Required: The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation, or other purposes situated within the Village and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may
in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the Village is hereby required, at their expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein,
and to connect such facilities directly with the public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days
after date of official notice to do so; provided, that said sewer is within one hundred feet (100') (30.5 m) of the property line. (Ord. 92-31, 5-
26-1992)
9-3-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
A. Private Systems Permitted: Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of subsection 9-3-2D of this chapter, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
B. Permit Requirements:
1. Permit Required: Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit
signed by the DuPage County Health Department. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992)
2. Application For Permit: The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the County which the applicant shall
supplement with any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the County Health Department. Copies of
Health Department permits shall be presented to the Village Building Department prior to issuance of building permits. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-
1992; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
3. Inspections: A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction
of the County Health Department. The County and Village shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and in any
event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the County Health Department when the work is ready for final inspection and before any
underground portions are covered. A certificate of final approval from the County Health Department shall be required prior to issuance of
occupancy permits by the Village.
C. Specifications: The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the
State of Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code, the County Health Department, and the State of Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet or watercourse.
D. Maintenance: The owner shall cooperate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in an operational manner at all times and at his
own expense.
E. Availability Of Public Sewer; Connection Required: At such time as a public sanitary sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection 9-3-2D of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to said sewer within
ninety (90) days, and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with sand or gravel.
F. Additional Regulations: No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be
imposed by the building or zoning authority having jurisdiction over said property. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992)
9-3-4: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
A. Permit To Connect:
1. Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public
sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Director of Public Works.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 269/548
2. Classes Of Permits; Applications: There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: a) for residential and commercial service; and
b) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special
form furnished by the Village. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
3. Permit And Inspection Fee: A permit and inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a residential or commercial building sewer permit shall
be paid to the Village at the time the application is filed, in addition to connection or tap-on fees or recapture fees, as applicable. The
industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type
of activity.
4. Conditions Of Permit: A building sewer permit will be issued and a sewer connection shall be allowed only if it can be demonstrated by the
applicant that the downstream sewerage works, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient
reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.
B. Separate Building Sewers: A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except, that where one building
stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an
adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992)
C. Use Of Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination
and test by the Director of Public Works, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
D. Installation And Connection Requirements:
1. The building sewer shall be extra strength vitrified clay pipe and fittings conforming to ASTM specification C700 with compression type
joints conforming to ASTM specification C425, or polyvinyl chloride pipe and fittings conforming to ASTM specifications D-3034 with an
SDR of 26 and compression type joints conforming to ASTM specification D-3212, or other suitable materials as approved by the Director
of Public Works.
2. The building sewer from the main to a distance not less than five feet (5') from the building shall not be less than six inch (6") diameter
size pipe, installed at a minimum invert slope of 0.125 (1/8) inch per foot. A sewer not less than four inch (4") diameter size installed at a
minimum invert slope of 0.25 (1/4) inch per foot shall be constructed from a distance five feet (5') outside of building through the foundation
wall using cast or ductile iron pipe per Building Department requirements. Building sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the Director of Public Works as to trench excavation and backfilling, installation of pipe and fittings and testing.
3. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the branch, if such branch is available, at a suitable location.
If the public sewer is twelve inches (12") in diameter or less, and no properly located Y branch is available, the owner shall, at his
expense, install a branch in the public sewer at the location specified and installation approved by the Director of Public Works. Where the
public sewer is greater than twelve inches (12") in diameter, and no properly located branch is available, a bored hole may be tapped into
the public sewer to receive the building sewer in such a manner that the invert of the building sewer at the point of connection, with the
spigot end being cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of
connection shall be at the same or a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the
connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings shall be used for the connection as approved by the
Director of Public Works. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
4. The building sewer pipe shall be bedded on a layer of gravel or crushed stone conforming to IDOT specifications for CA-6, and shall have
a minimum thickness of four inches (4") under the pipe barrel and two inches (2") under bells. It shall be carefully placed and compacted
around the pipe to provide uniform support to the bottom quadrant. Initial backfill material shall be placed to twelve inches (12") above the
top of the pipe and shall comply with "Illinois Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Construction". (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992)
5. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation above the basement floor, as approved by the
Director of Public Works. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet (3') of any bearing wall which might thereby be
weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sewage carried by such drains shall be lifted by approved mechanical pumping devices and discharged to
the building sewer. No water driven pumps will be approved. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
6. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to
the Village. Prior to any excavation, the plumber or sewer contractor shall notify all public and private utility companies.
E. Prohibited Discharges:
1. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
2. It shall be unlawful to discharge wastewater to any public sanitary sewer except those wastewaters in compliance with standards
promulgated pursuant to the Federal Act, or the State Act, or any rules, regulations, ordinances or standards of the Village. (Ord. 92-31, 5-
26-1992)
F. Control Manhole: Pursuant to section 9-3-5-5 of this chapter, the Director of Public Works may require installation of a control manhole on the
building sewer to observe, sample and measure nondomestic wastewater discharged to the public sewer system.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 270/548
G. Inspections: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Director of Public Works when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be inspected by the Director of Public Works or his representative. (Ord.
92-31, 5-26-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
H. Liability For Costs And Expenses; Bond And Insurance Required:
1. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
2. The person installing the building sewer for said owner shall be a licensed plumber or licensed sewer contractor, and he shall indemnify
the Village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by said installation. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992)
3. Before a building sewer permit is issued, the plumber or sewer contractor shall file with the Building Department a performance indemnity
bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in the form of cash, certified check, or letter of credit, payable to or in favor of the
Village. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
9-3-5: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
9-3-5-1: DISCHARGES INTO SYSTEM:
A. Stormwater, Surface Waters And Medical Wastes:
1. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, unpolluted industrial process waters, or medical wastes to any public sanitary sewer. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-
1992)
2. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the Director of Public
Works. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet approved by the
Director of Public Works, subject to the discharger obtaining an NPDES permit. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42,
11-13-2017)
B. Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
storm or sanitary sewers:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
3. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewerage works.
4. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewerage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers,
etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders, yard wastes, and medical wastes. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992)
C. Restricted Discharges:
1. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to a public sanitary sewer the following described substances, materials, waters, or
wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, that such waters or wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; cause interference with the proper operation of the
sewerage works or pass-through; or otherwise endanger life, limb, or public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to
the acceptability of these wastes, the Director of Public Works will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of such waters or
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials or construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process,
capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by
regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are: (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
a. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
b. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams
per liter (100 mg/L) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees
Fahrenheit (32°F) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (0°C and 65°C). (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992)
c. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor greater
than one horsepower shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of Public Works or his designee. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-
1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
d. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 271/548
e. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Village as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the State,
Federal, or other public agencies having jurisdiction over such discharge to the receiving waters.
f. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Village in compliance with
applicable State or Federal regulations.
g. Materials which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
(2) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
(3) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works.
(4) Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined in section 9-3-1 of this chapter.
h. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements
of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
i. Waters or wastes containing substances exceeding the following maximum concentrations of pollutants:
Pollutant Maximum Concentration (mg/L)
5-day BOD 500
Total suspended solids 500
Total dissolved solids 1,000
Chemical oxygen demand 750
Ammonia-nitrogen 50
Arsenic 0.1
Boron 1.0
Cadmium 1.0
Chromium (hexavalent) 0.25
Chromium (total) 3.0
Copper 4.5
Cyanide 1.0
Fats, oil and grease (FOG) (hexane soluble) 100
Fluoride 15.0
Iron 10.0
Lead 0.7
Manganese 5.0
Mercury 0.0005
Nickel 4.1
Phenols 0.5
Selenium 5.0
Silver 1.0
Total toxic organics 5.0
Zinc 5.0
(Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992)
2. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sanitary sewers, which waters contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection C1 of this section, and/or which are in violation of the standards for
pretreatment provided in chapter 1, EPA Rules and Regulations, subchapter D, Water Programs, part 128 - Pretreatment Standards,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 272/548
Federal Register Volume 38, no. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973, and any amendments thereto, and which, in the judgment of the
Village, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Director of Public Works may: (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42,
11-13-2017)
a. Reject the wastes;
b. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sanitary sewers;
c. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
d. Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of section 9-3-5-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992)
3. If the Director of Public Works permits the pretreatment or equalization of wastewater flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of Public Works and subject to the requirements of all applicable
codes, ordinances, and laws. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
9-3-5-2: EXCESS STRENGTH SURCHARGE:
Users with discharge concentrations of BOD, suspended solids, and/or ammonia-nitrogen in excess of domestic strength up to the maximum
limits listed in subsection 9-3-5-1C1i of this chapter are subject to an excess strength surcharge in addition to the basic charges of the current
rate ordinance. The surcharge rates will be calculated by the Village. Except for special contractual arrangements pursuant to section 9-3-5-8 of
this chapter, discharge concentrations in excess of the maximum limits listed in subsection 9-3-5-1C1i of this chapter are expressly prohibited.
(Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992)
9-3-5-3: INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, they are necessary to the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, and sand, or other harmful ingredients; except,
that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved
by the Director of Public Works and shall be located outside the building as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The
Village shall require each owner of an interceptor device to maintain records of cleaning and maintenance. Said interceptor device and records
shall be available for Village inspection upon request. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
9-3-5-4: PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OR FLOW EQUALIZATION:
Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his expense. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992)
9-3-5-5: CONTROL MANHOLE:
At the discretion of the Director of Public Works, each nonresidential wastewater discharger shall be required to install a control manhole, and
when required by the Village, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying nondomestic wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be at least forty eight inches (48") in diameter, accessibly and safely located,
and constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Village. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be
maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
9-3-5-6: SPILL PREVENTION, CONTAINMENT AND COUNTERMEASURES (SPCC) PLAN:
Any nonresidential user who is determined to have the potential for accidental discharge of toxic materials or other prohibited discharges shall,
within sixty (60) days of written notification by the Director of Public Works, submit to the Village a spill prevention, containment and
countermeasures (SPCC) plan. Such plan shall detail operating procedures and physical facilities necessary to provide protection to the Village
from accidental discharges. The SPCC plan shall include a facility floor plan identifying all connections to the sanitary sewer, including floor
drains, and all relevant storage and process areas. In cases where solvents are used or stored on site, a solvent management plan detailing
solvents used, storage, handling, containment, and disposal must also be included. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-
13-2017)
9-3-5-7: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES:
A. The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and
analyses of waters and wastes to demonstrate compliance with this chapter and any special conditions for discharge established by the
Village or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 273/548
B. The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the Village, but no less than
once per year, the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with
the Federal, State, and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the
Village at such times and in such manner as prescribed by the Village.
C. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the Village. At such times as deemed necessary,
the Village reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis.
D. If the owner's property is being used by another individual or entity whose facilities are discharging industrial waste into the building sewer,
that individual or entity, likewise, is responsible for ensuring that the testing and reporting required by this chapter is carried out and shall
cooperate with the owner in so doing.
E. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the
American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said
control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewerage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and
property. (The particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24 hour composite sample or whether a grab sample or samples should
be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24 hour composite samples, whereas pHs are
determined from periodic grab samples.) (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992)
9-3-5-8: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
No statement contained in this section 9-3-5 shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the Village and
any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Village for treatment, subject to
payment therefor by the industrial concern, provided such payments are in accordance with Village ordinances for the user charge system.
(Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992)
9-3-6: DAMAGE TO, TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this section shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of
disorderly conduct and damaging public property. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992)
9-3-7: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
A. Entry Powers; Limitation On Requested Information:
1. The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of the Village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the
purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Director of
Public Works or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining,
ceramic, paper, or other industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or
waterway or facilities for waste treatment.
2. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection A1 of this section, the Director of Public Works or duly
authorized employees of the Village and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall
have the right, but not the obligation, to observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company.
B. Safety Precautions: The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of the Village, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the Village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes
of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewerage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
9-3-8: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except section 9-3-6 of this chapter, shall be served by the
Village with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. Revocation Of Permit: The Village may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 274/548
C. Penalty: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided in subsection A of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each violation. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
D. Liability For Violations: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the Village by reason of such
violation. (Ord. 92-31, 5-26-1992)
Title 10
BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 1
BUILDING PERMITS, FEES AND BONDS
10-1-1: CLASSIFICATIONS OF FEES FOR PLAN REVIEWS, PERMITS, INSPECTIONS AND ENGINEERING
PROVISIONS:
A. Plan Review Fees:
1. A fee for the review of all plans shall be charged as indicated in section 10-1-2-1 of this chapter. Said plan review fees shall be paid at the
time of submission of plans for review. Said fees shall be nonrefundable and are separate from permit, inspection and engineering
provision fees.
2. The plan review fees for residential construction, new or remodel, for assembly, business, mercantile, educational, institutional, storage,
industrial, miscellaneous and mixed use occupancy construction shall be charged as indicated in section 10-1-2-1 of this chapter. The plan
review fee for all construction, in addition to other applicable fees, shall be based on the estimated cost of construction for the proposed
project. The estimated cost of construction shall, at a minimum, be based on the estimated cost per square foot for the type of
construction and the use contemplated. The latest edition of "RS Means Cost Data Guide" and/or actual project cost contracts provided by
the applicant shall be used by the Building Commissioner in determining the estimated project cost of construction.
3. There shall be charged for an expedited permit plan review, if requested by the permit applicant, one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the
costs of such services as indicated in section 10-1-2-1 of this chapter. Plan review fees shall be paid at the time of submission of plans for
review, and said fees shall be nonrefundable and are separate from permit, inspection and engineering provision fees.
B. Building Permit Fees:
1. The building permit fee shall be charged as indicated in section 10-1-2-1 of this chapter. The building permit fee shall be paid at the time
of permit issuance.
2. The building permit fee shall be based on the estimated cost of construction of the proposed structure or improvement. The estimated
cost of construction shall, at a minimum, be based on the estimated cost per square foot for the type of construction and the use
contemplated. The latest edition of "RS Means Cost Data Guide" and/or actual project cost contracts provided by the applicant shall be
used by the Building Commissioner in determining the estimated project cost of construction.
C. Electrical Permit Fee: The electrical permit fee shall be charged as indicated in section 10-1-2-1 of this chapter. The electrical permit fee shall
be paid at the time of permit issuance.
D. Plumbing Permit Fee: The plumbing permit fee shall be charged as indicated in section 10-1-2-1 of this chapter. The plumbing permit fee
shall be paid at the time of permit issuance.
E. Mechanical Permit Fee: The mechanical permit fee shall be charged as indicated in section 10-1-2-1 of this chapter. The mechanical permit
fee shall be paid at the time of permit issuance.
F. Fire Protection System Permit Fee: The fire protection system permit fee shall be charged as indicated in section 10-1-2-1 of this chapter.
The fire protection system permit fee shall be paid at the time of permit issuance.
G. Final Inspection/Occupancy Inspection Fee:
1. The permit fee for a final inspection, occupancy inspection, business license occupancy inspection, and temporary occupancy inspection
(additional occupancy inspection fee paid at the time of temporary occupancy inspection request) shall be charged as indicated in section
10-1-2-1 of this chapter. Any final inspection/occupancy inspection fee shall be paid at the time of inspection permit issuance prior to the
scheduling of the inspection.
2. If occupancy is requested without all requirements of the permit and applicable village codes and ordinances being complete, a letter of
credit or cash performance bond in the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the cost of the incomplete permit and/or village code
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 275/548
and ordinance requirements shall be posted. This type of occupancy request may result in the issuance of a temporary certificate of
occupancy with an expiration date. Only incomplete permit, code and/or ordinance requirements exterior to the building construction are
eligible for this temporary certificate of occupancy consideration at the discretion of the building commissioner.
H. Elevator, Escalator, Dumbwaiter, Man Lift, Wheelchair Lift, Moving Walk Permit And Semiannual/Annual Inspection Fees:
1. The permit fee for an elevator, escalator, dumbwaiter, man lift, wheelchair lift and moving walk installation shall be charged as indicated in
section 10-1-2-1 of this chapter and shall be paid at the time of permit issuance.
2. The semiannual fee for inspection of elevators, escalators, man lifts and moving walks shall be charged as indicated in section 10-1-2-1 of
this chapter. The semiannual fee for inspection shall be paid upon receipt of an invoice for said services.
3. The annual fee for inspection of wheelchair lifts shall be charged as indicated in section 10-1-2-1 of this chapter. The annual fee for
inspection shall be paid upon receipt of an invoice for said services.
I. Flammable Liquids Storage Tanks And Flammable Liquids Dispensing Device Permit Fees:
1. The flammable liquids storage tank permit fee shall be charged as indicated in section 10-1-2-1 of this chapter. The flammable liquids
storage tank permit fee (installation or removal) shall be paid at the time of permit issuance.
2. The flammable liquids dispensing device permit fee shall be charged as indicated in section 10-1-2-1 of this chapter. The flammable
liquids dispensing device permit fee shall be paid at the time of permit issuance.
J. Miscellaneous Permit Fees: Miscellaneous permit fees shall be charged as indicated in section 10-1-2-1 of this chapter. Miscellaneous permit
fees shall be paid at the time of permit issuance. (Ord. 2009-42, 10-26-2009)
10-1-1-1: PERMIT REGULATIONS, SPECIAL CONDITIONS AND ADDITIONAL FEES:
A. Expiration Of Permit And Extensions: If, after a permit required by this chapter has been granted and the operations called for by such permit
have not begun within six (6) months after issuance, such permit shall be void, and no operations shall begin until an extended permit,
executed by the owner or the owner's agent, is issued by the village. A fee of twenty five percent (25%) of the original cost of the permit shall
be charged for a permit extension. An extended permit shall be valid for six (6) months following the date of expiration of the original permit
and must be applied for within ten (10) days after the expiration of the original permit. Only two (2) extensions shall be granted. If work has
not begun within eighteen (18) months after the date of issuance of the original permit, all rights under the permit shall terminate by
limitation.
B. Completion Of Permitted Work: If, after a permit required by this chapter has been granted and the operations called for by such permit have
not been completed within twelve (12) months after issuance, such permit shall be void, and no operations shall continue until an extended
permit, executed by the owner or the owner's agent, is issued by the village. A fee of one hundred percent (100%) of the original cost of the
permit shall be charged for this permit extension. All rights under the initial permit shall terminate by limitation. At the discretion of the
building commissioner, updated village codes and ordinances, if more stringent than those existing at the time of initial permit issuance, may
be applied to the extended permit request.
C. Transfer Of Permit: Transfer of a permit issued to someone other than the original applicant shall require fifteen percent (15%) of the original
permit fee to be paid at the time of the transfer permit issuance.
D. Work Commenced Without Required Permit: A penalty of one hundred percent (100%) of the normal permit fee shall be payable by the
permit applicant where work for which a permit is required has commenced before the permit is issued.
E. Not Ready Fee And Reinspection Callback Fee:
1. If an inspection is scheduled and the work to be inspected is not ready for inspection or the inspector is unable to access the premises for
inspection, a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be required to be paid prior to any further inspections.
2. Where more than two (2) inspections of the same work for the same Code violation(s) is required, a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
will be required to be paid prior to the third or each subsequent inspection(s).
F. Reimbursement For Use Of Professional Or Technical Consultant Services: If the purchase and/or use of professional or technical services is
required by the Village to perform, complete or resolve permit processing, inspections or plan review activity, the permit applicant shall
reimburse the Village for one hundred ten percent (110%) of the costs of such services. The Village will notify the permit applicant, in writing,
prior to engaging professional or technical assistance. Payment shall be due upon invoice issuance by the Village. (Ord. 2009-42, 10-26-
2009)
10-1-1-2: BONDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 276/548
A. Applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), executed by a surety
company authorized to transact business in the State of Illinois as surety on the bond, with the applicant as principal on the bond and the
Village as beneficiary, and that of consumers dealing with the applicant, conditioned that the applicant shall faithfully perform the duties and
in all things comply with this Code pertaining to the applied for building permit without causing damage to surrounding private or public
properties. The bond shall remain in effect until the issuance of final inspection approval and/or final certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 2012-32,
7-23-2012)
B. Prior to the issuance of a permit, additional refundable bonds, if required, shall be deposited with the Village to assure compliance with
applicable Village codes and ordinances. (Ord. 2009-42, 10-26-2009)
10-1-1-3: ENGINEERING PROVISIONS:
A. Site Plan Review:
1. Residential: The plan review fee for new residential construction shall be charged as indicated in section 10-1-2-2 of this chapter. No fee
is required for remodeling or expansion. The residential site plan review fee shall be paid at the time of permit issuance.
2. Commercial: The plan review fee for commercial construction, including remodeling or expansion, shall be charged as indicated in section
10-1-2-2 of this chapter. The commercial site plan review fee shall be paid at the time of permit issuance. (Ord. 2009-42, 10-26-2009)
B. Stormwater Management Certification Fee: The stormwater management certification fee shall be charged as provided in section 10-1-2-2 of
this chapter. The stormwater management certification fee shall be paid at the time of permit issuance. (Ord. 2012-32, 7-23-2012)
C. Underground Utility Service Permit Fee: The underground utility service permit fee shall be charged as indicated in section 10-1-2-2 of this
chapter. The underground utility service permit fee shall be paid at the time of permit issuance. (Ord. 2009-42, 10-26-2009)
D. Plan And Specifications Review Fee: The plan and specifications review fee shall be charged as indicated in section 10-1-2-2 of this chapter.
The plan and specifications review fee shall be paid at the time of execution of the subdivision plat by the Village President or upon approval
of the plan by the Village Engineer, whichever comes first. (Ord. 2009-42, 10-26-2009; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
E. Public And Quasi-Public Improvement Inspection Fee:
1. The public and quasi-public improvement (see definitions in subsection E2 of this section) inspection fee shall be charged as provided in
section 10-1-2-2 of this chapter. The public and quasi-public improvement inspection fee shall be paid at one of the following times, at the
discretion of the Village:
a. Upon the execution of the subdivision plat by the Village President and Village Clerk; (Ord. 2012-32, 7-23-2012)
b. Upon approval of a site development plan or permit by the Village Engineer;
c. Upon approval of a building permit by the Building Commissioner, with the concurrence of the Village Engineer. (Ord. 2012-32, 7-23-
2012; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
2. For the purpose of this subsection, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection E2:
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch, water main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway,
street lighting, planting strip, off street parking area or other facility for which the Village may ultimately assume the responsibility for
maintenance and operation.
QUASI-PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch, water drain, roadway, parkway, sidewalk,
pedestrianway, nonstandard street lighting, planting strip, landscaping, off street parking area or other facility for which a private entity
such as, but not limited to, a homeowners' association, may ultimately assume responsibility for maintenance and operation. (Ord. 2012-
32, 7-23-2012)
10-1-1-4: DOCUMENT SALES AND REPRODUCTION COSTS:
Document sales and reproduction costs shall be charged in an amount comparable to the Village's actual cost of reproduction, as established
by the Village from time to time. (Ord. 2009-42, 10-26-2009; amd. 2012 Code)
10-1-2: FEE SCHEDULES:
The schedule of fees to be charged in connection with the administration and enforcement of the Village building ordinances, subdivision codes
and other related development ordinances and standards is as established in sections 10-1-2-1, 10-1-2-2 and 10-1-2-3 of this chapter. (Ord.
2009-42, 10-26-2009; amd. 2012 Code)
10-1-2-1: BUILDING DEPARTMENT PLAN REVIEW AND INSPECTION PERMIT SCHEDULE OF FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 277/548
Permit/Fee Classification Fee
Plan review:
Residential $50.00 base fee
Plus $0.10 per sq. ft.
Multi-family residential $50.00 base fee, first unit of each building
$50.00 each additional unit of each building
Plus $0.10 per square foot per building
Commercial $150.00 base fee
Plus $0.004 x construction cost from $1.00 to $1,000,000.00
Plus $0.0005 x construction cost from $1,000,000.00 and over
Expedited plan review fees 150% of cost of plan review per this fee schedule
Building:
Residential/commercial $50.00 base fee, first $1,000.00 of construction cost or fraction
thereof
Plus $8.00 for every $1,000.00 or fraction thereof after the first
$1,000.00 for the first 100,000 sq. ft. of construction
Thereafter, $4.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof
Includes all miscellaneous residential work
Electrical:
Electrical $50.00 - 100 ampere service, single-phase
$10.00 each additional 100 amperes in size
$50.00 - 100 ampere service, 3-phase
$15.00 for each additional 100 amperes in size
$50.00 for alteration of existing service
Circuit fees $3.00, 1-pole 15A./20A. circuit
$4.00, 2-pole circuit
$5.00, 3-pole circuit
Motor fees $1.00 per horsepower
Transformer fees $1.00 per KVA
Outdoor lighting standard fee $10.00 per fixture
All work not covered in this fee schedule $50.00 per required inspection
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 278/548
Mechanical/HVAC:
Residential/commercial $50.00 base fee
Plus $10.00 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area or portion thereof
Fire protection system:
Residential/commercial $50.00 base fee
Plus $2.00 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area or portion thereof
Plumbing:
Plan review:
Residential $50.00 base fee
Plus $10.00 for each fixture or rough opening
Commercial $75.00 base fee
Plus $10.00 for each fixture or rough opening
Inspection:
Residential $50.00 base fee
Plus $10.00 for each fixture or rough opening
Commercial $75.00 base fee
Plus $10.00 for each fixture or rough opening
All work not covered in this fee schedule, reinspections or extra
inspections shall be charged $50.00 per required inspection
Residential water heater inspections $50.00
Final inspection/certificate of occupancy:
Residential $75.00, final inspection/occupancy
$75.00, new construction/remodeling
Commercial $75.00, final inspection/occupancy
Residential/commercial $75.00, temporary occupancy - all uses
Elevator, escalator, dumbwaiter, man lift/persons with disabilities lift/moving walk, semiannual/annual inspections:
Residential/commercial $200.00 per unit
Semiannual inspection fee $75.00 per unit for elevators, escalators, man lifts and moving
walks
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 279/548
Annual inspection fee $75.00 per unit for persons with disabilities lifts
Flammable liquids storage tanks and flammable liquids dispensing devices:
Storage tanks $50.00 base fee
Plus $10.00 for each 2,000 gallons or portion thereof storage
capacity
Dispensing devices $50.00 base fee
Plus $5.00 for each hose
Miscellaneous:
Demolition $100.00 base fee
Plus $5.00 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Construction trailer $50.00 base fee
(Ord. 2009-42, 10-26-2009; amd. 2012 Code)
10-1-2-2: ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT PLAN REVIEW AND INSPECTION PERMIT SCHEDULE OF FEES:
Permit/Fee Classification Fee
Application fees:
Stormwater certification $75.00
General certification $50.00
Letter of permission $25.00
Ditch fill permits:
Plan review fee $25.00 per site
Inspection fee $25.00 per site
Engineering plan review:
Single-family $350.00 per acre with a $350.00 minimum
Multi-family $200.00 per unit with a $400.00 minimum
Commercial $350.00 per acre with a $250.00 minimum
Stormwater management (section 10-12-1 of this title):
Site runoff conveyance, storage $650.00 per acre-foot, with a $250.00 minimum
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 280/548
Floodplain, wetland or buffers $500.00 per acre ($500.00 minimum, plus direct costs of consultants, and a Village
administrative fee)
Underground utility service inspection fees:
Water service $50.00 per inspection
Sewer service $50.00 per inspection
Soil erosion control and Best Management Practices for water quality:
SESC $50.00 per site
If part of a general certification $25.00 per site
BMPs $250.00 per site
If part of a general certification $25.00 per site
Landscape inspection fee $100.00
Plus 1.5% of approved estimate of construction
Connection to storm sewer:
Permit fee $10.00 per connection
Inspection fee $40.00 per connection; includes sump pumps and downspouts
Plan and specification review $100.00
Plus 1% of approved engineer's estimate of construction
Public and quasi-public improvement
inspection
$150.00
Plus 1.5% of approved engineer's estimate of construction
Sewer/water (connection fees/water
meters)
See title 9, chapter 1 of this Code
(Ord. 2012-32, 7-23-2012)
10-1-2-3: MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION AND PERMIT SCHEDULE OF FEES:
Permit/Fee Classification Fee
Property amendment, variation, special use, exception applications:
Single- to two-family $ 50.00
General residence to multiple dwelling residence 75.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 281/548
Business district 100.00
Commercial, industrial, manufacturing and business park 150.00
PUD of 250 acres or more 500.00
Tree preservation/removal permit fee (as required by this code) 100.00
Sign permit fees:
Sign installation (illuminated or nonilluminated) 100.00
Temporary sign/banner (per 15 day period - maximum 4 per year) 50.00
Commercial real estate sign installation 100.00
Recreational ramp fee 100.00
Not ready fee and reinspection callback fee 100.00
Temporary land use fee (per day) 25.00
(Ord. 2009-42, 10-26-2009; amd. 2012 Code)
10-1-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, occupy, maintain, or conduct business in any building or structure in the village in
violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter or without payment of the fees set forth herein. (Ord. 2009-42, 10-26-2009)
10-1-4: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty in the amount of one hundred
percent (100%) of any unpaid fee required by this chapter and, in addition, the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each day of
violation. (Ord. 2009-42, 10-26-2009; amd. 2012 Code)
Chapter 2
BUILDING CODE
10-2-1: VILLAGE BUILDING CODE:
The building code of the village (hereinafter referred to as the "building code") shall hereafter be identical with the provisions of that publication
entitled international building code, 2015 edition, except as amended in section 10-2-2 of this chapter. Three (3) copies of the building code are
on file in the office of the village clerk and are available for public inspection at all times during regular business hours as provided by law. (Ord.
2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-2-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Additions, insertions, changes and deletions to sections of the building code are hereby revised as follows:
Subsection 101.1 Title (page 1, Name Of Jurisdiction, insert in second line)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 282/548
Insert: village of Bloomingdale.
Subsection 101.2 Scope, Exception (page 1, add to sixth line in exception)
Add: ...as amended and adopted by the village of Bloomingdale.
Subsection 101.4.1 Gas (page 1, referenced codes, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: All installations of gas piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories shall conform to the current
provisions of the village of Bloomingdale fuel gas code.
Subsection 101.4.2 Mechanical (page 1, referenced codes, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: All installations, alterations, repairs and replacement of mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings
and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and refrigeration systems and other energy-related systems
shall be in accordance with the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale mechanical code.
Subsection 101.4.3 Plumbing (page 1, referenced codes, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: The design, installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings
and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system, shall conform to the
current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale plumbing code.
Subsection 101.4.4 Property Maintenance (page 1, referenced codes, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: The maintenance of existing structures and premises; equipment and facilities; light, ventilation, space heating, sanitation, life and
fire safety hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants; and occupancy of existing premises and structures shall conform
to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale property maintenance code.
Subsection 101.4.5 Fire Prevention (page 1, referenced codes, add to end of subsection)
Add: The current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale fire prevention code.
Subsection 101.4.6 Energy (page 1, referenced codes, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: The design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency shall conform to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale
energy conservation code.
Subsection 101.4.7 Existing Buildings (page 1, referenced codes, delete subsection and insert - formerly section 3412)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition to and relocation of existing buildings shall conform to the sections of the building
code and any other applicable village of Bloomingdale code and ordinance requirements for new construction.
Subsection 101.4.8 Zoning (page 1, add new subsection)
Add: Zoning - The restrictions of the zoning regulations and all amendments thereto, shall not be deemed to be modified by any provision
of this code; and such restrictions shall be controlling except insofar as this code imposes greater restrictions by reason of the type of
construction used, in which case the provisions of this code shall control.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 283/548
Subsection 101.4.9 Legislative (page 1, add new subsection)
Add: Legislative - If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is, or shall be for any reason held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The village board hereby declares that it would have
passed this ordinance, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared invalid.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
Section 103 Department Of Building Safety (page 2, delete section and insert)
Delete: Entire section.
Insert: The building department shall be charged with the enforcement of the building code, and the building commissioner shall be known
as the building official.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
Subsection 105.2 Work Exempt From Permits (pages 3 and 4, permits section - Work Exempt From Permits, delete exemptions)
Delete: All building permit exemptions, except where approved by the building commissioner.
Delete: All electrical permit exemptions, except where approved by the building commissioner.
Delete: All gas permit exemptions, except where approved by the building commissioner.
Delete: All mechanical permit exemptions, except where approved by the building commissioner.
Delete: All plumbing permit exemptions, except where approved by the building commissioner.
Subsection 105.5 Permit Expiration (page 5, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Permit expiration shall be governed by title 10, chapter 1 of the village code.
Subsection 107.1 Submittal Documents (page 6, Submittal Documents, add to ninth line)
Add: Unless otherwise specified by the building commissioner, each application shall be accompanied by a minimum of six (6) sets of
drawings and specifications signed and sealed by an architect licensed to practice architecture as provided by the Illinois architectural act,
or by a structural engineer licensed to practice structural engineering as provided by the Illinois architectural act, or by the owner of said
proposed building when it is determined to be sufficient by the building commissioner. To obtain a permit, the owner or his representative
shall file an application on a form furnished by the village for that purpose, and shall include a signed statement indicating the proposed
occupancy or use of all parts of the building and the estimated construction cost thereof.
Subsection 110.3.10 Final Occupancy Inspection (page 8, Final Occupancy Inspection, add to third line)
Add: No building or part thereof, hereafter erected, or the structure of which shall hereafter be altered or repaired and for which erection,
alteration or repair a permit shall be required as provided in sections 105 and 106 of this building code, and no existing building in which
the character of the occupancy is to be changed, shall be occupied or used in whole or in part until a certificate of occupancy shall have
been issued by the building commissioner. Such certificate shall carry the certification of the building commissioner that said building or
part thereof conforms to the requirements of this and any other applicable village ordinance, and that said building, construction,
alteration, or repair has been substantially completed in accordance with the plans and specifications upon which the building permit
required by this ordinance was issued.
Subsection 111.1.2 Change In Use (page 9, Occupancy Certificate Requirements, add to subsection 111.1)
Add: No building upon which a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued shall be used for a different classification or group
occupancy until a certificate of occupancy for such different use shall have been issued by the building commissioner; provided, however,
that no certificate of occupancy shall be issued in any event unless the occupancy or use of the building complies with the zoning law.
"Change of occupancy" is not intended to mean change of tenant or proprietor, provided the new tenant is to occupy the building for a
purpose, which would not involve its reclassification into a different occupancy group.
Subsection 111.2 Certificate Issued (page 9, delete Occupancy Certificate Requirements)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 284/548
Delete: Requirements numbered 7, 9, 10, and 11.
Subsection 111.3 Temporary Occupancy (page 9, Occupancy Certificate Requirements, add to subsection)
Add: A cash performance bond, or other method of surety acceptable to the building commissioner, shall be posted in the amount of one
hundred and ten percent (110%) of the cost of the remaining work necessary for a certificate of occupancy to be issued. Completion of the
incomplete work and the issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be secured prior to the expiration date of the temporary occupancy.
Failure to comply with this occupancy requirement shall constitute a violation of this ordinance which shall be punishable as provided in
section 1-4-1 of the village code.
Section 113 Board Of Appeals (page 9, Board Of Appeals, delete section and insert)
Delete: Entire section.
Insert: That any person, firm or corporation shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building commissioner to the planning and
zoning commission. Means of appeal shall follow requirements set forth in title 11, chapter 3, section 7 of the village code.
Subsection 116.1 Conditions (page 10, add to subsection)
Add: If any building or other structure has become dangerous to life, limb or property or to the public because of structural defects,
deterioration, or fire damage, or has become so unsanitary or out of repair as to render the same unsafe and unfit for occupancy or human
habitation, it shall be deemed a nuisance, and the building commissioner, if and when he shall find any such conditions exist, shall declare
such building or other structure a nuisance and shall condemn the same, and no person, firm or corporation shall occupy, rent, lease or
use such building or other structure with or without compensation. The violations of the provisions of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor, and any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation thereof shall be subject to a fine in the manner and amount as
provided by section 1-4-1 of the village code.
Subsection R116.1.1 Reconstruction Or Removal (page 10, add to subsection)
Add: Rebuilding, restoration or removal must begin within five (5) days of condemnation notice. Any building or other structure condemned
and declared to be a nuisance by the building commissioner under the provisions of subsection 116.1 hereof shall be put in a safe or
sanitary condition or be demolished and removed. Within five (5) days after the service of notice in the manner and form provided in
subsections 116.3 and 116.4 hereof, to make such building or other structure safe or sanitary or to remove and demolish the same, the
owner or owners or the party or parties interested therein shall proceed to begin the work of making said building or other structure safe or
sanitary or the work of removing and demolishing the same and shall prosecute said work continuously without unnecessary delay to a
completion thereof; provided, however, that should the owner or person in possession of said building or structure deem himself aggrieved
by any direction to repair or remove such building or other structure alleged by the building commissioner to be a nuisance, he shall, within
a period of five (5) days after the giving of the notice as required by subsection 116.3 and subsection 116.4 hereof, have the right to
appeal in writing, from the judgement of the building commissioner to the planning and zoning commission, which commission shall make
the investigation and report its findings to the village board. If in the judgement of the village board upon consideration of the report of the
planning and zoning commission, said building or other structure is unsafe or unsanitary and should be declared a nuisance, it shall order
the owner or other person in possession thereof to forthwith begin the work of making safe or sanitary or of demolishing and removing
said building or other structure. After demolition of a structure, the premises shall be maintained free from all unsafe and hazardous
conditions. Removal of all underground and in-ground structures is required. Restoration of established grades is required to insure proper
lot drainage in compliance with village engineering regulations.
Subsection R116.3.1 Notice - Noncompliance With Notice Of Unsafe Buildings (page 10, add to subsection)
Add: Upon the failure of the owners of said building or other structure, or the party or parties interested therein, within five (5) days after
the service of the notice provided in subsection 116.3 hereof or upon the failure to comply with an order of the village board as provided in
subsection 116.1 hereof to begin the work of making safe or sanitary or of removing and demolishing said building or other structure, or
upon the failure of the owner or owners or the party or parties interested therein after beginning such work to proceed continuously without
unnecessary delay to completion thereof, the village may take any action at law or in equity to restrain the use of such structure, or may
proceed against the owner or any person in possession of the same in a penal action before the 18th circuit court for the violation of the
provisions of this ordinance. The village may also, in its discretion, cause the said structure to be secured to prevent access, cleaned of
unsanitary conditions detrimental to the public or removed in its entirety, after the failure, within the time hereinabove provided for, to
restore the same to a safe condition.
Subsection 116.4 Method Of Service (page 10, add to subsection)
Add: Whenever the building commissioner shall under the provision of subsection 116.1 hereof, condemn and declare any building or
other structure to be a nuisance because of dangerous or unsanitary condition thereof, he shall cause a notice in writing to be served
upon the owner or owners, upon the tenant and occupant thereof, if any, and upon the holder or holders of any encumbrances or general
tax lien thereof, if any, ordering and directing said building or other structure to be put in a safe or sanitary condition or be demolished and
removed. Service of said notice may be effected by personal delivery thereof, or by mailing a copy thereof by registered mail directed to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 285/548
the person involved, at his last address known to the building commissioner or available to him upon examination of the records of the
county treasurer and county clerk of DuPage County, Illinois, and by posting a copy thereof upon the premises subject to such
condemnation.
Subsection 116.5 Restoration (page 10, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Reconstruction To Conform To Requirements For New Structures If Cost Exceeds 50% Of Value. A structure declared unsafe by
duly constituted authority may be restored to safe condition as provided in section 116.1 hereof; provided that if the damage or cost of
reconstruction or restoration is in excess of 50% of the value of the structure if reconstructed or restored, it shall be made to conform, with
respect to materials and type of construction, to the requirements for new structures as provided for in this ordinance.
Section 117 Climatic And Geographic Design Criteria (page 10 - new section insert)
Insert: Ground snow load - 30 pounds per square foot.
Wind speed - See IBC code section 1609.
Seismic design category - See IBC code section 1613.
Damage from weathering - Severe.
Frost line depth - Forty-two (42) inches.
Damage from termites - Moderate to heavy.
Damage from decay - Slight to moderate.
Winter design temperature - -4 degrees F.
Ice shield underlayment required - Yes.
Flood hazards - See current FIRM and FBFM maps.
Air freezing index - 1700 cumulative degree days below 32 degrees F.
Section 202 Definitions (page 12, Area, Building, change first sentence)
Change: "The area included within the surrounding exterior walls..." to "The gross area including surrounding exterior walls..." in the first
sentence.
Subsection 306.3 Factory Industrial F-2 Low-Hazard Occupancy (page 43, add to end of subsection)
Add: All factory industrial uses and occupancy classified as group F-2 shall be classified as group F-1. Requirements of this ordinance and
code for factory industrial group F-1 shall apply to all factory industrial use and occupancy.
Section 310.5.1 Care Facilities Within A Dwelling (page 50, delete)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Subsection 311.3 Low-Hazard Storage, Group S-2 (page 51, add to end of subsection)
Add: All storage uses and occupancy classified as group S-2 shall be classified as group S-1. Requirements of this ordinance and code
for storage group S-1 shall apply to all storage use and occupancy.
Subsection 403.1 High-Rise Buildings, Applicability (page 57, delete applicability paragraph and insert new paragraph)
Delete: Entire paragraph.
Insert: The provisions of this section shall apply to buildings having occupied floors located more than 55 feet (16,764 mm) or four or more
stories above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 286/548
Subsection 403.3 High-Rise Buildings, Automatic Sprinkler System (page 58, delete exceptions)
Delete: Exception nos. 1 and 2.
Subsection 403.3.1 Number Of Sprinkler Risers And System Design (page 58, add to end of subsection)
Add: All sprinkler systems shall be on a two (2) source water supply as approved by the building official and the local fire protection district
having jurisdiction. Shut-off valves and water flow indicating devices shall be provided for each floor in compliance with fire protection
district specifications.
Subsection 403.5.4 Smoke Proof Enclosures (page 60, change height requirements)
Change: Floor surface height change from 75 feet (22,860 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access to 55 feet
(16,764 mm) shall be a smoke proof enclosure pressurized stairway in accordance with section 909.20.4.
Subsection 404.3 Atriums - Automatic Sprinkler Protection, Exceptions (page 60, delete exceptions)
Delete: Exception nos. 1 and 2.
Subsection 405.7.2 Smoke Proof Enclosure (page 62, change height requirements)
Change: serving floor levels from more than 30 feet (9,144 mm) below the level of exit discharge to any exit below the level of exit
discharge serving such floor levels shall be a smoke proof enclosure and pressurized stairway in accordance with section 909.20.4.
Subsection 406.3.1 Motor-Vehicle-Related Occupancies, Classification (page 62, add to end of subsection)
Add: All motor vehicle related occupancies are to be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system and fire alarm system.
Subsection 406.3.3 Garage Floor Surfaces (page 62, add to end of subsection)
Add: Garage and carport floor surfaces shall be improved with portland cement concrete, 3,500 psi, not less than four (4) inches (102 mm)
in thickness over compacted crushed aggregate base not less than four (4) inches (102 mm) in thickness. Vapor barrier minimum 6 mil in
thickness shall be installed where living area exists above garage space. Slab reinforcement is required. Garage floor surfaces attached to
habitable areas shall be provided with a six (6) inch (153 mm) concrete gas curb, above the floor surface, adjacent to the habitable area
portion of the building. If building foundation extends the minimum six (6) inches above floor surface, it can serve as the gas curb.
Subsection 406.3.4 Separation (page 62, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Private attached garages shall be separated from all occupancies by a U.L. listed two (2) hour rated fire-resistive ceiling assembly
and wall assembly. Any openings or penetrations through a rated assembly shall be made in compliance with chapter 7.
Subsection 406.3.5 Carports, Exception (page 62, delete exception)
Delete: Exception.
Section 419 Live/Work Units (pages 91 and 92, delete section)
Delete: Entire section.
Section 504/Tables 504.3 and 504.4 General Height And Area Limitations (pages 97, 98, 99 and 100, delete construction types)
Delete: Type Of Construction - Type III, Type IV And Type V Construction. These types of construction are not permitted. Any reference to
these construction types elsewhere in the building code are hereby deleted and not permitted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 287/548
Section 506/Table 506.2 Building Area (pages 101, 102, 103 and 104 delete construction types)
Delete: Type Of Construction - Type III, Type IV And Type V Construction. These types of construction are not permitted. Any reference to
these construction types elsewhere in the building code are hereby deleted and not permitted.
Subsection 507.3 Non-Sprinklered, One Story (page 105, delete subsection)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Subsection 507.3 Sprinklered, One Story (page 105, delete exceptions)
Delete: Exception nos. 1 and 2.
Section 601/Table 601 Fire-Resistance Rating Requirements For Building Elements (page 113 delete construction types)
Delete: Type Of Construction - Type III, Type IV And Type V Construction. These types of construction are not permitted. Any reference to
these construction types elsewhere in the building code are hereby deleted and not permitted.
Subsection 602.3 Construction Classification Type III (page 113, delete subsection)
Delete: Delete entire subsection. Type III construction is not permitted. Any reference to construction type III elsewhere in the building
code is hereby deleted and not permitted.
Subsection 602.4 Construction Classification Type IV (pages 113 and 114, delete subsection)
Delete: Delete entire subsection. Type IV construction is not permitted. Any reference to construction type IV elsewhere in the building
code is hereby deleted and not permitted.
Subsection 602.5 Construction Classification Type V (page 115, delete subsection)
Delete: Entire subsection. Type V construction is not permitted. Any reference to construction type V elsewhere in the building code is
hereby deleted and not permitted.
Subsection 603.1 Allowable Materials (pages 115 and 116, delete or change listed material applications)
Change: Applications 1.1 and 1.2 - Fire-retardant-treated wood shall not be permitted in any non-bearing partitions or non-bearing exterior
walls.
Change: Exception 14 - Blocking such as for handrails, millwork, cabinets, and window and door frames shall be fire-retardant-treated
lumber or plywood.
Subsection 708.1 General (page 128, Fire Partitions, add to end of subsection)
Add: 6. Walls separating tenant spaces in the same building in all occupancies.
Subsection 708.3 Fire-Resistance Rating (page 128, change hour rating, delete exceptions)
Change: "Fire partitions shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. If an entire building is fully protected by a fire sprinkler
system, fire partitions shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour."
Delete: Exception nos. 1 and 2.
Subsection 710.3 Smoke Partitions - Fire-Resistance Rating (page 130, change rating requirement)
Change: All smoke partitions shall have a minimum fire-resistance rating of one (1) hour.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 288/548
Subsection 711.2.4.3 Horizontal Assemblies - Fire-Resistance Rating, Dwelling Units And Sleeping Units (page 131, delete exception)
Delete: Entire exception.
Subsection 718.2.1 Fire-Blocking Materials (page 148, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Fire-blocking shall consist of 2-inch (51 mm) nominal lumber or two thicknesses of 1-inch (25 mm) nominal lumber with broken lap
joints, one thickness of .625 (5/8) inch (15.8 mm) fire code gypsum board, or batts or blankets of mineral wool, mineral fiber or other
approved materials installed in such a manner as to be securely retained in place.
Subsection 718.2.1.2 Fire-Blocking - Un-Faced Fiberglass (page 148, delete subsection)
Delete: Entire subsection (not permitted).
Subsection 718.3.1 Draft-Stopping Materials (page 149, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Draft-stopping materials shall not be less than one thickness of .625 (5/8) inch (15.8 mm) fire code gypsum board or other approved
materials adequately supported. The integrity of draft-stops shall be maintained.
Subsection [F]903.2.1.1 Group A-1 (page 211, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group A-1 occupancies.
Subsection [F]903.2.1.2 Group A-2 (page 211, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group A-2 occupancies.
Subsection [F]903.2.1.3 Group A-3 (page 211, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group A-3 occupancies.
Subsection [F]903.2.1.4 Group A-4 (page 211, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group A-4 occupancies.
Subsection [F]903.2.1.5 Group A-5 (page 211, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group A-5 occupancies.
Subsection [F]903.2.2 Ambulatory Care Facilities (page 211, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 289/548
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all ambulatory care facility occupancies.
Subsection [F]903.2.3 Group E (page 211, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group E occupancies.
Subsection [F]903.2.4 Group F-1 (page 211, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group F-1 occupancies.
Subsection [F]903.2.6 Group I (page 212, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group I occupancies.
Subsection [F]903.2.7 Group M (page 212, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group M occupancies.
Subsection [F]903.2.9 Group S-1 (page 213, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group S-1 occupancies.
Subsection [F]903.2.9.1 Repair Garages (page 213, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings used as repair garages.
Subsection [F]903.2.9.2 Bulk Storage Of Tires (page 213, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Buildings and structures utilized for the storage of tires shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with section 903.3.1.1.
Subsection [F]903.2.10 Group S-2 Enclosed Parking Garages (page 213, delete entire subsection)
Delete: Entire subsection (all S-2 uses to comply with S-1).
Subsection [F]903.2.10.1 Commercial Parking Garages (page 213, delete fourth line)
Delete: Entire fourth line ... "where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (464 square meters)."
Subsection [F]903.2.11 Specific Building Areas And Hazards (pages 213 and 214, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 290/548
Insert: In all occupancies an automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed for specific building design or hazards in all locations.
Subsection [F]903.2.13 Group B (page 214, add new subsection)
Add: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group B occupancies.
Subsection [F]903.3.5.1 Domestic Services (page 215, add to end of subsection, line 4)
Add: Domestic water services and associated shut-off valves shall be separate from the water supply for the automatic sprinkler system
and shall be separated on the outside of the building or structure being served with separate identified exterior shut-off valves, unless
otherwise approved by the building official.
Subsection [F]903.3.6 Hose Threads (page 215, add to end of subsection, line 3)
Add: The size of all fire department connections shall be two and one-half inches (21/2") in diameter and shall be national standard thread.
Subsection [F]903.4 Sprinkler System Supervision And Alarms (page 216, delete exceptions 2 and 3)
Delete: Entire exception nos. 2 and 3.
Subsection [F]903.4.1 Monitoring (page 216, delete first paragraph of subsection and insert new paragraph)
Delete: First paragraph of subsection, exceptions to remain.
Insert: Alarm, supervisory and trouble signals shall be distinctly different and automatically transmitted to central stations or remote
supervisory stations by a one way private radio alarm system complying with chapter 26 of the 2010 edition of NFPA 72 which manually or
automatically retransmit trouble, supervisory and full fire alarm signals to DuPage Public Safety Communications (Du-Comm).
Subsection [F]903.6 Speculative Buildings (page 216, Automatic Sprinkler Systems, insert new subsection)
Insert: [F]903.6 Speculative Buildings. Automatic sprinklers in speculative buildings shall be hydraulically designed for the storage of class
IV commodities, as defined by NFPA 231, to the maximum available storage height in the building. The maximum available storage height
in a building is the clear height dimension between the finished floor and the median point between the bottom of the high and low points
of the structural members supporting the roof assembly.
Subsection [F]905.3 Standpipe Systems - Required Installations (page 219, Required Installations, add to end of subsection, line 5)
Add: The size of all standpipe fire department connections shall be two and one-half inches (21/2") in diameter and shall be national
standard thread. Fire communication jacks shall be provided at all fire department standpipe connection locations and shall be tied into the
building communication system. Siamese connections for standpipe and sprinkler systems shall be located no further than ten feet (10')
apart and shall be readily accessible. Public water supplies, when used for the hydraulic design of sprinkler and standpipe systems, shall
be adjusted to ninety percent (90%) of the actual recorded test results. At stairwells, hose connections are required at both sides of
stairwell doors, one connection inside the stairwell and one connection outside the stairwell.
Subsection [F]905.3.1 Standpipe Systems - Height (page 219, Height, change building height regulations on lines 3 and 5, and delete all
exceptions)
Change: "30 feet (9144 mm) above" to "15 feet (4572 mm) above" and change "30 feet (9144 mm) below" to "15 feet (4572 mm) below".
Delete: All exceptions.
Subsection [F]905.7 Cabinets (pages 220 and 221, Standpipe Systems, add to end of paragraph)
Add: Cabinets as required shall be mounted on the floor side of stairwell doors.
Subsection [F]907.2.1 Group A (page 223, delete subsection and insert)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 291/548
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group A occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the fire
protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection [F]907.2.2 Group B (page 224, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group B occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the fire
protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection [F]907.2.3 Group E (page 224, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group E occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the fire
protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection [F]907.2.4 Group F (page 224, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group F occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the fire
protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection [F]907.2.5 Group H (page 224, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group H occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the fire
protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection [F]907.2.6 Group I (pages 224 and 225, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group I occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the fire
protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection [F]907.2.7 Group M (pages 225 and 226, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group M occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the fire
protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection [F]907.2.8 Group R-1 (page 226, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group R-1 occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the
fire protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection [F]907.2.9 Group R-2 (pages 226 and 227, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group R-2 occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the
fire protection district having jurisdiction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 292/548
Subsection [F]907.2.10 Group R-4 (page 227, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group R-4 occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the
fire protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection [F]907.2.24 Group S (page 230, insert new subsection)
Insert: A fire alarm system in group S occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the fire
protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection [F]907.6.4 Zones (page 233, insert new subsection)
Insert: Subsection [F]907.6.4.3 Zone Disconnects. All fire alarm systems shall be capable of zoned disconnects at the control panel.
Disconnection of a zone shall cause the fire alarm system to transmit a trouble signal.
Subsection [F]907.6.6 Monitoring (pages 233 and 234, delete part of subsection and insert)
Delete: First paragraph of subsection, exceptions to remain.
Insert: Alarm, supervisory and trouble signals shall be distinctly different and automatically transmitted to central stations or remote
supervisory stations by a one way private radio alarm system complying with chapter 26 of the 2010 edition of NFPA 72, which manually
or automatically retransmit trouble, supervisory and full fire alarm signals to DuPage Public Safety Communications (Du-Comm).
Subsection [F]910.1 General (page 243, Smoke And Heat Vents, add to end of subsection paragraph, and delete exception)
Add: Buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with a mechanical smoke exhaust system in all occupancies of groups A, B, E, F, H, I,
M and S having more than 30,000 square feet (2787 square meters) in floor area. Such systems shall provide three to four air exchanges
per hour.
Delete: All exceptions at discretion of the code official.
Subsection [F]910.2.1 Groups F-1 And S-1 (page 243, Smoke And Heat Vents - Where Required, delete entire subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Groups F And S. Buildings and portions thereof used as a group F, H or S occupancy having less than 30,000 square feet (2787
square meters) in floor area.
Subsection 1006.2.1 Common Path Of Egress Travel - Exceptions (page 254, add exception)
Add: 3. The length of common path of egress travel in occupancies in group B, F and S shall not be more than 100 feet (30 480 mm) for
common truck docks which are provided and separated from other occupancies by 1-hour fire-resistance rated assemblies, and that are
entirely protected throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1.
Subsection 1009.1 Accessible Means Of Egress Required (page 257, add to end of subsection and delete exception no. 1)
Add: Accessible means of egress shall comply with the current version of the Illinois accessibility code.
Delete: Exception no. 1.
Subsection 1010.1.2.1 Direction Of Swing (page 261, change occupant load in line 2, second paragraph)
Change: "occupant load of 50 or more" to "occupant load of more than 10 for interior doors only. All exterior doors, doors accessing an exit
enclosure, and all doors serving group H occupancy shall swing in the direction of egress travel and be provided with an approved
automatic door closer."
Subsection 1010.1.9.3 Locks And Latches (page 264, delete numbers 2, 2.1 and 2.2)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 293/548
Delete: Numbers 2, 2.1 and 2.2.
Subsection 1015.4 Guards - Opening Limitations (page 275, add to end of subsection)
Add: Required guards shall not be constructed with horizontal rails or other ornamental pattern that results in a ladder effect.
Subsection 1006.2.1 Egress Base On Occupant Load And Common Path Of Egress Travel Distance (page 253, add to fourth line of subsection)
Add: Where shared truck dock facilities are provided in group B, S and F in multiple tenant buildings, two exits or exit access doorways
from the space shall be provided.
Table 1020.1 Corridor Fire-Resistance Rating (page 279, change hour ratings in table)
Change: All occupancies without sprinkler systems are "not permitted" in the third column in coordination with section 903.2, which as
amended by this ordinance requires all buildings to be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section
903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 where allowed.
Change: All occupancies with sprinkler systems are to have 1 hour corridor fire-resistance rating in the fourth column, with no reductions
in fire-resistance allowed. Exit corridors serving fire-resistance rated stairwells shall have the same fire-resistance rating as the stairwell.
Subsection 1023.11 Smoke-Proof Enclosures (page 282, change "and" to "and pressurized stairway" in line 3)
Change: "and pressurized stairway" in line 3.
Subsection 1101.2 Design (page 295, add to subsection)
Add: Compliance with the current edition of the Illinois accessibility code is required.
Subsection 1301.1.1 Energy Efficiency - Criteria (page 317, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Buildings shall be designed and constructed in accordance with title 10, chapter 8 of the village code (Energy Conservation Code).
Subsection 1807.1.3 Rubble Stone Foundation Walls (page 422, delete subsection)
Delete: Entire subsection. Rubble stone foundation walls are not permitted. Any other reference to rubble stone foundation walls in the
building code is hereby deleted.
Subsection 1807.1.4 Permanent Wood Foundation Systems (page 422, delete subsection)
Delete: Entire subsection. Permanent wood foundation systems are not permitted. Any other reference to permanent wood foundation
systems in the building code is hereby deleted.
Subsection 1807.1.5 Concrete And Masonry Foundation Walls (page 423, delete reference to masonry foundations)
Delete: Reference to masonry foundations. Masonry foundation walls are not permitted. Any other reference to masonry foundation walls
in the building code is hereby deleted.
Subsection 1809.9 Masonry-Unit Footings (page 432, delete subsection)
Delete: Entire subsection. Masonry-unit footings are not permitted. Any other reference to masonry-unit footings in the building code is
hereby deleted.
Subsection 1809.12 Timber Footings (page 432, delete subsection)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 294/548
Delete: Entire subsection. Timber footings are not permitted. Any other reference to timber footings in the building code is hereby deleted.
Subsection 1907.2 Minimum Slab Provisions Under-Floor Space (page 451, insert new subsection)
Insert: Crawl space or under-floor surface shall be finished with an approved vapor barrier minimum 6-mil thick (0.15 mm) under a slurry
coat of concrete, minimum two (2) inches (51 mm) in thickness.
Chapter 27 Electrical subsection 2701.1 Scope (page 567, add to subsection)
Add: The design and installation of electrical systems shall conform to title 10, chapter 4 of the village code (Electrical Code).
Chapter 28 Mechanical Systems subsection 2801.1 Scope (page 569, add to subsection)
Add: The design and installation of mechanical systems shall conform to title 10, chapter 6 of the village code (Mechanical Code).
Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems (pages 571 through 574, delete chapter and insert)
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: The design and installation of plumbing systems shall conform to title 10, chapter 5 of the village code (Plumbing Code).
Subsection 3001.2 Reference Standards (page 575, add to end of paragraph)
Add: Elevator and conveying systems shall be in conformance with state of Illinois section 140 of the elevator safety and regulation act
(225 ILCS 312/140), and the administrative rules (41 Ill. adm. code 1000). Elevator and conveying systems shall comply with following
standards and guidelines:
1. Safety code for elevators and escalators (ASME A17.1-2010/CSA B44-10) and performance-based safety code for elevators and
escalators (ASME A17.7-2007/CSA B44.7-07).
2. Guide for inspection of elevators, escalators, and moving walks (ASME A17.2-2010).
3. Safety code for existing elevators and escalators (ASME A17.3-2005) upgrades required by section 35(h) of the elevator safety act
shall be completed in the time frame specified therein.
4. Safety standard for platform lifts and stairway chairlifts (ASME A18.1-2008).
5. Standard for the qualification of elevator inspectors (ASME QEI-1-2010).
6. Automated people mover standard (ASCE 21-05), part 1, 2005/2006.
7. Automated people mover standards (ANSI/ASCE/T&DI 21.2-08), parts 2, 3 and 4, 2008.
Subsection 3002.4 Elevator Car To Accommodate Ambulance Stretcher (page 575, add to end of subsection)
Add: In all buildings and structures serviced by an elevator, at least one elevator shall be provided for fire department emergency access
to all floors. The minimum size of an elevator car shall be 54-inch by 82-inch (1371 mm by 2082 mm) and shall be equipped with a sideopening
door, versus a center-opening door, to accommodate the maneuvering of a 24-inch by 84-inch (610 mm by 2134 mm) ambulance
stretcher in the horizontal open position.
Subsection [F]3003.4 Emergency Signal Devices And Lighting (page 576, insert new subsection)
Insert: 3003.4 Emergency Signal Devices And Lighting. New and existing passenger elevator cars and freight elevator cars which are
located in buildings shall provide in the car the following emergency signal devices operable from within the car in accordance with
sections 211 and 204.7 of the most current edition of ANSI A17.1:
1. An electric signal bell not less than six (6) inches in diameter located inside the building and audible outside the elevator hoist-way.
Only one bell is required for a group or bank of elevators if operable from all cars in the group or bank, with battery back-up power.
2. An emergency call button in each elevator car shall be connected to the central telephone emergency exchange system of the fire
protection district having jurisdiction. Call buttons (red in color) are to be installed no more than forty-eight (48) inches in height as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 295/548
measured to the highest operable part that is essential to the basic operation of the call button.
3. All emergency lighting in elevator cars, hoistways and related equipment rooms shall be equipped with a battery back-up system in
compliance with current village electrical code regulations.
Subsection [F]3003.5 Smoke Detectors (page 576, Elevators And Conveying Systems, insert new subsection)
Insert: 3003.5 Smoke Detectors. Smoke detectors shall be installed in each elevator lobby at each floor, machine room and shaft/hoistway
in accordance with NFPA 72E chapter 4. The activation of a smoke detector in any elevator lobby, machine room or shaft/hoist-way
other than at the designated level shall cause all cars in all groups that serve that lobby to return non-stop to the designated level.
Subsection 3102.1 Membrane Structures - General (page 583, add to subsection)
Add: The installation of a membrane structure requires village building permit.
Subsection 3103.1 Temporary Structures - General (page 584, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: The provisions of this section shall apply to structures erected for a period of less than 180 days. Structures to be in place for more
than 180 days shall be considered permanent structures. Tents and other membrane structures shall comply with all applicable
requirements of this code and any other applicable codes and ordinances of the village of Bloomingdale and the Bloomingdale fire
protection district. A village permit is required for any installation.
Subsection 3105.1 Awnings And Canopies - General (page 586, add to subsection)
Add: The installation of awnings and canopies shall also conform to title 11, chapter 14 of the village code (sign code).
Section 3106 Marquees (page 586, delete section)
Delete: Entire section. Marquees are not permitted.
Section 3107 Signs (page 586, add to section)
Add: The installation of signs shall conform to title 11, chapter 14 of the village code (sign code).
Section 3109.1 Swimming Pool Enclosures And Safety Devices - General (pages 587 and 588, add to section)
Add: The installation of private and public swimming pools, swimming pool enclosures and safety devices shall also conform to title 10,
chapter 11 of the village code (pool code).
Chapter 32 Encroachments Into The Public Right-Of-Way (page 589, delete section)
Delete: Entire section. Encroachments into the public right-of-way are not permitted.
Chapter 35 Referenced Standards (pages 614 and 615, insert NFPA standards)
Insert: All referenced NFPA standards shall refer to the most current standards available.
Chapter 36 Driveways And Off-Street Parking Areas (new chapter)
Subsection 3601 Driveway/Off-Street Parking Area Permit. No person shall hereafter alter, construct, build or establish any driveway or offstreet
parking area without first obtaining a village permit.
Subsection 3602 Application For Permit. Application for a permit for a driveway and/or off-street parking area installation or improvement
shall be filed with the building commissioner and shall contain the name and address of the person making the application and the name
and address of the owner of the property to be served by such driveway and/or off-street parking installation or improvement, together with
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 296/548
the proposed location and plans and specifications for such work.
Subsection 3603 Approval By Building Commissioner. No permit shall be issued for any work to be done in any way about the
construction of any driveway or off-street parking area installation or improvement until the plans and specifications therefor have been
submitted to and approved by the building commissioner.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-2-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful to design, construct, alter, move, enlarge, replace, repair, demolish, remove, use or maintain
property, buildings or structures in the village in violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter.
B. Application To Existing Permits: This chapter shall not be construed to extend to or affect any construction activity for which a permit was
issued or application for permit filed prior to the effective date hereof, except for fees not yet due or payable, unless the building
commissioner determines that any provision of this chapter or the regulations incorporated herein by reference should be applied for
reasons of public health and safety. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-2-4: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a penalty in the amount of one hundred
percent (100%) of any unpaid fee and, in addition, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
Chapter 3
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE
10-3-1: VILLAGE RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE:
The One- and Two-Family and Multiple-Family (Townhouse) Dwelling Code of the Village (hereinafter referred to as the "Residential Building
Code") shall hereinafter be identical with the provisions of that publication entitled International Residential Code, 2015 edition, and which is
incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth, except as amended in section 10-3-2 of this chapter. Three (3) copies of the International
Residential Code are on file in the Office of the Village Clerk and are available for public inspection at all times during regular business hours as
provided by law. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-3-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Additions, insertions, changes and deletions to sections of the Residential Building Code are hereby revised as follows:
Subsection R101.1 Title (Page 1, Name Of Jurisdiction, insert second line)
Insert: village of Bloomingdale.
Subsection R101.2 Scope (Page 1, addition to ninth line)
Add: Attached dwelling units shall be vertically separated by a U.L. listed three (3) hour rated fire resistive masonry wall assembly with an
STC rating of not less than 50 with a separate means of egress.
Subsection R101.4 Zoning (Page 1, new subsection)
Add: Zoning - The restrictions of the village code zoning regulations and all amendments thereto, shall not be deemed to be modified by
any provision of this code; and such restrictions shall be controlling except insofar as this code imposes greater restrictions by reason of
the type of construction used, in which case the provisions of this code shall control.
Subsection R101.5 Legislative (Page 1, new subsection)
Add: Legislative - If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is, or shall be for any reason held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The village board hereby declares that it would have
adopted this ordinance, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared invalid.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 297/548
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
Subsection R103.1 Department Of Building Safety (Page 2, Creation Of Enforcement Agency)
Change: The building department shall be charged with the enforcement of the residential building code, and the building commissioner
shall be known as the building official.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
Subsection R105.2 Work Exempt From Permits (Page 3, building section)
Delete: Building permit exemptions 1 through 10.
Subsection R105.5 Permit Expiration (Page 5)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Permit expiration shall be governed by title 10, chapter 1 of the village code.
Subsection R106.1 Construction Documents (Page 5, Submittal Documents, add to ninth line)
Insert: Unless otherwise specified by the building commissioner, each application shall be accompanied by a minimum of four sets of
drawings and specifications signed and sealed by an architect licensed to practice architecture as provided by the Illinois architectural act,
or by a structural engineer licensed to practice structural engineering as provided by the Illinois architectural act, or by the owner of said
proposed building when it is determined to be sufficient by the building commissioner. To obtain a permit, the owner or his representative
shall file an application on a form furnished by the village for that purpose, and shall include a signed statement indicating the proposed
occupancy or use of all parts of the building and the estimated construction cost thereof.
Subsection R110.1.1 Final Occupancy Inspection (Page 8, Final Occupancy Inspection, new subsection)
Insert: Unlawful To Occupy Building Before Final Inspection. No building or part thereof, hereafter erected, or the structure of which shall
hereafter be altered or repaired and for which erection, alteration or repair a permit shall be required as provided in sections R105 and
R106 of this chapter, and no existing building in which the character of the occupancy is to be changed, shall be occupied or used in
whole or in part until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the building commissioner. Such certificate shall carry the
certification of the building commissioner that said building or part thereof conforms to the requirements of this code and any other
applicable village ordinance, and that said building, construction, alteration, or repair has been substantially completed in accordance with
the plans and specifications upon which the building permit required by this chapter was issued.
Subsection R110.2 Change In Use (Page 8, Occupancy Certificate Requirements, replace entire subsection)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Certificate Of Occupancy Required For Change In Use Or Occupancy. No building upon which a certificate of occupancy shall have
been issued shall be used for a different classification or group occupancy until a certificate of occupancy for such different use shall have
been issued by the building commissioner; provided, however, that no certificate of occupancy shall be issued in any event unless the
occupancy or use of the building complies with title 11 (Zoning Regulations) of the village code. "Change of occupancy" is not intended to
mean change of tenant or proprietor, provided the new tenant is to occupy the building for a purpose, which would not involve its
reclassification into a different occupancy group.
Subsection R110.4 Temporary Occupancy (Page 8, Occupancy Certificate Requirements, addition to subsection)
Insert: A cash performance bond, or other method of surety acceptable to the building commissioner, shall be posted in the amount of one
hundred and ten percent (110%) of the cost of the remaining work necessary for a certificate of occupancy to be issued. Completion of the
incomplete work and the issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be secured prior to the expiration date of the temporary occupancy.
Failure to comply with this occupancy requirement shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of the village code.
Section R112 Appeals (Pages 8 and 9, Board Of Appeals)
Delete: Entire section.
Insert: That any person, firm or corporation shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building commissioner to the planning and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 298/548
zoning commission. Means of appeal shall follow requirements set forth in section 11-3-7 (Appeals) of the village code.
Section R115 Building Condemnation (Page 9, Condemnation Order, new subsection)
Insert: R115.1 Existing Buildings Contrary To Code. If the building commissioner finds that any building or other structure has become
dangerous to life, limb or property or to the public because of structural defects, deterioration, or fire damage, or has become so
unsanitary or out of repair as to render the same unsafe and unfit for occupancy or human habitation, it shall be deemed a nuisance, and
the building commissioner shall declare such building or other structure a nuisance and shall condemn the same, and no person, firm or
corporation shall occupy, rent, lease or use such building or other structure. The violations of the provisions of this section shall constitute
a misdemeanor, and any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation thereof shall be subject to a fine in the manner and amount
as provided by section 1-4-1 of the village code.
Subsection R115.2 Rebuilding Or Removal After Notice Of Condemnation (Page 9, Rebuilding Or Removal, new subsection)
Insert: R115.2 Rebuilding or removal must begin within five (5) days of condemnation notice. Any building or other structure condemned
and declared to be a nuisance by the building commissioner under the provisions of subsection 115.1 of this chapter shall be put in a safe
or sanitary condition or be demolished and removed. Within five (5) days after the service of notice in the manner and form provided in
subsection 115.3 and 115.4 of this chapter, to make such building or other structure safe or sanitary or to remove and demolish the same,
the owner or owners or the party or parties interested therein shall proceed to begin the work of making said building or other structure
safe or sanitary or the work of removing and demolishing the same and shall prosecute said work continuously without unnecessary delay
to completion; provided, however, that should the owner or person in possession of said building or structure deem himself aggrieved by
any direction to repair or remove such building or other structure alleged by the building commissioner to be a nuisance, he shall, within a
period of five (5) days after the giving of the notice as required by subsection 115.3 and subsection 115.4 in this chapter, have the right to
appeal in writing, from the judgment of the building commissioner to the planning and zoning commission, which shall make the
investigation and report its findings to the village board. If in the judgment of the village board upon consideration of the report of the
planning and zoning commission, said building or other structure is unsafe or unsanitary and should be declared a nuisance, it shall order
the owner or other person in possession of the building or structure to begin the work of making safe or sanitary or of demolishing and
removing said building or other structure.
Subsection R115.3 Notification Of Unsafe Buildings (Page 9, Notice Of Unsafe Buildings, new subsection)
Insert: R115.3 Building Commissioner To Give Notice In Writing On Unsafe Buildings - Method Of Service. Whenever the building
commissioner shall under the provision of subsection 115.1 in this chapter, condemn and declare any building or other structure to be a
nuisance because of dangerous or unsanitary condition, he shall cause a notice in writing to be served upon the owner or owners, upon
the tenant and occupant, if any, and upon the holder or holders of any encumbrances or general tax lien, if any, ordering and directing said
building or other structure to be put in a safe or sanitary condition or be demolished and removed. Service of said notice may be effected
by personal delivery, or by mailing a copy by registered mail directed to the person involved, at his last address known to the building
commissioner or available to him upon examination of the property tax records of DuPage County, Illinois, and by posting a copy upon the
premises subject to such condemnation.
Subsection R115.4 Noncompliance With Notification Of Unsafe Buildings (Page 9, Noncompliance Procedures, new subsection)
Insert: R115.4 Procedures Upon Failure To Comply After Notice. Upon the failure of the owners of said building or other structure, or the
party or parties interested therein, within five (5) days after the service of the notice provided in subsection 115.3 of this chapter or upon
the failure to comply with an order of the village board as provided in subsection 115.2 of this chapter to begin the work of making safe or
sanitary or of removing and demolishing said building or other structure, or upon the failure of the owner or owners or the party or parties
of interest after beginning such work to proceed continuously without unnecessary delay to completion, the village may take any action at
law or in equity to restrain the use of such structure, or may proceed against the owner or any person in possession of the same in a penal
action before the circuit court for violation of the provisions of this chapter. The village may also, in its discretion, cause said structure to be
secured to prevent access, cleaned of unsanitary conditions detrimental to the public or removed in its entirety, after the failure, within the
time provided for, to restore the same to a safe condition.
Subsection R115.5 Reconstruction (Page 9, Reconstruction Requirements, new subsection)
Insert: R115.5 Reconstruction To Conform To Requirements For New Structures If Cost Exceeds 50% Of Value. A structure declared
unsafe by the building commissioner may be restored to safe condition as provided in subsection 115.2 of this chapter; provided that if the
damage or cost of reconstruction or restoration is in excess of 50% of the value of the structure if reconstructed or restored, it shall be
made to conform, with respect to materials and type of construction, to the requirements for new structures as provided for in this chapter.
Section R202 Definitions (Page 25, Townhouse, add to fourth line)
Addition: Adjoining townhouse units shall be separated by a U.L. listed three (3) hour rated fire-resistive masonry wall assembly with an
STC rating of not less than 50. Two-family dwellings (duplex) are considered the same as a townhouse.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 299/548
Table R301.2(1) Climatic And Geographic Design Criteria (Page 29, Information, insert)
Ground snow load - 30 pounds per square foot.
Wind speed - 90 miles per hour.
Topographic effects - No.
Seismic design category - A.
Damage from weathering - Severe.
Frost line depth - Forty-two (42) inches.
Damage from termites - Moderate to heavy.
Damage from decay - Slight to moderate.
Winter design temperature - -4 degrees F.
Ice barrier underlayment required - Yes.
Flood hazards - See current FIRM and FBFM maps.
Air freezing index - 1700 cumulative degree days below 32 degrees F.
Subsection R302.1 Exterior Walls (Pages 50 and 51, line 6)
Add: All one (1) hour wall and projection ratings listed in table R302.1(1) shall be changed to not less than three (3) hour fire-resistive
rated with exposure ratings from both sides. Three (3) hour walls are to be masonry construction only.
Subsection R302.2 Townhouses (Page 50, change wall assembly within items 1 and 2)
Change: Item 1, line 3, 2-hour fire-resistance-rated masonry.
Change: Item 2, line 3, 3-hour fire-resistance-rated masonry.
Subsection R302.3 Two-Family Dwellings (Page 52, delete entire subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Two-family dwelling units shall be separated and constructed to meet the same requirements as a townhouse.
Subsection R302.6 Separation Required - Attached Garages (Page 53, Table R302.6)
Change: ... 5/8 inch (15.9 mm) type "X" fire code gypsum board material shall be required for all separations (changed from 1/2 inch
(12.7 mm) gypsum board).
Subsection R309.1 Floor Surface (Page 61, change first sentence)
Change: Garage floor surfaces shall be improved with portland cement concrete, 3,500 psi, not less than four (4) inches (102 mm) in
thickness over compacted crushed aggregate base not less than four (4) inches (102 mm) in thickness. Vapor barrier minimum 6 mil in
thickness shall be installed where living area exists above garage space. Garage floor surfaces attached to living area shall be provided
with a six (6) inch (153 mm) concrete gas curb, above the floor surface, adjacent to the living area portion of the building. If building
foundation extends the minimum six (6) inches above floor surface, it can serve as the gas curb.
Subsection R309.2 Carports (Page 61, add after second sentence)
Add: Carport floor and gas curb requirements and area requirements shall be the same as amended requirements for garages in
subsection R309.1.
Subsection R310.4 Bars, Grills, Covers And Screens (Page 62, second sentence word change and addition to end of subsection)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 300/548
Change: ... devices are required to be placed ("required" replaces "permitted").
Add: Window well covers are to be able to support a minimum 250 pound weight load.
Subsection R312.1.3 Guard Opening Limitations (Page 66, add after first sentence, fourth line)
Add: Required guards shall not be constructed with horizontal rails or other ornamental pattern that results in a ladder effect.
Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems (Page 67, delete entire section)
Delete: Entire section. Fire sprinkler systems not mandatory.
Subsection R319.1 Site Address - Premises Identification (Page 72, add to end of subsection)
Add: Addresses are not permitted on garage doors. Address numbers on mailboxes shall be installed on both sides of the mailbox.
Subsection R402.1 Wood Foundations (Page 79, delete entire subsection)
Delete: Entire subsection. Wood foundations not permitted.
Subsection R403.2 Footings For Wood Foundations (Page 91, delete entire subsection)
Delete: Entire subsection. Wood foundations not permitted.
Subsection R404.2 Wood Foundation Walls (Page 118, delete entire subsection)
Delete: Entire subsection. Wood foundations not permitted.
Subsection R405.1 Foundation Drainage - Concrete Or Masonry Foundations (Page 119, delete masonry, second line of subsection)
Delete: "masonry" in second line of subsection.
Subsection R405.2 Wood Foundations (Pages 119 and 120, delete entire subsection)
Delete: Entire subsection. Wood foundations not permitted.
Subsection R405.3 Drainage System Discharge (Page 120, add new subsection)
Add: The drainage system sump shall discharge to grade a minimum of three (3) feet (914 mm) from the exterior wall of the building.
Splash blocks shall be required at all sump pump discharge lines. Splash blocks shall be constructed of concrete or other material
acceptable to the building commissioner and be designed to carry water at least three (3) feet (914 mm) from the exterior wall of the
building. It shall be mandatory to carry the water flow away from the direction of the adjacent side lot so that the water will not empty onto
such property as it flows from the sump pump discharge.
Subsection R406.3 Damp Proofing For Wood Foundations (Page 121, delete entire subsection)
Delete: Entire subsection. Wood foundations not permitted.
Subsection R408.6 Under-Floor Space, Finished Grade (Page 122, line 8)
Addition: Crawl space or under-floor surface shall be finished with an approved vapor barrier minimum 6 mil thick (0.15 mm) under a slurry
coat of concrete, minimum two (2) inches (51 mm) in thickness.
Section R504 Pressure Preservative Treated-Wood Floors, On Ground (Pages 133 and 134, delete entire subsection)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 301/548
Delete: Entire subsection.
Table R702.3.5 Minimum Thickness And Application Of Gypsum Board (Page 343, deletion)
Delete: Use of any referenced single layer 3/8 inch (9 mm) drywall installations - not permitted.
Subsection R801.3 Roof Drainage (Page 365, delete entire subsection and insert new subsection)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Gutters shall be installed on all roofs with back edge not less than one (1) inch (25.4 mm) higher than the front (outside) edge. All
gutters and downspouts shall be securely fastened to the building. Downspouts shall not be connected to the sanitary or storm sewer.
Splashblocks are required at the bottom of downspouts and shall be constructed of concrete or other materials acceptable to the building
commissioner and shall be designed to carry water at least five (5) feet (1524 mm) from the exterior wall of the building. It shall be
mandatory to carry the water flow away from the direction of the adjacent side lot so that the water will not empty onto such property as it
flows from the downspout channel.
Chapter 11 Energy Efficiency (Pages 437 through 470, delete entire chapter - insert)
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: The design and construction of buildings and associated systems and equipment shall conform to the current provisions of the
village of Bloomingdale energy code title 10, chapter 8 of the village code.
Chapter 22 Special Piping And Storage Systems (Pages 509 and 510, delete entire chapter - Fuel Oil Installations)
Delete: Entire chapter. Installations not permitted.
Chapter 25 Plumbing Administration (Pages 591 and 592, delete entire chapter - insert)
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: The design and installation of plumbing systems shall conform to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale plumbing
code title 10, chapter 5 of the village code.
Chapter 26 General Plumbing Requirements (Pages 593 through 595, delete entire chapter - insert)
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: The design and installation of plumbing systems shall conform to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale plumbing
code title 10, chapter 5 of the village code.
Chapter 27 Plumbing Fixtures (Pages 597 through 602, delete entire chapter - insert)
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: The design and installation of plumbing systems shall conform to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale plumbing
code title 10, chapter 5 of the village code.
Chapter 28 Water Heaters (Pages 603 and 604, delete entire chapter - insert)
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: The design and installation of plumbing systems shall conform to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale plumbing
code title 10, chapter 5 of the village code.
Chapter 29 Water Supply And Distribution (Pages 605 through 634, delete entire chapter - insert)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 302/548
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: The design and installation of plumbing systems shall conform to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale plumbing
code title 10, chapter 5 of the village code.
Chapter 30 Sanitary Drainage (Pages 635 through 646, delete entire chapter - insert)
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: The design and installation of plumbing systems shall conform to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale plumbing
code title 10, chapter 5 of the village code.
Chapter 31 Vents (Pages 647 through 651, delete entire chapter - insert)
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: The design and installation of plumbing systems shall conform to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale plumbing
code title 10, chapter 5 of the village code.
Chapter 32 Traps (Pages 653 and 654, delete entire chapter - insert)
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: The design and installation of plumbing systems shall conform to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale plumbing
code title 10, chapter 5 of the village code.
Chapter 34 General Requirements - Electrical (Pages 657 through 663, delete entire chapter - insert)
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: All electrical equipment and installations shall conform to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale electrical code title
10, chapter 4 of the village code.
Chapter 35 Electrical Definitions (Pages 665 through 669, delete entire chapter - insert)
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: All electrical equipment and installations shall conform to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale electrical code title
10, chapter 4 of the village code.
Chapter 36 Services (Pages 671 through 680, delete entire chapter - insert)
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: All electrical equipment and installations shall conform to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale electrical code title
10, chapter 4 of the village code.
Chapter 37 Branch Circuit And Feeder Requirements (Pages 681 through 687, delete entire chapter - insert)
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: All electrical equipment and installations shall conform to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale electrical code title
10, chapter 4 of the village code.
Chapter 38 Wiring Methods (Pages 689 through 693, delete entire chapter - insert)
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: All electrical equipment and installations shall conform to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale electrical code title
10, chapter 4 of the village code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 303/548
Chapter 39 Power And Lighting Distribution (Pages 695 through 721, delete entire chapter - insert)
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: All electrical equipment and installations shall conform to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale electrical code title
10, chapter 4 of the village code.
Chapter 40 Devices And Luminaires (Pages 723 through 728, delete entire chapter - insert)
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: All electrical equipment and installations shall conform to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale electrical code title
10, chapter 4 of the village code.
Chapter 41 Appliance Installation (Pages 729 through 731, delete entire chapter - insert)
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: All electrical equipment and installations shall conform to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale electrical code title
10, chapter 4 of the village code.
Chapter 42 Swimming Pools (Pages 733 through 744, delete entire chapter - insert)
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: All electrical equipment and installations shall conform to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale electrical code title
10, chapter 4 of the village code.
Chapter 43 Class 2 Remote Control, Signaling, And Power-Limited Circuits (Pages 745 and 746, delete entire chapter - insert)
Delete: Entire chapter.
Insert: All electrical equipment and installations shall conform to the current provisions of the village of Bloomingdale electrical code title
10, chapter 4 of the village code.
Chapter 45 Driveways (new chapter)
Section R4501 Driveway Permit And Construction Requirements. No person shall hereafter alter, construct, build or establish any
driveway without first obtaining a village permit. Driveway sub-grade to be minimum 6 inch (152 mm) thick crushed and compacted CA-6
aggregate, with concrete surface to be minimum 6 inch (152 mm) thick.
Section R4502 Application For Permit. Application for a permit for a driveway, shall be filed with the building commissioner and shall
contain the name and address of the person making the application and the name and address of the owner of the property to be served
by such driveway, together with the proposed location and plans and specifications for such driveway.
Section 4503 Approval By Building Commissioner. No permit shall be issued for any work to be done in any way about the construction of
any driveway until the plans and specifications therefore have been submitted to and approved by the building commissioner.
Chapter 46 Safety Fencing (new chapter)
Section R4601: If required by the building commissioner for life safety, residential construction projects are required to have a minimum
48" to maximum 72" tall safety fence above grade around the entire perimeter of the construction project area. Fencing must be installed
prior to commencement of construction.
Chapter 47 Temporary Storage (new chapter)
Section R4701: Any type of temporary storage on residentially zoned property requires village of Bloomingdale building permit. Duration of
storage is not to exceed thirty (30) days. Extension of time may be considered and is at the discretion of the building commissioner based
on approval of documented hardship.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 304/548
Chapter 48 Radon Gas Controls (new chapter)
Section R4801: New dwelling unit construction shall be built in compliance with radon gas controls as provided in appendix F of the
international residential code, 2015 edition, pages 813 through 818.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-3-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to design, construct, alter, move, enlarge, replace, repair, demolish, remove, use or maintain one- and two-family dwellings
and accessory structures in the village in violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-3-4: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a penalty in the amount of one hundred
percent (100%) of any unpaid fee and, in addition, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
Chapter 3A
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION ARCHITECTURAL APPROVAL
10-3A-1: APPROVAL PREREQUISITE TO BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE:
From and after the effective date hereof, no building permit shall be issued by the building commissioner for any construction requiring prior
written approval by a registered homeowners' association or by a registered architectural review committee or subcommittee of such
association unless written evidence of such approval is submitted to the building commissioner. (Ord. 2013-13, 2-25-2013)
10-3A-2: APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
A. Applicant's Responsibility: It shall be the responsibility of any applicant for a building permit to secure and submit any required association or
committee approval; provided, however, that any homeowners' association or architectural review committee or subcommittee may submit
such approval directly to the building commissioner.
B. Contents Of Application: All applications for a building permit for any construction, improvements, additions, alterations or repairs of any
single-family residence, residential accessory building or accessory structure shall contain either a statement under oath by the applicant
that the applicant agrees to obtain any required approvals by an architectural review committee or subcommittee of any homeowners'
association having jurisdiction, or a representation under oath that, after due and diligent inquiry, the applicant has determined that no such
approvals are required.
C. Falsifying Data: Any permit which is issued by the building commissioner based upon purported architectural approval by homeowners'
association or architectural review committee or subcommittee, or upon the representation that no approvals are required, is subject to
immediate revocation by the building commissioner in the event that such representation is determined to be false, regardless of the intent of
the applicant. Any appeal from a revocation of any permit shall be as otherwise heretofore provided by the building code adopted in section
10-3-2 of this title or other applicable ordinances. (Ord. 2013-13, 2-25-2013)
10-3A-3: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a penalty in the amount of one hundred
percent (100%) of any unpaid fee and, in addition, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each violation. (Ord. 2013-
13, 2-25-2013)
Chapter 4
ELECTRICAL CODE
10-4-1: VILLAGE ELECTRICAL CODE:
The Electrical Code of the Village (hereinafter referred to as the "Electrical Code") shall hereafter be identical with the provisions of that
publication entitled the NFPA National Electrical Code, 2014 edition (the "National Electrical Code"), and which is incorporated herein by
reference as if fully set forth, except as amended in section 10-4-2 of this chapter. At least three (3) copies of the National Electrical Code are
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 305/548
on file with the Village Clerk and are available for public inspection at all times during regular business hours as provided by law. (Ord. 2016-13,
3-14-2016)
10-4-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Additions and deletions of sections of the Electrical Code are as follows:
Article 90-10 Electrical Contractor Requirement (page 70-26, add new article section).
Add: All electrical work requires a village permit subject to the requirements of title 10, chapter 1 of the village code and shall be
performed by a licensed electrical contractor. A photocopy of the electrical contractor's license and certificate of insurance must be
submitted to the building commissioner prior to permit issuance. Only electrical licenses obtained through competency testing will be
accepted. Any electrical work, for which a permit is required, performed on village of Bloomingdale property or right-of-way requires the
village of Bloomingdale to be listed as an additional insured on the certificate of insurance and that the electrical contractor submit an
executed permittee indemnity signature page with the permit application.
Prior to the issuance of an electrical permit, a bond in the minimum amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), except where work to be
performed exceeds the minimum bond amount the bond shall be for the actual cost of work to be performed, shall be executed by a surety
company authorized to transact business in the state of Illinois as surety on the bond with the applicant as principal on the bond, and the
village of Bloomingdale as obligee, for its benefit, and at the discretion of the village of Bloomingdale, that of consumers dealing with the
applicant, conditioned that the applicant shall faithfully perform the duties without damage to surrounding private or public properties and
in all things comply with village of Bloomingdale codes and ordinances pertaining to the applied for permit. The bond shall remain until the
issuance of final inspection approval and/or final certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
Article 100-I Definitions - General - Authority Having Jurisdiction (page 70-27, line 4 addition).
Add: The building department shall be charged with the enforcement of the electrical code, and the building commissioner shall be known
as the code official, authority having jurisdiction.
Article 210-8 Ground Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection For Personnel (page 70-55, addition).
Add: (E) Building department inspector reserves the right to require ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection where a potential hazard may
exist.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
Article 320 Armored Cable Type AC (pages 70-193 through 195, delete article).
Delete: Entire article. Use not permitted.
Article 326 Integrated Gas Spacer Cable Type IGS (pages 70-198 and 199, delete article).
Delete: Entire article. Use not permitted.
Article 330 Metal-Clad Cable Type MC (pages 70-200 through 202, delete article).
Delete: Entire article. Use not permitted.
Article 332 Mineral-Insulated, Metal-Sheathed Cable Type MI (pages 70-202 and 203, delete article).
Delete: Entire article. Use not permitted.
Article 334 Nonmetallic-Sheathed Cable Types NM, NMC And NMS (pages 70-203 through 205, delete article).
Delete: Entire article. Use not permitted.
Article 340 Underground Feeder And Branch-Circuit Cable Type UF. Section II Installation, 340.10(4) installed as nonmetallic-sheathed cable
(pages 70-208 and 209, delete subsection).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 306/548
Delete: Entire subsection. Installation as nonmetallic-sheathed cable not permitted.
Article 362 Electrical Nonmetallic Tubing Type ENT (pages 70-227 through 229, delete article).
Delete: Entire article. Use not permitted.
Article 394 Concealed Knob-And-Tube Wiring (pages 70-257 and 258, delete article).
Delete: Entire article. Use not permitted.
Article 398 Open Wiring On Insulators (pages 70-258, 259 and 260, delete article).
Delete: Entire article. Use not permitted.
Article 410, 410.10 II. Luminaire (Fixture) In Specific Locations, (A) Wet And Damp Locations (page 70-281, eighth line, addition).
Add: Installation of outdoor luminaires (fixtures) on the exterior of a property shall be installed so as to not cause glare or excessive
amounts of light onto neighboring property or onto public property/right-of-way, thereby creating a public nuisance or hazard, as
determined by the building commissioner.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-4-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful to design, install, construct, reconstruct, alter or use/maintain electrical systems in any building or
structure in the village in violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter.
B. Application To Existing Permits: This chapter shall not be construed to extend to or affect any construction activity for which a permit was
issued or application for permit filed prior to the effective date hereof, except for fees not yet due or payable, unless the building
commissioner determines that any provision of this chapter or the regulations incorporated herein by reference should be applied for
reasons of public health and safety. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-4-4: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a penalty in the amount of one hundred
percent (100%) of any unpaid fee and, in addition, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each violation. (Ord. 2016-
13, 3-14-2016)
Chapter 5
PLUMBING CODE
10-5-1: VILLAGE PLUMBING CODE:
The plumbing code of the village (hereinafter referred to as the "plumbing code") shall hereafter be identical with the provisions of that
publication entitled "Illinois plumbing code, 2014 edition", and which is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth by this chapter. (Ord.
2014-49, 11-10-2014)
10-5-2: COMPLIANCE AND PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to design, install, construct, reconstruct, alter, use or maintain plumbing systems in any building or structure or on property in
the village in violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter. A village building permit is required for all plumbing work to be performed,
subject to all applicable village permit fees. (Ord. 2014-49, 11-10-2014)
10-5-3: STATE LICENSED CONTRACTORS:
All plumbing work shall be installed by an Illinois licensed plumbing contractor. A photocopy of the plumbing contractor's license shall be
submitted to the building commissioner prior to permit issuance. (Ord. 2014-49, 11-10-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 307/548
10-5-4: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall not be construed to extend to or affect any construction activity for which a permit was issued or application for permit filed
prior to the effective date hereof, except for fees not yet due or payable, unless the building commissioner determines that any provision of this
chapter or the regulations incorporated herein by reference should be applied for reasons of public health and safety. (Ord. 2014-49, 11-10-
2014)
10-5-5: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a penalty in the amount of one hundred
percent (100%) of any unpaid fee and, in addition, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each violation. (Ord. 2014-
49, 11-10-2014)
Chapter 6
MECHANICAL CODE
10-6-1: VILLAGE MECHANICAL CODE:
The Mechanical Code of the Village (hereinafter referred to as the "Mechanical Code") shall hereafter be identical with the provisions of that
publication entitled International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, and which is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth, except as
amended in section 10-6-2 of this chapter. At least three (3) copies of the International Mechanical Code are on file with the Village Clerk and
are available for public inspection at all times during regular business hours as provided by law. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-6-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Additions, insertions, changes and deletions to sections of the International Mechanical Code are hereby revised as follows:
Subsection [A]101.1 (page 1, Title, second line).
Insert: The village of Bloomingdale.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
Subsection [A]103.1 (page 2, Department Of Mechanical Inspection, General).
Change: The building department shall be charged with the enforcement of the mechanical code, and the building commissioner shall be
known as the code official.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
Subsection [A]106.4.3 (page 4, Permit Expiration).
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Permit expiration shall be governed by title 10, chapter 1 of the village code.
Subsection [A]106.4.4 (page 4, Permit Extensions).
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Permit extensions shall be governed by title 10, chapter 1 of the village code.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
Subsection [A]106.5.2 (page 5, Fee Schedule, third line).
Insert: The fee schedule shall be governed by section 10-1-2-1 (Building Department Plan Review And Inspection Permit Schedule Of
Fees), of the village code.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 308/548
Subsection [A]106.5.3 (page 5, Fee Refunds).
Delete: Entire subsection.
New Subsection [A]106.6 (page 5, Mechanical Contractor Requirements).
Add: All mechanical work requires a village permit subject to the requirements of the village permit regulations and schedule of fees and
bonds ordinance and shall be performed by a licensed mechanical contractor. A photocopy of the mechanical contractor's license and
certificate of insurance must be submitted to the building commissioner prior to permit issuance. Any mechanical work, for which a permit
is required, performed on village of Bloomingdale property or right-of-way requires that the village of Bloomingdale be listed as an
additional insured on the certificate of insurance and that the mechanical contractor submit an executed permittee indemnity signature
page with the permit application. Prior to the issuance of a mechanical permit, a bond in the minimum amount of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00), except where work to be performed exceeds the minimum bond amount the bond shall be for the actual cost of work to be
performed, shall be executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state of Illinois as surety on the bond with the
applicant as principal on the bond, and the village of Bloomingdale as obligee, for its benefit, and at the discretion of the village of
Bloomingdale, that of consumers dealing with the applicant, conditioned that the applicant shall faithfully perform the duties without
damage to surrounding private or public properties and in all things comply with village of Bloomingdale codes and ordinances pertaining
to the applied for permit. The bond shall remain until the issuance of final inspection approval and/or final certificate of occupancy.
Subsection [A]108.4 (page 7, Violation Penalties).
Delete: Entire subsection.
Subsection [A]108.5 (page 7, Stop Work Orders, Fine Amounts).
Insert: ... as provided in section 1-4-1 of the village code for each day in violation.
Section 109 (pages 7 and 8, entire appeals section).
Delete: Entire section.
Insert: Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the planning and zoning commission. Means of appeal
shall follow requirements set forth in section 11-3-7 of the village code, Appeals.
Subsection 301.10 (page 21, Electrical, third line).
Delete: NFPA 70.
Insert: Title 10, chapter 4 of the village code.
Subsection 301.11 (page 21, Plumbing Connections, third/fourth lines).
Delete: International plumbing code.
Insert: Title 10, chapter 5 of the village code.
Subsection 506.1 (page 51, Commercial Kitchen Hood Ventilation System Ducts And Exhaust Equipment, end of first sentence third line).
Add: ...shall comply with the requirements of this section (add) except current National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 96 standard for
ventilation control and fire protection of commercial cooking operations regulations shall be applicable where this standard is more
stringent than this code for all installations.
Subsection 507.1 (page 56, Commercial Kitchen Hoods, end of first sentence second line).
Add: ...shall comply with the requirements of this section (add) except current National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 96 standard for
ventilation control and fire protection of commercial cooking operations regulations shall be applicable where this standard is more
stringent than this code for all installations.
Subsection 508.1 (page 59, Commercial Kitchen Makeup Air, end of paragraph after end of twelfth line, new sentence).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 309/548
Add: The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 96 standard for ventilation control and fire protection of commercial cooking
operations regulations shall be applicable where this standard is more stringent than this code for all installations.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-6-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful to design, install, construct, reconstruct, alter or use/maintain mechanical systems in any building
or structure in the Village in violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter.
B. Application To Existing Permits: This chapter shall not be construed to extend to or affect any construction activity for which a permit was
issued or application for permit filed prior to the effective date hereof, except for fees not yet due or payable, unless the Building
Commissioner determines that any provision of this chapter or the regulations incorporated herein by reference should be applied for
reasons of public health and safety. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-6-4: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a penalty in the amount of one hundred
percent (100%) of any unpaid fee and, in addition, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each violation. (Ord. 2016-
13, 3-14-2016)
Chapter 7
FUEL GAS CODE
10-7-1: VILLAGE FUEL GAS CODE:
The Fuel Gas Code of the Village (hereinafter referred to as the "Fuel Gas Code") shall hereafter be identical with the provisions of that
publication entitled International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, and which is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth, except as
amended in section 10-7-2 of this chapter. At least three (3) copies of the International Fuel Gas Code are on file with the Village Clerk and are
available for public inspection at all times during regular business hours as provided by law. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-7-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Additions, insertions, changes and deletions to sections of the International Fuel Gas Code are hereby revised as follows:
Subsection [A]101.1 (page 1, Title, second line).
Insert: The village of Bloomingdale.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
Subsection [A]103.1 (pages 2 and 3, Department Of Inspection, General).
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: The building department shall be charged with the enforcement of the fuel gas code, and the building commissioner shall be known
as the code official.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
Subsection [A]106.5.3 (page 5, Permit Expiration).
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Permit expiration shall be governed by title 10, chapter 1 of the village code.
Subsection [A]106.5.4 (page 5, Permit Extensions).
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Permit extensions shall be governed by title 10, chapter 1 of the village code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 310/548
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
Subsection [A]106.6.2 (page 5, Permit Fees).
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Permit fees shall be governed by section 10-1-2-1 (Building Department Plan Review And Inspection Permit Schedule Of Fees), of
the village code.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
Subsection [A]106.6.3 (page 5, Fee Refunds).
Delete: Entire subsection.
New subsection [A]106.7 (page 5, Fuel Gas/Mechanical Contractor Requirements).
Add: All fuel gas system and related mechanical work requires a village permit subject to the requirements of the village permit, fee and
bond regulation ordinance and shall be performed by a licensed mechanical contractor. A photocopy of the mechanical contractor's
license and certificate of insurance must be submitted to the building commissioner prior to permit issuance. Any fuel gas system and
related mechanical work, for which a permit is required, performed on village of Bloomingdale property or right-of-way requires that the
village of Bloomingdale be listed as an additional insured on the certificate of insurance and that the mechanical contractor submit an
executed permittee indemnity signature page with the permit application.
Prior to the issuance of a permit, a bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), except where work to be performed exceeds
the minimum bond amount the bond shall be for the actual cost of work to be performed, shall be executed by a surety company
authorized to transact business in the state of Illinois as surety on the bond with the applicant as principal on the bond, and the village of
Bloomingdale as obligee, for its benefit, and at the discretion of the village of Bloomingdale, that of consumers dealing with the applicant,
conditioned that the applicant shall faithfully perform the duties without damage to surrounding private or public properties and in all things
comply with village of Bloomingdale codes and ordinances pertaining to the applied for permit. The bond shall remain until the issuance of
final inspection approval and/or final certificate of occupancy.
Subsection [A]108.4 (page 7, Violation Penalties).
Delete: Entire subsection.
Subsection [A]108.5 (page 7, Stop Work Orders, Fine Amounts).
Insert: ...as provided in section 1-4-1 of the village code for each violation.
Section 109 (page 8, entire appeals section).
Delete: Entire section.
Insert: Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the planning and zoning commission. Means of appeal
shall follow requirements set forth in section 11-3-7 of the village code, Appeals.
Subsection [A]301.6 (page 21, Plumbing Connections, third line).
Delete: International plumbing code.
Insert: Title 10, chapter 5 of the village code.
Subsection 309.2 (page 32, Electrical, Connections, third line).
Delete: NFPA 70.
Insert: Title 10, chapter 4 of the village code.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-7-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 311/548
A. Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful to design, install, construct, reconstruct, alter or use/maintain fuel gas systems and gas fired
appliances in any building or structure or on property in the Village in violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter.
B. Application To Existing Permits: This chapter shall not be construed to extend to or affect any construction activity for which a permit was
issued or application for permit filed prior to the effective date hereof, except for fees not yet due or payable, unless the Building
Commissioner determines that any provision of this chapter or the regulations incorporated herein by reference should be applied for
reasons of public health and safety. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-7-4: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a penalty in the amount of one hundred
percent (100%) of any unpaid fee and, in addition, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each violation. (Ord. 2016-
13, 3-14-2016)
Chapter 8
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
10-8-1: VILLAGE ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE:
The energy conservation code of the village (hereinafter referred to as the "energy conservation code") shall hereafter be identical with the
provisions of that publication entitled Illinois energy conservation code, 2015 edition, and which is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set
forth by this chapter. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-8-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Additions, insertions, changes and deletions to sections of the international energy conservation code are as set forth in the Illinois energy
conservation code, 71 Illinois administrative code 600. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-8-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful to design, install, construct, reconstruct, alter or use/maintain any building or structure and related
mechanical, lighting and power systems in the village in violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter.
B. Application To Existing Permits: This chapter shall not be construed to extend to or affect any construction activity for which a permit was
issued or application for permit filed prior to the effective date hereof, except for fees not yet due or payable, unless the building
commissioner determines that any provision of this chapter or the regulations incorporated herein by reference should be applied for
reasons of public health and safety. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-8-4: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a penalty in the amount of one hundred
percent (100%) of any unpaid fee and, in addition, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each violation. (Ord. 2016-
13, 3-14-2016)
Chapter 9
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
10-9-1: VILLAGE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
The Property Maintenance Code of the Village (hereinafter referred to as the "Property Maintenance Code") shall hereafter be identical with the
provisions of that publication entitled the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, and which is incorporated herein by reference
as if fully set forth, except as amended in section 10-9-2 of this chapter. At least three (3) copies of the International Property Maintenance Code
are on file with the Village Clerk and are available for public inspection at all times during regular business hours as provided by law. (Ord. 2016-
13, 3-14-2016)
10-9-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 312/548
Additions, insertions, deletions and changes to sections of the Property Maintenance Code are hereby revised as follows:
Subsection [A]101.1 Title (page 1, Title, second line).
Insert: The village of Bloomingdale.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
Subsection [A]103.1 Department Of Property Maintenance Inspection (page 2, Department Of Property Maintenance Inspection, General).
Delete: Entire section.
Insert: The building department shall administer and enforce the property maintenance ordinance.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
Subsection [A]104.1 General (page 2, Duties And Powers Of The Code Official, General).
Add: The building commissioner shall be known as the code official.
Subsection [A]104.3 (page 2, Right Of Entry).
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: In order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the public, the code official is authorized to attempt to obtain consent to enter
at any reasonable time from any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a dwelling, structure or property subject to this code for the
purpose of making inspections and performing duties under this code. Such owner, occupant, or other person in charge shall be informed
that entry by the code official is sought for the purpose of making an inspection and performing duties under this code. Failure to give
consent to entry under this section shall not be punishable by fine or imprisonment.
Subsection [A]104.3.1 Search Warrant In Absence Of Consent (page 2, Search Warrant In Absence Of Consent, new subsection).
Add: If the code official, after a reasonable attempt to obtain consent, does not receive consent to enter a dwelling, structure or property
subject to the code as described in subsection 104.3, the code official may seek in the circuit court of DuPage County, a search warrant
pursuant to subsection 104.3.2 of this code. An owner, occupant or other person in charge of a dwelling, structure or property subject to
the provisions of this code, who is presented with a search warrant obtained pursuant to this section, shall not refuse, impede, inhibit,
interfere with, restrict, or obstruct entry and free access to any part of the structure or premises where an inspection authorized by the
search warrant is sought to be made.
Subsection [A]104.3.2 Procurement Of Search Warrants (page 2, Procurement Of Search Warrants, new subsection).
Add: A search warrant sought pursuant to subsection 104.3.1 shall be sought in the circuit court of DuPage County. The court may
consider any of the following factors along with such other matters as it deems pertinent in its decision as to whether a warrant shall be
issued:
(1) Eyewitness account of violation.
(2) Citizen complaints.
(3) Tenant complaints.
(4) Plain view violations.
(5) Violations apparent from village records.
(6) Property deterioration.
(7) Age of property.
(8) Nature of alleged violation.
(9) Similar properties in the area.
(10) Documented violations on similar properties in the area.
(11) Passage of time since last inspection.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 313/548
(12) Previous violations on the property.
Subsection [A]107.3 Notices And Orders - Method Of Service (page 3, Notices And Orders - Method Of Service, delete entire subsection and
insert new subsection).
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Such service shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner if a copy thereof is delivered to the owner personally; or by
leaving the notice at the usual place of abode, in the presence of someone in the family of the age of 13 years or upwards, who shall be
informed of the contents thereof, provided that the person making service shall also mail a copy of the notice with postage fully prepaid,
addressed to the owner at his or her usual place of abode; or by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known
address with return receipt requested; or if the certified or registered letter is returned with receipt showing that it has not been delivered,
by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice, or at least one publication of such
notice in a local newspaper of general circulation.
Subsection [A]110.3 Failure To Comply (page 6, Demolition Failure To Comply, delete entire subsection and insert new subsection).
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Whenever the owner of a property fails to comply with a demolition order within the time period prescribed, the code official shall
immediately report such failure to comply to the corporate authorities. The corporate authorities may demolish, or cause the demolition of
dangerous and unsafe buildings or uncompleted and abandoned buildings within the village by applying to the circuit court for an order
authorizing such action to be taken with respect to any such building if the owner or owners thereof, including the lien holders of record,
after at least 15 days written notice by mail to do so, have failed to demolish it. Where, upon diligent search, the identity or whereabouts of
the owner or owners of any such building including the lien holders of record is not ascertainable, notice mailed to the person or persons
in whose name such real estate was last assessed is sufficient notice under this subsection. The cost of such demolition incurred by the
village of Bloomingdale, including court costs, attorneys' fees and other costs related to the enforcement of this subsection is recoverable
from the owner or owners of such real estate and is a lien thereon, which lien is superior to all prior existing liens and encumbrances,
except taxes. Within sixty (60) days after such demolition, the village of Bloomingdale shall file notice of lien of such cost and expense
incurred in the office of the county recorder. The notice must consist of a sworn statement setting out (1) a description of the real estate
sufficient for identification thereof, (2) the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred, and (3) the date or dates when
the cost and expense was incurred by the village or by the lien holder of record. Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner or
persons interested in the property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the village and the release may be filed
of record as in the case of filing a notice of lien. Where the dangerous condition of a structure is deemed by the corporate authorities,
upon recommendation of the code official to constitute an imminent and immediate danger to human life, the village may promptly raze or
remove said structure or a portion thereof which has been deemed to cause such a danger in accord with applicable laws and procedures.
Section [A]110.5 Demolition Or Structure Moving Permit (page 6, new section, Demolition Permit).
Add: A demolition or structure moving permit is required prior to any such work occurring on property within the village of Bloomingdale. To
obtain a permit, the property owner or his authorized representative shall file an application for permit on a form furnished by the village for
that purpose, and shall include a signed statement indicating the exact scope of demolition or structure moving work to occur on the
subject property. Prior to issuance of a permit, the person, firm or corporation engaged in the work of demolition or moving a structure
shall provide copy of license to perform such work. A valid certificate of insurance must be submitted specific to the property where
demolition or structure moving is to take place. A bond in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with sureties to be approved
by the building commissioner, to indemnify, keep and save harmless the village of Bloomingdale against any loss, cost, damage, expense,
judgment, or liability of any kind whatsoever the village may suffer, or which may accrue against, be charged or be recovered from said
village, or any of its officials from or by reason or on account of accidents to persons or property during any such demolition or moving
operations and from or by reason or on account of anything done under or by virtue of any permit granted for such demolition or moving
operations. The bond in each case shall extend over the period of and cover all such demolition or moving operation. Prior to issuance of
permit, the applicant shall submit written evidence to the building commissioner that the property for which such permit is to be issued has
been inspected and treated for vectors and vermin by a person or persons duly qualified and licensed as exterminators in vermin and pest
control. The inspection and treatment for vectors and vermin shall be made and conducted within forty-five (45) days preceding the
commencement of demolition or moving. Prior to issuance of permit, it is required that the village be provided a certified inspection report
from an Illinois licensed asbestos inspector certifying that the property is clear of any asbestos hazards before commencing demolition or
moving. A separate permit shall be required for the removal of asbestos containing material, should inspection discover the presence of
asbestos containing material. Upon satisfactory report of removal and disposal of asbestos containing material by an Illinois licensed
asbestos abatement contractor, the demolition or structure moving permit shall be issued providing all other requirements for such permit
have been met. Provisions shall be made by the permit applicant to control erosion and dust during the demolition or structure moving
process. Safety fencing shall be required, minimum forty-eight (48) to seventy-two (72) inches in height above grade around the entire
perimeter of the project area and shall be installed prior to the commencement of work. Fees for all permits are subject to the current
village schedule of fees and bonds.
Section [A]111.0 (pages 6 and 7, Means Of Appeal, delete entire section and insert new section).
Delete: Entire section.
Insert: Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building commissioner to the planning and zoning commission. Means of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 314/548
appeal shall follow requirements set forth in section 11-3-7 of the village code, Appeals.
Section 202.0 (pages 9 and 10, Definitions, additions).
Add: Dangerous Landscaping. Any tree or shrub, or limb or portion thereof, which creates a risk of imminent danger or hazard to person or
property in that it has broken or fallen or threatens to fall or come in contact with a building, neighboring property or overhead utility lines.
Any tree or shrub, or limb or portion thereof, that blocks safe passage of, or obstructs in whole or in part, streets, sidewalks, driveways,
easements or bicycle paths; or in that it falls or threatens to fall and block safe passage after having become uprooted or unstable as a
result of construction activity, disease, age, severe weather or any other event.
Add: Demolition And Construction Waste. Waste materials from the construction or destruction of residential, commercial or industrial
structures, including concrete, gravel, sand, soil, lumber or any type of excess fill or construction spoils.
Add: Junk. Any discarded material, such as stoves, refrigerators, furniture, automobile parts, toys, miscellaneous appliances or excessive
amounts of materials other than garbage, rubbish or refuse.
Add: Refuse. Any solid waste material.
Subsection 302.1 (page 11, Sanitation, add fifth line).
Add: Any storage of salt on the exterior of private property for use in snow and ice control is prohibited.
Subsection 302.4 (page 11, Weeds, delete entire subsection and insert new subsection).
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of ten (10) inches in height.
Weeds or plant growth in excess of ten (10) inches is hereby declared to be a nuisance and violation of this ordinance. Weeds shall be
defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, any plant of volunteer growth which is not cultured or specifically grown for human
food, any high growth of grass or plants that may conceal garbage, rubbish, refuse, junk or other unhealthy deposits or any growth which
constitutes a fire hazard when dry. Noxious weeds shall be prohibited as required by the Illinois noxious weed law (505 ILCS 100/1).
These weeds are common ragweed, giant ragweed, Canada thistle, perennial sow thistle, musk thistle, marijuana and perennial members
of the Sorghum genus. Also prohibited are exotic weeds as required by the Illinois exotic weed act (525 ILCS 10). These weeds are
Japanese honeysuckle, multiflora rose and purple loosestrife.
Exceptions to this subsection are as follows:
1) Trees.
2) Shrubs.
3) Cultivated gardens.
4) Natural landscaping which preserves or re-introduces native plants to the area. Areas to be "naturally landscaped" must be approved
by the village of Bloomingdale. A site plan is required for village staff review of the proposed or existing planting area or an existing
"native" natural area with a listing of the plant species that are in or are to be in the site. This is to insure compliance with all aspects of
this ordinance including verification that the planting areas within the site do not encroach into public right-of-ways, onto neighboring
property or impede line-of-sight safety requirements for vehicular traffic on private or public property.
Subsection 302.5 Pest Harborage (page 11, Pest Harborage, add to end of subsection).
Add: Any storage or placement of materials on property within the village in a manner which may harbor pest infestation is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and in violation of this ordinance. Any type of infestation shall immediately be abated.
Subsection 302.8.1 Motor Vehicles (page 11, Motor Vehicles, Inoperable Or Unlicensed, delete existing subsection and insert new subsection).
Delete: Existing subsection.
Insert: All inoperable or unlicensed motor vehicles on public or private property, are hereby declared to be a nuisance and a violation of
this ordinance. "Inoperable motor vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle from which the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed,
or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being
driven.
Subsection 302.10 Equipment Storage (page 11, Equipment Storage, add new subsection).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 315/548
Add: It is hereby declared a nuisance and a violation of this ordinance for an owner of real estate within the village to store out in the open
on the exterior of private property construction equipment, snow removal equipment or landscaping equipment without first obtaining
written approval from the building commissioner.
Subsection 302.11 (page 11, Landscaping, add new subsection).
Add: All premises and exterior property shall be maintained and be free from dead or dangerous landscaping. Removal of dead or
dangerous landscaping from non-residential property and residential property larger than one (1) acre in area requires a permit for
removal. The building commissioner shall review permit application submittals prior to issuance. Where a permit for removal is required, a
replacement plan in compliance with village code and/or site specific development ordinance regulations shall be submitted for
compliance review.
Subsection 303.1.1 Swimming Pools (page 11, Swimming Pools, add subsection).
Add: Swimming pools are to be regulated by the current village ordinance governing the maintenance, use and equipment of private
swimming pools, spas, hot tubs and portable or temporary pools in residential zoning districts where it is more stringent than this code. All
other installations shall be regulated by this code and other applicable codes and ordinances.
Subsection 304.14 Insect Screens (page 13, Insect Screens, first line, insert in the "date" blanks).
Insert: April 1 to December 1.
Subsection 308.1 (page 15, Rubbish And Garbage, addition after third line).
Add: It is hereby declared a nuisance and a violation of this ordinance for an owner of real estate within the village to allow garbage,
rubbish, junk, refuse or construction material or waste to remain outside in the open air upon that property. All garbage, rubbish, junk,
refuse or construction material or waste must be enclosed in containers. No container shall be stored in the front yard, including that area
between the building and front yard, or stored in the corner-side or side yard of any property including that area between the building and
that yard unless screened from view from the street.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
Subsection 404.8 New Occupancy In Existing Non-Residential Space (page 18, New Occupancy In Existing Non-Residential Space, new
subsection).
Add: No property, premises, building or tenant space within a non-residential building shall be occupied or reoccupied without first having
been inspected by the village building department and the appropriate fire protection district to insure compliance with public health, safety
and any other applicable village ordinance requirements. This verification of compliance is to be initiated through building permit
application for an occupancy inspection.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
Subsection [P]502.5 Public Toilet Facilities (page 19, Public Toilet Facilities, deletion and insertion, third line).
Delete: "International plumbing code" on third line.
Insert: "current edition of the Illinois state plumbing code" on third line.
Subsection 602.3 Heat Supply (page 21, Heat Supply, fifth line, insert in the "date" blanks).
Insert: September 1 to June 1.
Subsection 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces (page 21, Occupiable Work Spaces, third line, insert in the "date" blanks).
Insert: September 1 to June 1.
Subsection 606.1 (page 22, Elevators, Escalators And Dumbwaiters, add to end of subsection).
Add: Elevators and conveying systems shall be maintained in conformance with state of Illinois section 140 of the elevator safety and
regulations act (225 ILCS 312/140), and the administrative rules (41 Ill. adm. code 1000). Elevator and conveying systems shall be
maintained in compliance with the following standards and guidelines:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 316/548
1. Safety code for elevators and escalators (ASME A17.1-2010/CSA B44-10) and performance-based safety code for elevators and
escalators (ASME A17.7-2007/CSA B44.7-07).
2. Guide for inspection of elevators, escalators and moving walks (ASME A17.2-2010).
3. Safety code for existing elevators and escalators (ASME A17.3-2005) upgrades required by section 35(h) of the elevator safety act
shall be completed in the time frame specified therein.
4. Safety standard for platform lifts and stairway chairlifts (ASME A18.1-2008).
5. Standard for the qualifications of elevator inspectors (ASME QEI-1-2010).
6. Automated people mover standard (ASCE 21-05), part 1, 2005/2006.
7. Automated people mover standards (ANSI/ASCE/T&DI 21.2-08), parts 2, 3 and 4, 2008.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-9-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful to design, construct, alter, enlarge, repair, demolish, remove, use or maintain any building or
structure in the Village in violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter or any other applicable Village ordinance.
B. Application To Existing Permits: This chapter shall not be construed to extend to or affect any construction activity for which a permit was
issued or application for permit filed prior to the effective date hereof, except for fees not yet due or payable, unless the Building
Commissioner determines that any provision of this chapter or the regulations incorporated herein by reference should be applied for
reasons of public health and safety. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-9-4: NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROVISIONS:
A. Notice Of Violation; Failure To Comply; Abatement By Village: Any owner and/or occupant of real estate located within the Village upon which
a nuisance or violation as indicated by this chapter exists shall be sent or served a notice stating the specific violation. If the violation has not
been corrected within seven (7) days after receiving the notice, a citation will be issued by the Village for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each day which a violation continues to occur. The penalty for each offense will be as
indicated in section 10-9-5 of this chapter. A court order will then be sought to allow the Village, or a duly authorized contractor, to enter upon
the property to abate the nuisance. The Village will also seek reimbursement for abatement of the nuisance by court order.
B. Costs A Lien:
1. Any costs incurred by the Village or a duly authorized contractor in abating a nuisance, violation or any other charge imposed by the
Village under this chapter shall be a lien upon the real estate in question as authorized under the Illinois Municipal Code and shall be
superior to all other liens and encumbrances except tax liens; provided, that within sixty (60) days after such cost and expense is incurred,
the Village, or a contractor performing such services as authorized by the Village, in his or in its own name, files notice of lien in the Office
of the County Recorder. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: a) a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification thereof; b) the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service; and c) the date or
dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the Village. The lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to such
real estate have arisen subsequent to the weed cutting or property maintenance actions by the Village and prior to the filing of the notice
of lien. The lien shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lienor whose right in and to such real estate arises prior
to the filing of the notice.
2. Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner or other persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the
lien shall be released by the Village or person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release may be filed of record as in the case
of filing notice of lien. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-9-5: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a penalty in the amount of one hundred
percent (100%) of any unpaid fee and, in addition, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each day of violation. (Ord.
2016-13, 3-14-2016)
Chapter 10
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
10-10-1: VILLAGE FIRE PREVENTION CODE:
The fire prevention code of the village (hereinafter referred to as the "fire prevention code") shall hereafter be identical with the provisions of that
publication entitled "international fire prevention code, 2015 edition" and which is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth, except as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 317/548
amended in section 10-10-2 of this chapter. Three (3) copies of the international fire code are on file in the office of the village clerk and are
available for public inspection at all times during regular business hours as provided by law. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-10-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Additions, insertions and changes to sections of the fire prevention code are hereby revised as follows:
Subsection [A]101.1 Title (page 1, name of jurisdiction, insert in second line)
Insert: village of Bloomingdale.
Subsection [A]101.2 Scope (page 1, addition to scope, number (6.) and (7.) to be added)
Add: (6.) All references in this code to the international building code or the international existing building code shall be meant to conform
to the current provisions of the village building code.
(7.) All references to the international residential code, the construction of one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses) no more than three (3) stories in height with a separate means of egress are to conform to the current provisions
of the village residential building code.
Subsection [A]101.6 Zoning (page 1, add new subsection)
Add: Zoning - The restrictions of the title 11 Zoning Regulations of the village code, as amended from time to time, shall not be deemed to
be modified by any provision of this code; and such restrictions shall be controlling except insofar as this code imposes greater restrictions
in which case the life safety provisions of this code shall control.
Subsection [A]101.7 Legislative (page 1, add new subsection)
Add: Legislative - If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is, or shall be for any reason held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The village board hereby declares that it would have
approved this chapter, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared invalid.
Subsection [A]102.3 Change Of Use Or Occupancy (page 1, add to end of subsection)
Add: No building upon which a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued shall be used for a different classification or group
occupancy until a certificate of occupancy for such different use shall have been issued by the building commissioner; provided, however,
that no certificate of occupancy shall be issued in any event unless the occupancy or use of the building complies with the zoning law.
"Change of occupancy" is not intended to mean change of tenant or proprietor, provided the new tenant is to occupy the building for a
purpose, which would not involve its reclassification into a different occupancy or use group.
Section 103 Department Of Fire Prevention (page 2, delete section and insert)
Delete: Entire section.
Insert: The building commissioner shall be charged with the enforcement of the fire prevention code as amended herein, and the building
commissioner shall be known as the fire code official where referenced in this code.
Subsection [A]105.1 Permits - General (page 4, permits section - add to second line)
Add: Permits shall be governed by title 10, chapter 1 of the village code.
Subsection [A]105.3.1 Permits - Expiration (page 5, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Permit expiration shall be governed by title 10, chapter 1 of the village code.
Subsection [A]105.4.2 Information On Construction Documents (page 6, add to end of subsection)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 318/548
Add: Unless otherwise specified by the building commissioner, each application shall be accompanied by a minimum of six (6) sets of
drawings and specifications signed and sealed by an architect licensed to practice architecture as provided by the Illinois architectural act,
or by a structural engineer licensed to practice structural engineering as provided by the Illinois architectural act, or by the owner of said
proposed building when it is determined to be sufficient by the building commissioner. To obtain a permit, the owner or his representative
shall file an application on a form furnished by the village for that purpose, and shall include a signed statement indicating the proposed
occupancy or use of all parts of the building and the estimated construction cost thereof.
Subsection [A]106.2 Inspections (page 12, add to end of subsection)
Add: It shall be unlawful to occupy, utilize, conduct operations, or conduct business on premises prior to obtaining occupancy or
compliance inspection approval from the village of Bloomingdale. No building, premises or part thereof, hereafter erected, or a structure of
which shall hereafter be altered or repaired and for which a permit shall be required as provided in this code, and no existing building in
which the character of the occupancy is to be changed, shall be occupied or used in whole or in part until a certificate of occupancy and
compliance shall have been issued by the building commissioner. Such certificate shall carry the certification of the building commissioner
that said building, premises or part thereof conforms to the requirements of this and any other applicable village code or ordinance, and
that said building, construction, alteration, repair, use or proposed operation is in compliance with the plans and specifications upon which
the permit required by this code was issued.
Section 108 Board Of Appeals (page 13, Board Of Appeals, delete section and insert)
Delete: Entire section.
Insert: That any person, firm or corporation shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building commissioner (fire code official) to the
planning and zoning commission. Means of appeal shall follow requirements set forth in title 11, chapter 3, section 7 (Appeals) of the
village code.
Subsection [A]109.3 Notice Of Violation (page 13, add to end of subsection)
Add: Upon the failure of the owners of said building or other structure, or the party or parties interested therein, within five (5) days after
the service of the notice of failure to comply with an order of the president and board of trustees to begin the work of making safe or
sanitary or of removing and demolishing said building or other structure, or upon the failure of the owner or owners or the party or parties
interested therein after beginning such work to proceed continuously without unnecessary delay to completion thereof, the village may
take any action at law or in equity to restrain the use of such structure, or may proceed against the owner or any person in possession of
the same in a penal action before the 18th circuit court in DuPage County for the violation of the provisions of this code. The village may
also, in its discretion, cause the structure to be secured to prevent access, cleaned of unsanitary conditions detrimental to the public or
removed in its entirety, after the failure, within the time hereinabove provided for, to restore the same to a safe condition.
Subsection [A]109.3.1 Service (page 13, add to subsection)
Add: Whenever the building commissioner shall condemn and declare any building or other structure to be a nuisance because of
dangerous or unsanitary condition thereof, he shall cause a notice in writing to be served upon the owner or owners, upon the tenant and
occupant thereof, if any, and upon the holder or holders of any encumbrances or general tax lien thereof, if any, ordering and directing said
building or other structure to be put in a safe or sanitary condition or be demolished and removed. Service of said notice may be effected
by personal delivery thereof, or by mailing a copy thereof by registered mail directed to the person involved, at his last address known to
the building commissioner or available to him upon examination of the records of the county treasurer and county clerk of DuPage County,
Illinois, as the case might be and by posting a copy thereof upon the premises subject to such condemnation.
Subsection [A]110.4 Abatement (page 14, add to subsection)
Add: If any building or other structure has become dangerous to life, limb or property or to the public because of structural defects,
deterioration, or fire damage, or has become so unsanitary or out of repair as to render the same unsafe and unfit for occupancy or human
habitation, it shall be deemed a nuisance, and the building commissioner, if and when he shall find any such conditions exist, shall declare
such building or other structure a nuisance and shall condemn the same, and no person, firm or corporation shall occupy, rent, lease or
use such building or other structure with or without compensation. The violations of the provisions of this section shall constitute a petty
offense, and any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation thereof shall be subject to a fine in the manner and amount as
provided by village code.
Subsection 506.3 Security Locking Systems (page 71, new subsection)
Add: All buildings except those in use groups R-3 and R-4 shall have installed an approved key safe system.
Subsection 506.4 Type And Location (page 71, new subsection)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 319/548
Add: The fire protection district having jurisdiction shall review and approve the type of key safe for use within its fire protection district.
The key safe shall be mounted on the exterior of the building in a location approved by the fire marshal.
Subsection 506.5 Electric Security Gates (page 71, new subsection)
Add: At properties equipped with electric security gates, the gates shall be provided with a key switch that activates the operation of the
gate. The key switch shall be of the type approved for this use by the fire protection district. The location of the key switch shall be
approved by the fire marshal.
Subsection 506.6 Security Gates (page 71, new subsection)
Add: At properties equipped with security gates, provisions shall be made for securing of the gate in locked position using a double
padlock system. A padlock approved for this use by the fire protection district shall be provided in addition to the occupant's padlock.
Subsection 903.2.1.1 Group A-1 (page 106, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group A-1 occupancies.
Subsection 903.2.1.2 Group A-2 (page 106, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group A-2 occupancies.
Subsection 903.2.1.3 Group A-3 (page 106, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group A-3 occupancies.
Subsection 903.2.1.4 Group A-4 (page 106, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group A-4 occupancies.
Subsection 903.2.1.5 Group A-5 (page 106, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group A-5 occupancies.
Subsection 903.2.2 Ambulatory Care Facilities (page 106, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all ambulatory care facilities.
Subsection 903.2.3 Group E (page 107, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group E occupancies.
Subsection 903.2.4 Group F-1 (page 107, delete subsection and insert)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 320/548
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group F-1 occupancies.
Subsection 903.2.6 Group I (page 107, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group I occupancies.
Subsection 903.2.7 Group M (page 107, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group M occupancies.
Subsection 903.2.9 Group S-1 (page 108, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group S-1 occupancies.
Subsection 903.2.9.1 Repair Garages (page 108, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings used as repair garages.
Subsection 903.2.9.2 Bulk Storage Of Tires (page 108, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Buildings and structures utilized for the storage of tires shall be equipped throughout with an automatic fire sprinkler system in
accordance with section 903.3.1.1.
Subsection 903.2.10 Group S-2 Enclosed Parking Garages (page 108, delete entire subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings used as enclosed parking garages.
Subsection 903.2.10.1 Commercial Parking Garages (page 108, delete fourth line)
Delete: Entire fourth line ... "where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (464 square meters)."
Subsection 903.2.11 Specific Building Areas And Hazards (pages 108 and 109, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: In all occupancies an automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed for specific building design or hazards in all locations.
Subsection 903.2.13 Group B (page 109, add new subsection)
Add: An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided for all group B occupancies.
Subsection 903.4 Sprinkler System Supervision And Alarms (page 112, delete exceptions 2 and 3)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 321/548
Delete: Entire exception nos. 2 and 3.
Subsection 903.4.1 Monitoring (page 112, delete first paragraph of subsection and insert new paragraph)
Delete: First paragraph of subsection, exceptions to remain.
Insert: Alarm, supervisory and trouble signals shall be distinctly different and automatically transmitted to central stations or remote
supervisory stations by a one way private radio alarm system complying with chapter 26 of the 2010 edition of NFPA 72 which manually or
automatically retransmit trouble, supervisory and full fire alarm signals to DuPage Public Safety Communications (Du-Comm).
Subsection 903.7 Speculative Buildings (page 112, Automatic Sprinkler Systems, insert new subsection)
Insert: 903.7 Speculative Buildings. Automatic sprinklers in speculative buildings shall be hydraulically designed for the storage of class IV
commodities, as defined by NFPA 231, to the maximum available storage height in the building. The maximum available storage height in
a building is the clear height dimension between the finished floor and the median point between the bottom of the high and low points of
the structural members supporting the roof assembly.
Subsection 907.2.1 Group A (page 121, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group A occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the fire
protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection 907.2.2 Group B (page 121, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group B occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the fire
protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection 907.2.3 Group E (pages 121 and 122, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group E occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the fire
protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection 907.2.4 Group F (page 122, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group F occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the fire
protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection 907.2.5 Group H (page 122, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group H occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the fire
protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection 907.2.6 Group I (pages 122 and 123, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group I occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the fire
protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection 907.2.7 Group M (page 123, delete subsection and insert)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 322/548
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group M occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the fire
protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection 907.2.8 Group R-1 (pages 123 and 124, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group R-1 occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the
fire protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection 907.2.9 Group R-2 (page 124, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group R-2 occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the
fire protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection 907.2.10 Group R-4 (pages 124 and 125, delete subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: A fire alarm system in group R-4 occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the
fire protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection 907.2.24 Group S (page 128, insert new subsection)
Insert: A fire alarm system in group S occupancies shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 as regulated by the fire
protection district having jurisdiction.
Subsection 907.6.4 Zones (page 131, insert new subsection)
Insert: Subsection 907.6.4.3 Zone Disconnects. All fire alarm systems shall be capable of zoned disconnects at the control panel.
Disconnection of a zone shall cause the fire alarm system to transmit a trouble signal.
Subsection 907.6.6 Monitoring (page 131, delete part of subsection and insert)
Delete: First paragraph of subsection, exceptions to remain.
Insert: All required fire alarm systems other than fire suppression systems shall be connected to an approved remote station system in
accordance with NFPA 72.
Subsection 910.2 Where Required (pages 139 and 140, Smoke And Heat Vents, add to end of subsection paragraph, and delete exceptions)
Add: Buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with a mechanical smoke exhaust system in all occupancies of groups A, B, E, F, H, I,
M and S having more than 30,000 square feet (2787 square meters) in floor area.
Delete: All exceptions.
Subsection 910.2.1 Groups F-1 And S-1 (page 140, Smoke And Heat Vents - Where Required, delete entire subsection and insert)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Groups F And S. Buildings and portions thereof used as a group F or S occupancy having less than 30,000 square feet (2787
square meters) in floor area.
Subsection [BE]1009.1 Accessible Means Of Egress Required (page 157, add to end of subsection and delete exception no. 1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 323/548
Add: Accessible means of egress shall comply with the current version of the Illinois accessibility code.
Delete: Exception no. 1.
Subsection [BE]1010.1.2 Direction Of Swing (page 161, change occupant load in line 4, second paragraph)
Change: "occupant load of 50 or more" to "occupant load of more than 10 for interior doors only. All exterior doors, doors accessing an exit
enclosure, and all doors serving group H occupancy shall swing in the direction of egress travel and be provided with an approved
automatic door closer."
Subsection [BE]1010.1.9.3 Locks And Latches (page 164, delete numbers 2, 2.1 and 2.2)
Delete: Numbers 2, 2.1 and 2.2.
Subsection [BE]1015.4 Guards - Opening Limitations (page 175, add to end of subsection)
Add: Required guards shall not be constructed with horizontal rails or other ornamental pattern that results in a ladder effect.
Subsection [BE]1006.2.1 Common Path Of Egress Travel (page 153, add to end of subsection)
Add: The length of common path of egress travel in occupancies in group B, F and S shall not be more than 100 feet (30 480 mm) for
common truck docks which are provided and separated from other occupancies by 1-hour fire-resistance rated assemblies, and that are
entirely protected throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1.
Subsection [BE]1006.2.1 Egress Based On Occupant Load And Common Path Of Egress Travel Distance (page 153, add to subsection)
Add: Where shared truck dock facilities are provided in group B, S and F in multiple tenant buildings, two exits or exit access doorways
from the space shall be provided.
Table [BE]1020.1 Corridor Fire-Resistance Rating (page 179, change hour ratings in table)
Change: All occupancies without sprinkler systems are "not permitted" in the third column in coordination with section 903.2, which as
amended by this ordinance requires all buildings to be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section
903.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 where allowed.
Change: All occupancies with sprinkler systems are to have 1 hour corridor fire-resistance rating in the fourth column, with no reductions
in fire-resistance allowed. Exit corridors serving fire-resistance rated stairwells shall have the same fire-resistance rating as the stairwell.
Subsection [BE]1023.11 Smoke-Proof Enclosures (page 182, add "and pressurized" after "smoke proof" in line 3)
Add: "and pressurized" after "smoke proof" in line 3.
Subsection 1101.2 Intent (page 197, add to subsection)
Add: Compliance with the current edition of the Illinois accessibility code is required.
Subsection 1104.2 Elevators, Escalators And Moving Walks (page 204, add to end of paragraph)
Add: Elevator and conveying systems shall be in conformance with state of Illinois section 140 of the elevator safety and regulation act
(225 ILCS 312/140), and the administrative rules (41 Ill. adm. code 1000). Elevator and conveying systems shall comply with following
standards and guidelines:
1. Safety code for elevators and escalators (ASME A17.1-2010/CSA B44-10) and performance-based safety code for elevators and
escalators (ASME A17.7-2007/CSA B44.7-07).
2. Guide for inspection of elevators, escalators, and moving walks (ASME A17.2-2010).
3. Safety code for existing elevators and escalators (ASME A17.3-2005) upgrades required by section 35(h) of the elevator safety act
shall be completed in the time frame specified therein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 324/548
4. Safety standard for platform lifts and stairway chairlifts (ASME A18.1-2008).
5. Standard for the qualification of elevator inspectors (ASME QEI-1-2010).
6. Automated people mover standard (ASCE 21-05), part 1, 2005/2006.
7. Automated people mover standards (ANSI/ASCE/T&DI 21.2-08), parts 2, 3 and 4, 2008.
Subsection 5003.4.1 (page 324, Material Safety Data Sheets, new subsection)
Add: Where Required: The owner shall submit to the village building commissioner a material safety data sheet for each hazardous
material or substance on the premises. The material safety data sheet shall include the following information:
a. Manufacturer's name, address and emergency telephone number.
b. Chemical name and synonyms; trade names and hazardous ingredients.
c. Physical data; reactivity data.
d. Fire and explosion data.
e. Health hazard data.
f. Special protection information and special precautions.
g. Spill or leak cleanup procedures.
Subsection 5003.4.2 (page 324, Material Safety Data Sheets, new subsection)
Add: Occupancies identified by the fire protection district shall install one or more hazardous materials information safes approved by the
fire protection district. This safe shall contain all information as required in section 5003.4.1. The safe shall be mounted in a location
approved by the fire prevention district.
Subsection 5003.5 (pages 324 and 325, Hazard Identification Signs, Location, first sentence)
Delete: "in quantities requiring a permit and".
Subsection 5003.5.1 (page 325, Hazard Identification Signs, Markings, addition)
Add: Rooms, cabinets and outside storage areas shall be labeled in accordance with NFPA 704 listed in chapter 80.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-10-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful to design, construct, alter, repair, demolish, remove, use or maintain any building or structure in the
village in violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter.
B. Application To Existing Permits: This chapter shall not be construed to extend to or affect any construction activity for which a permit was
issued or application for permit filed prior to the effective date hereof, except for fees not yet due or payable, unless the building
commissioner determines that any provision of this chapter or the regulations incorporated herein by reference should be applied for
reasons of public health and safety. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-10-4: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a penalty in the amount of one hundred
percent (100%) of any unpaid fee and, in addition, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each violation. (Ord. 2016-
13, 3-14-2016)
Chapter 11
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 325/548
10-11-1: VILLAGE POOL CODE:
The Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code of the Village (hereinafter referred to as the "Pool Code") shall hereafter be identical with the
provisions of that publication entitled International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2015 edition, except as amended in section 10-11-2 of this
chapter. Three (3) copies of the Pool Code are on file in the Office of the Village Clerk. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-11-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Additions, insertions, changes and deletions to sections of the Pool Code are hereby revised as follows:
Subsection 101.1 Title (page 1, insert at second line)
Insert: the village of Bloomingdale
Subsection 101.2 Scope (page 1, add to new subsection)
Add: The restrictions of title 11, chapter 5 of the village code, and all amendments thereto, shall not be deemed to be modified by any
provision of this chapter; and such restrictions shall be controlling except in so far as this chapter imposes greater restrictions by reason of
life safety, in which case the provisions of this code shall control.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
Subsection 103.1 Creation Of Enforcement Agency (page 2, change subsection)
Change: The building department shall be charged with the enforcement of the pool code, and the building commissioner shall be known
as the building official.
Subsection 105.3 Construction Documents (page 3, add to end of subsection)
Add: Construction Documents. Unless otherwise specified by the building commissioner, each application shall be accompanied by a
minimum of three sets of drawings and specifications signed and sealed by an architect licensed to practice architecture as provided by
the Illinois architectural act, or by a structural engineer licensed to practice structural engineering as provided by the Illinois architectural
act, or by the property owner of said proposed swimming pool, spa or hot tub when it is determined to be sufficient by the building
commissioner. Construction document submittal shall include aforementioned plans, dimensioned property plat of survey indicating
proposed installation, all proposed equipment manufacturer's specifications, and a grading plan should the installation require excavation,
filling, change of grades or retaining wall installation acceptable to the Building Commissioner and Village Engineer.
Subsection 105.6.2 Fee Schedule (page 4, insert)
Insert: The fee schedule shall be governed by section 10-1-2-1 (Building Department Plan Review And Inspection Permit Schedule Of
Fees), of the village code.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
Subsection 106.4 Other Inspections (page 5, add to end of subsection)
Add: Other Inspections. The building commissioner, or other authorized representative, is hereby authorized and directed to periodically
inspect swimming pools, spas or hot tubs affected by this ordinance to insure compliance with the health, sanitation and safety
requirements set forth herein. If, after inspection, the building commissioner finds that the installation, use, maintenance or operation of a
swimming pool, spa or hot tub does not meet the requirements and regulations imposed by this ordinance, said installation shall be closed
and drained until all violations have been corrected. Inspections during the construction or installation of a swimming pool, spa or hot tub
shall be performed based on the type of installation and as required by the conditions of the permit.
Section 108 Means Of Appeals (pages 6 and 7, delete entire section and add new section)
Delete: Entire section.
Add: Means Of Appeals. That any person, firm or corporation shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building commissioner to the
planning and zoning commission. Means of appeal shall follow requirements set forth in section 11-3-7 of the village code, Appeals.
Section 109 Condemnation (page 7, add new section)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 326/548
Add: Condemnation. If any swimming pool, spa or hot tub has become dangerous to life, limb or property or to the public because of
structural defects, deterioration, damage, or has become so unsanitary or out of repair as to render the same unsafe, it shall be deemed a
nuisance, and the building commissioner, if and when he shall find any such conditions exist, shall declare such swimming pool, spa or hot
tub a nuisance and shall condemn the same. The violations of the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, and any
person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation thereof shall be subject to a fine in the manner and amount as provided by this
ordinance.
Section 110 Rebuilding Or Removal After Notice Of Condemnation (page 7, add new section)
Add: Rebuilding Or Removal After Notice Of Condemnation. Rebuilding or removal must begin within five (5) days of condemnation
notice. Any swimming pool, spa or hot tub condemned and declared to be a nuisance by the building commissioner under the provisions
of section 109 hereof shall be put in a safe or sanitary condition or be demolished and removed. Within five (5) days after the service of
notice in the manner and form provided in section 111 and 112 hereof, to make such swimming pool, spa or hot tub safe or sanitary or to
remove and demolish the same, the owner or owners or the party or parties interested therein shall proceed to begin the work of making
said installation or structure safe or sanitary or the work of demolishing and removing the same and shall prosecute said work
continuously without unnecessary delay to a completion thereof; provided, however, that should the owner or person in possession of said
swimming pool, spa or hot tub deem himself aggrieved by any direction to repair or remove such installation alleged by the building
commissioner to be a nuisance, he shall, within a period of five (5) days after the giving of the notice as required by section 111 and 112
hereof, have the right to appeal in writing, from the judgment of the building commissioner to the planning and zoning commission, which
commission shall make the investigation and report its findings to the village board. If in the judgment of the village board upon
consideration of the report of the planning and zoning commission, said swimming pool, spa or hot tub is unsafe or unsanitary and should
be declared a nuisance, it shall order the owner or other person in possession thereof to forthwith begin the work of making safe or
sanitary or of demolishing and removing said installation.
Section 111 Unsafe Swimming Pools, Spas Or Hot Tubs - Method Of Service For Notice (page 7, add new section)
Add: Unsafe Swimming Pools, Spas, Hot Tubs - Method Of Service For Notice. Whenever the building commissioner shall under the
provision of section 109 hereof, condemn and declare any swimming pool, spa or hot tub to be a nuisance because of dangerous or
unsanitary condition thereof, he shall cause a notice in writing to be served upon the owner or owners, upon the tenant and occupant
thereof, if any, and upon the holder or holders of any encumbrances or general tax lien thereof, if any, ordering and directing said
swimming pool, spa or hot tub to be put in a safe or sanitary condition or be demolished and removed. Service of said notice may be
effected by personal delivery thereof, or by mailing a copy thereof by registered mail directed to the person involved, at his last address
known to the building commissioner or available to him upon examination of the records of the county treasurer and county clerk of
DuPage County, Illinois, and by posting a copy thereof upon the premises subject to such condemnation.
Section 112 Failure To Comply After Notice (page 7, add new section)
Add: Failure To Comply After Notice. Upon the failure of the owners of said swimming pool, spa or hot tub, or the party or parties
interested therein, within five (5) days after the service of the notice provided in section 111 hereof or upon the failure to comply with an
order of the village board as provided in section 110 hereof to begin the work of making safe or sanitary or of removing and demolishing
said installation, or upon the failure of the owner or owners or the party or parties interested therein after beginning such work to proceed
continuously without unnecessary delay to completion thereof, the village may take any action at law or in equity to restrain the use of
such installation, or may proceed against the owner or any person in possession of the same in a penal action before the circuit court for
the violation of the provisions of this ordinance. The village may also, in its discretion, cause the said installation to be secured to prevent
access, cleaned of unsanitary conditions detrimental to the public or removed in its entirety, after the failure, within the time herein above
provided for, to restore the same to a safe condition.
Section 202 Definitions (page 11, Portable Or Temporary Pool, add new definition)
Add: Portable Or Temporary Pool. Any above-ground swimming or wading pool, which may be removed and stored when not in use
without dismantling or disassembling, and which does not require electrical connections or filtering and recirculating equipment. Use of a
portable or temporary pool is restricted to the residential property owner on the property it is located for the sole use of his/her household
and guests, and not for the purpose of profit or in connection with any business operated for profit. All portable or temporary pools are to
be drained of all water and stored at the end of each day it is used.
Section 202 Definitions (page 11, Residential Swimming Pool, delete definition and add a new definition)
Delete: Existing swimming pool definition.
Insert: Residential Swimming Pool. Any container, receptacle, structure or artificial basin for water having a depth at any point in excess of
twelve (12) inches in depth and which is used, or intended to be used, for swimming, wading or recreational bathing. This includes inground,
above-ground, on-ground swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. It shall also include all equipment, appliances, structures, facilities
and other appurtenances incidental to, or necessary and intended for, the use, operation and maintenance of a swimming pool as defined
herein. Use of a swimming pool is restricted to the residential property owner on the property it is located for the sole use of his/her
household and guests, and not for the purpose of profit or in connection with any business operated for profit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 327/548
Subsection 302.1 Electrical (page 13, delete and insert new subsection)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Electrical Requirements. All electrical equipment and installations shall conform to the provisions set out in title 10, chapter 4 of the
village code.
Subsection 302.2 Plumbing Requirements (page 13, add new subsection)
Add: Plumbing Requirements. All plumbing equipment and installations shall conform to the provisions set out in title 10, chapter 5 of the
village code.
Subsection 302.2.1 Water Supply (page 13, add new subsection)
Add: Water Supply. The water supply for swimming pools, spas, hot tubs and portable or temporary pools shall be secured from the water
distribution system of the village of Bloomingdale when the pool is located on property served by said system. No fixed piping
arrangements shall exist, which will permit sewage or waste water to enter the pool water system, nor shall any connection be permitted
which could permit water from the pool system to enter the household water supply or the water distribution system of the village of
Bloomingdale. The water supply for a swimming pool, spa, hot tub, portable or temporary pool shall meet the bacteriological standards of
the Illinois department of public health for safe drinking water.
Subsection 302.6 Wastewater Discharge (page 13, delete and insert new subsection)
Delete: Entire subsection.
Insert: Discharge drainage from swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall not be permitted to drain so that any such drainage shall
detrimentally affect or constitute a nuisance or hazard to any adjoining properties. It shall be mandatory to carry the water flow away from
the direction of adjacent properties so that the water will not empty onto such property as it flows from the swimming pool, spa or hot tub
discharge or drain outlet. No discharge or drain outlet shall connect directly to any sewer line.
Subsection 302.9 Mechanical Requirements (page 13, add new subsection)
Add: Mechanical Requirements. All mechanical equipment and installations shall conform to the provisions set out in title 10, chapter 6 of
the village code of the village of Bloomingdale mechanical regulations.
Section 324 Safety Requirements For Portable Or Temporary Pools (page 24, add new subsection)
Add: Safety Requirements For Portable Or Temporary Pools. Portable or temporary pools are to be completely emptied of water at the
end of each day's use. Such pools are to be removed and stored when not in use. Such pools are to be removed and stored when all of
the adult (18 years old or older) residents of the property on which the pool is located will not be in clear sight of the pool or will be absent
from the property.
Section 325 Structural Stability And Construction Requirements (page 24, add new section)
Add: Structural Stability And Construction Requirements. All swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, portable or temporary shall be constructed of
an inert and enduring material, nontoxic to humans. Pool sides shall be vertical and non-climbable and shall be designed to withstand all
anticipated loading for the pool when filled with water and occupied by humans. All swimming pools, spas, hot tubs and related equipment,
structures or decks shall be installed and constructed in compliance with all applicable construction provisions of title 10 of the village code
and other applicable village development codes and ordinances. All vegetation shall be removed from the area directly beneath a
permanent swimming pool, spa or hot tub.
Section 326 Placement And Location Of Pools And Equipment (page 24, add new section)
Add: Placement And Location Of Pools, Spas, Hot Tubs, Portable Or Temporary Pools, And Pool Equipment.
A. Location of swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, portable or temporary pools, as measured from the outermost edges of the proposed
installation(s), shall be limited to property located within residential zoning districts, and shall be further restricted as follows:
(1.) Only located in rear yards.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 328/548
(2.) Not less than five (5) feet away from any side or rear property line.
(3.) Not less than ten (10) feet away from the principal building, detached accessory building or structure, porch or balcony (as
measured from eaves or edge of structures to the proposed installation).
(4.) No installation shall be permitted over any easements.
B. Location of pumps, filters, heaters and water disinfecting equipment shall be limited and restricted as follows:
(1.) Only located in rear yards and permitted areas for pools, spas and hot tubs.
(2.) Not less than five (5) feet away from any side or rear property line.
(3.) Located so as not to constitute a hazard to children. Such items and equipment shall not be situated so as to provide or allow
entry into a swimming pool, spa or hot tub.
(Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-11-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful to design, construct, alter, move, enlarge, replace, repair, demolish, remove, use or maintain a
swimming pool, spa or hot tub dangerous to life or detrimental to health in the village in violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter.
B. Application To Existing Permits: This chapter shall not be construed to extend to or affect any construction activity for which a permit was
issued or application for permit filed prior to the effective date hereof, except for fees not yet due or payable, unless the building
commissioner determines that any provision of this chapter or the regulations incorporated herein by reference should be applied for
reasons of public health and safety. (Ord. 2016-13, 3-14-2016)
10-11-4: PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a penalty in the amount of one hundred
percent (100%) of any unpaid fee and, in addition, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each violation. (Ord. 2016-
13, 3-14-2016)
Chapter 12
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND FLOOD CONTROL
10-12-1: COUNTY REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
10-12-1-1: COUNTYWIDE STORMWATER AND FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE (THE "COUNTYWIDE ORDINANCE"):
All articles, appendices, exhibits and schedules of the DuPage County countywide stormwater and floodplain ordinance adopted by the DuPage
County board April 24, 2012, pursuant to provisions of DuPage County ordinance OSM-001-12, entitled "Amendments To Chapter 15 Of The
DuPage County Code - DuPage County Countywide Stormwater And Flood Plain Ordinance", excepting schedule A - permit fee schedule are
hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein.
A. Three (3) copies of the countywide ordinance are on file in the office of the village clerk for public use and inspection, and available online at:
http://www.dupageco.org/EDP/Stormwater_Management/1165/
B. The provisions of the countywide ordinance as codified in this chapter shall be effective July 25, 2012. (Ord. 2012-32, 7-23-2012)
10-12-1-2: COMPLETE WAIVER COMMUNITY:
Pursuant to article XVII of the countywide ordinance, the village hereby petitions and declares its intent to enforce completely the provisions of
the countywide ordinance within its municipal boundaries. (Ord. 2012-32, 7-23-2012)
10-12-1-3: OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE:
The village board of trustees is hereby designated as the oversight committee responsible to oversee the implementation and enforcement of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 329/548
the countywide ordinance. (Ord. 2012-32, 7-23-2012)
10-12-1-4: GENERAL CERTIFICATIONS:
The general certifications adopted by the DuPage County board April 24, 2012, pursuant to ordinance OSM-002-12 "General Certifications For
Chapter 15 Of The DuPage County Code - DuPage Countywide Stormwater And Flood Plain Ordinance", and presented below, are hereby
adopted by reference.
A. Construction of accessory structures in a flood plain (GC no 1);
B. Construction of boardwalks (GC no 2);
C. Construction of boat lifts and piers in a flood plain, buffer, and/or wetland (GC no 3);
D. Construction of a deck in a flood plain or buffer (GC no 4);
E. Demolition of structures in a flood plain, buffer, and/or wetland (GC no 5);
F. Construction of posts, fencing, and guard rails in a flood plain or buffer (GC no 6);
G. Construction of recreational facilities not located in a wetland (GC no 7);
H. Construction of sidewalks, trails, patios, and driveways outside of wetlands (GC no 8);
I. Construction of storm sewer outfalls and outlet channels located in a floodway, flood plain, buffer, and/or wetland (GC no 9);
J. Construction of shoreline or stream bank stabilization measures (GC no 10);
K. Construction of topsoil and sand restoration in a flood plain, floodway or buffer, but not within a wetland (GC no 11); and
L. Construction of utilities (GC no 12). (Ord. 2012-32, 7-23-2012)
10-12-2: COMPLETE WAIVER COMMUNITY STAFFING:
Pursuant to article XVII of the Countywide ordinance, the Village, as a complete waiver community is required to provide reasonable assurances
to DuPage County that it has available and will utilize qualified experts in the administration and enforcement of the Countywide ordinance, as
follows: (Ord. 2012-32, 7-23-2012)
A. The Village Engineer is hereby designated as the Stormwater Ordinance Administrator and professional engineer.
B. The Civil Engineer is hereby designated as the deputy Stormwater Ordinance Administrator and professional engineer. (Ord. 2012-32, 7-23-
2012; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
C. As necessary and applicable, in the administration and enforcement of the Countywide ordinance, the Village will utilize the services of
qualified experts as follows:
1. A professional engineer with two (2) years experience in stormwater and floodplain management.
2. A professional engineer with two (2) years experience in the application of continuous hydrology and fully dynamic hydraulic models.
3. An environmental scientist.
4. A soil scientist. (Ord. 2012-32, 7-23-2012)
10-12-3: COMPLETE WAIVER COMMUNITY COMMITMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 330/548
A. Annexation Or Preannexation Agreements: As part of its enforcement of the Countywide ordinance, the Village requires that every
development complies with the stormwater standards of the Countywide ordinance, as amended, with regard to any proposed development
for which a plat of subdivision has not been previously recorded or is to be amended after the Countywide ordinance was adopted by the
Village.
B. Rules And Procedures Of The County Stormwater Management Committee: As part of its enforcement of the Countywide ordinance, the
Village consents to be bound by the rules and procedures governing its complete waiver community status, including, without limitation, the
County Stormwater Management Committee's procedures for reasserting County jurisdiction over stormwater management within the
Village's boundaries. (Ord. 2012-32, 7-23-2012)
10-12-4: EXEMPT DEVELOPMENT LIST:
VILLAGE OF BLOOMINGDALE OFFICIAL EXEMPT DEVELOPMENT LIST
Exempt
Development
List
November 22, 1991
Revised January 22,
1992
Previously Approved Ordinance Requirements
Name Of Development1
Address/
Subdivision2 PIN3
Stormwater
Facilities4
Floodplain5
Wetland6
Soil Erosion7
Stratford PUD Stratford Lakes &
Glenwood
2-17-200-013 E E E E
2-17-200-017 E E E E
2-17-200-020 E E E E
2-17-200-021 E E E E
2-17-200-023 E E E E
2-17-200-024 E E E E
2-17-200-025 E E E E
Bloomfield Hills Unit 1 Various E E E E
Bloomfield Hills Unit 2 Various E E E E
Bloomfield Hills Unit 3A Various E E E E
Bloomfield Hills Unit 3B Various E E E E
Bloomfield Hills Unit 4 Various E E E E
Heritage at Stratford Unit 1
Various E E E E
Heritage at Stratford Unit 2
Various E E E E
Heritage at Stratford Unit 3
Various E E E E
Heritage at Stratford Unit 4
Various E E E E
Chateau Lorraine Unit 1 Various E E E E
Chateau Lorraine Unit 2 Various E E E E
Chateau Lorraine Unit 3 Various E E E E
Bloomfield Club Unit 1 Various E E E E
Bloomfield Club Unit 2 Various E E E E
Bloomfield Club Unit 3 Various E E E E
Bloomfield Club Unit 4 Various E E E E
Bloomfield Club Unit 5 Various E E E E
269 Springfield Dr 2-16-108-031 E E E E
269 Springfield Dr 2-16-108-032 E E E E
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 331/548
269 Springfield Dr 2-16-108-033 E E E E
None assigned 2-09-401-018 E E E
None assigned 2-09-401-019 E E E
None assigned 2-09-401-020 E E E
261 Springfield Dr 2-09-401-031 E E E E
None assigned 2-16-200-042 E E E
None assigned 2-16-200-043 E E E
269 Springfield Dr 2-16-100-033 E E E E
None assigned 2-16-300-036 E E E
Glen Garry Subdivision 2-16-300-041 E E E E
Various 2-17-400- E E E
Various 2-17-401- E E E
Various 2-17-402- E E E
None assigned 2-09-414-001 E E
369 Army Trail Rd 2-20-207-001 E E E E
357 Army Trail Rd 2-20-207-002 E E E E
290 Springfield Dr 2-20-207-003 E E E E
245 Gary Avenue 2-20-205-013 E E E E
One Asa Plaza 2-20-205-021 E E E E
None assigned 2-20-205-029 E E E
One Asa Plaza 2-20-205-032 E E E E
None assigned 2-20-205-004 E E E
None assigned 2-20-205-005 E E E
None assigned 2-20-205-015 E E E
290 Knollwood Dr 2-20-205-016 E E E E
405 Army Trail Rd 2-20-205-009 E E E E
391 Army Trail Rd 2-20-205-031 E E E E
50 Scott Dr 2-20-204-004 E E E E
52 Scott Dr 2-20-204-004 E E E E
54 Scott Dr 2-20-204-004 E E E E
363 Army Trail Rd 2-20-206-011 E E E E
None assigned 2-20-206-019 E E E
None assigned 2-20-206-020 E E E
None assigned 2-20-206-021 E E E
None assigned 2-20-206-022 E E E
240 Gary Avenue 2-20-201-022 E E E E
240 Gary Avenue 2-20-100-022 E E E E
246 Gary Avenue 2-20-201-023 E E E E
250 Gary Avenue 2-20-201-025 E E E E
252 Gary Avenue 2-20-201-026 E E E E
Bloomingdale Fashion
Cen.
2-20-400-008 E E E E
412 Army Trail 2-20-400-009 E E E E
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 332/548
404 Army Trail 2-20-400-010 E E E E
355 Army Trail 2-21-108-009 E E E E
None assigned 2-21-108-011 E E E
None assigned 2-21-108-005 E E E
Glen Garry Subdivision 2-21-101-013 E E E E
241 Butterfield Dr 2-21-102-023 E E E E
251 Army Trail Rd 2-21-102-025 E E E E
Stratford Estates 2-21-107- E E E E
339 White Hall Terrace 2-21-104-010 E E E E
337 White Hall Terrace 2-21-104-011 E E E E
335 White Hall Terrace 2-21-104-012 E E E E
333 White Hall Terrace 2-21-104-013 E E E E
331 White Hall Terrace 2-21-104-014 E E E E
329 White Hall Terrace 2-21-104-015 E E E E
327 White Hall Terrace 2-21-104-016 E E E E
325 White Hall Terrace 2-21-104-017 E E E E
323 White Hall Terrace 2-21-104-018 E E E E
324 White Hall Terrace 2-21-104-019 E E E E
326 White Hall Terrace 2-21-104-020 E E E E
328 White Hall Terrace 2-21-104-021 E E E E
330 White Hall Terrace 2-21-104-022 E E E E
332 White Hall Terrace 2-21-104-023 E E E E
320 Old Mill Lane 2-21-104-024 E E E E
322 Old Mill Lane 2-21-104-025 E E E E
324 Old Mill Lane 2-21-104-026 E E E E
326 Old Mill Lane 2-21-104-027 E E E E
328 Old Mill Lane 2-21-104-028 E E E E
330 Old Mill Lane 2-21-104-029 E E E E
332 Old Mill Lane 2-21-104-030 E E E E
334 Old Mill Lane 2-21-104-031 E E E E
336 Old Mill Lane 2-21-104-032 E E E E
338 Old Mill Lane 2-21-104-033 E E E E
340 Old Mill Lane 2-21-104-034 E E E E
Bloomingdale Court PUD Various 2-21-300-021 E E E E
Various 2-21-300-020 E E E E
Various 2-21-300-019 E E E E
Covington Corporate Center 210 Covington Dr 2-17-304-031 E E E
200 Covington Dr 2-17-304-042 E E E
200 Covington Dr 2-17-304-045 E E E
190 Covington Dr 2-17-304-044 E E E
180 Covington Dr 2-17-304-043 E E E
180 Covington Dr 2-17-304-039 E E E
170 Covington Dr 2-17-304-035 E E E E
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 333/548
160 Covington Dr 2-17-304-036 E E E
150 Covington Dr 2-17-304-037 E E E
140 Covington Dr 2-17-304-038 E E E
Various 2-17-305- E E E E
Various 2-17-300- E E E E
211 Covington Dr 2-17-306-001 E E E
462 Camden Ct 2-17-306-001 E E E
455 Scott Dr 2-20-106-007 E E E
220 Covington Dr 2-20-105-001 E E E
467 Fox Ct 2-20-105-001 E E E
471 Fox Ct 2-20-105-002 E E E
472 Fox Ct 2-20-105-003 E E E E
230 Covington Dr 2-20-105-004 E E E E
230 Covington Dr 2-20-105-005 E E E E
476 Brighton Dr 2-20-105-008 E E E
468 Brighton Dr 2-20-105-009 E E E E
472 Brighton Dr 2-20-105-010 E E E E
464 Brighton Dr 2-20-105-011 E E E
460 Brighton Dr 2-20-105-012 E E E
456 Brighton Dr 2-20-105-013 E E E
250 Covington Dr 2-20-105-014 E E E E
471 Brighton Dr 2-20-105-015 E E E E
221 Covington Dr 2-20-106-001 E E E
221 Covington Dr 2-20-106-002 E E E
454 Scott Dr 2-20-107-001 E E E
458 Scott Dr 2-20-107-002 E E E
462 Scott Dr 2-20-107-003 E E E
455 Scott Dr 2-20-106-007 E E E
241 Covington Dr 2-20-106-007 E E E
251 Covington Dr 2-20-107-004 E E E E
251 Covington Dr 2-20-107-005 E E E E
None assigned 2-20-107-007 E E E
455 Brighton Dr 2-20-107-008 E E E
455 Brighton Dr 2-20-107-009 E E E
Outlot B None
assigned
E E E
Springbrook Villas Various 2-15-208- E E E E
Springbrook 2-15-209- E E E E
Drive 2-15-210- E E E E
Tiffany Pointe East One Tiffany Point 2-15-114-003 E E E E
2-15-114-004 E E E E
2-15-114-008 E E E E
2-15-114-009 E E E E
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 334/548
2-15-114-010 E E E E
Bloomingdale Town Center 101 N Bloomingdale Rd 2-15-200-011 E E E E
103 N Bloomingdale Rd 2-15-200-012 E E E E
2-15-200-046 E E E E
2-15-200-050 E E E E
2-15-200-051 E E E E
Old Town Commons 108 Schick Rd 2-15-308-023 E E E E
148 Bloomingdale Rd 2-15-308-026 E E E E
150 Bloomingdale Rd 2-15-309-029 E E E E
152 Bloomingdale Rd 2-15-309-030 E E E E
154 Bloomingdale Rd 2-15-309-031 E E E E
156 Bloomingdale Rd E E E E
160 Bloomingdale Rd E E E E
Leone Medical Center 159 Bloomingdale Rd 2-15-401-002 E E E E
Park Place Townhomes None assigned 2-16-200-034 E E E E
None assigned 2-16-201-010 E E E E
Outlot 3 2-16-201-021 E E E E
38 Royal Lane 2-16-201-011 E E E E
36 Royal Lane 2-16-201-012 E E E E
34 Royal Lane 2-16-201-013 E E E E
32 Royal Lane 2-16-201-014 E E E E
30 Royal Lane 2-16-201-015 E E E E
28 Royal Lane 2-16-201-016 E E E E
26 Royal Lane 2-16-201-017 E E E E
24 Royal Lane 2-16-201-018 E E E E
22 Royal Lane 2-16-201-019 E E E E
20 Royal Lane 2-16-201-020 E E E E
40 Royal Lane 2-16-203-006 E E E E
42 Royal Lane 2-16-203-007 E E E E
44 Royal Lane 2-16-203-008 E E E E
46 Royal Lane 2-16-203-009 E E E E
48 Royal Lane 2-16-203-010 E E E E
50 Royal Lane 2-16-203-011 E E E E
52 Royal Lane 2-16-203-012 E E E E
54 Royal Lane 2-16-203-013 E E E E
56 Royal Lane 2-16-203-014 E E E E
58 Royal Lane 2-16-203-015 E E E E
Outlot 5 2-16-203-016 E E E E
33 Royal Lane 2-16-214-001 E E E E
35 Royal Lane 2-16-214-002 E E E E
37 Royal Lane 2-16-214-003 E E E E
39 Royal Lane 2-16-214-004 E E E E
41 Royal Lane 2-16-214-005 E E E E
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 335/548
43 Royal Lane 2-16-214-006 E E E E
45 Royal Lane 2-16-214-007 E E E E
47 Royal Lane 2-16-214-008 E E E E
60 Royal Lane 2-16-214-009 E E E E
62 Royal Lane 2-16-214-010 E E E E
64 Royal Lane 2-16-214-011 E E E E
66 Royal Lane 2-16-214-012 E E E E
68 Royal Lane 2-16-216-013 E E E E
70 Royal Lane 2-16-214-014 E E E E
72 Royal Lane 2-16-214-015 E E E E
74 Royal Lane 2-16-214-016 E E E E
None assigned 2-16-214-017 E E E E
Fessler's Cove 103 Fesslers Cove 2-15-104-015 E E E E
105 Fesslers Cove 2-15-104-019 E E E E
107 Fesslers Cove 2-15-104-020 E E E E
109 Fesslers Cove 2-15-104-035 E E E E
111 Fesslers Cove E E E E
115 Fesslers Cove E E E E
117 Fesslers Cove E E E E
118 Fesslers Cove E E E E
119 Fesslers Cove E E E E
120 Fesslers Cove E E E E
121 Fesslers Cove E E E E
124 Fesslers Cove E E E E
126 Fesslers Cove E E E E
128 Fesslers Cove E E E E
130 Fesslers Cove E E E E
132 Fesslers Cove E E E E
107 Lake Street 2-15-104-024 E E E E
109 Lake Street 2-15-104-025 E E E E
Shell Oil Company 250 Army Trail Rd 2-23-303-002 E E E E
2-23-303-007 E E E E
Community Driving School 140 Bloomingdale Rd 2-15-102-014 E E E
Medinah Lakes PUD 220 Glen Ridge Ln 2-23-203-031 E E E E
229 Glen Ridge Ln 2-23-203-032 E E E E
Outlot A 2-23-203-038 E E E E
220 Wildwood Ct 2-23-203-039 E E E E
222 Wildwood Ct 2-23-203-040 E E E E
224 Wildwood Ct 2-23-203-041 E E E E
226 Wildwood Ct 2-23-203-042 E E E E
228 Wildwood Ct 2-23-203-043 E E E E
221 Wildwood Ct 2-23-203-044 E E E E
223 Wildwood Ct 2-23-203-045 E E E E
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 336/548
225 Wildwood Ct 2-23-203-046 E E E E
287 Wildwood Ct 2-23-203-047 E E E E
229 Wildwood Ct 2-23-203-048 E E E E
220 Deer Glen Way 2-23-203-049 E E E E
222 Deer Glen Way 2-23-203-050 E E E E
224 Deer Glen Way 2-23-203-051 E E E E
226 Deer Glen Way 2-23-203-052 E E E E
228 Deer Glen Way 2-23-203-053 E E E E
230 Deer Glen Way 2-23-203-054 E E E E
232 Deer Glen Way 2-23-203-055 E E E E
234 Deer Glen Way 2-23-203-056 E E E E
236 Deer Glen Way 2-23-203-057 E E E E
238 Deer Glen Way 2-23-203-058 E E E E
240 Deer Glen Way 2-23-203-059 E E E E
242 Deer Glen Way 2-23-203-060 E E E E
244 Deer Glen Way 2-23-203-061 E E E E
246 Deer Glen Way 2-23-203-062 E E E E
257 Willowbrige Way 2-23-209-009 E E E E
Various 2-23-210- E E E E
Various 2-23-211- E E E E
Various 2-23-212- E E E E
Various 2-23-213- E E E E
Various 2-23-214- E E E E
Various 2-23-215- E E E E
Various 2-23-216- E E E E
Various 2-23-217- E E E E
Various 2-23-218- E E E E
East side storage tank and pump
station
None assigned None
assigned
E E E E
Notes:
1. Name of large subdivision or complex.
2. For large developments, general location (see map).
3. For large developments, provide range (see map).
4. Refers to detention and conveyance facilities.
5. Floodplain approval can be by local municipality or IDOT; also riparian areas fall under this category.
6. Refers to projects approved by the U.S. army corps of engineers.
7. Approved soil erosion and sedimentation plan.
(Ord. 92-4, 1-27-1992)
Chapter 13
DISCLOSURES TO CONDOMINIUM PURCHASERS
10-13-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall apply to all condominiums built, converted and regulated by the condominium property act of the state of Illinois1. (Ord. 2002-
20, 6-3-2002; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 337/548
10-13-2: WRITTEN DISCLOSURES REQUIRED:
Any developer of a new condominium development as well as any developer of a rental apartment complex converted to condominiums shall
provide written disclosure to the purchaser of a "condominium unit" (as defined in the condominium property act), prior to entering into a
contract for the sale of that condominium unit, of the following information:
A. The total number of parking spaces on the condominium property.
B. The total number of parking spaces mandated on the condominium property by ordinance.
C. The total number of parking spaces included in the purchase of the condominium unit.
D. The total number of spaces for shared use by condominium owners.
E. The total number of condominium parking spaces that will be exclusively set aside for guest parking.
F. The ratio of parking spaces available for private ownership to the total number of condominium units offered for sale.
G. The off street parking requirements of the village prohibiting all off street parking between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
daily.
H. Restrictions, if any, on parking vehicles in the private guest parking areas of adjacent subdivisions where those guest parking spaces are
specifically restricted to owners of property in those subdivisions or their guests.
I. Notice of IEPA noise guidelines that may pertain to noise generated at the condominium property line from externally mounted heating and air
conditioning units on the condominium building. (Ord. 2002-20, 6-3-2002)
10-13-3: PURCHASER SIGNATURE REQUIRED; PROVISION THAT PURCHASER HAS READ AND UNDERSTANDS
DISCLOSURE REQUIRED:
The written notification mandated by section 10-13-2 of this chapter shall be signed by the prospective purchaser indicating this disclosure has
been made prior to entering into the contract for purchase of the condominium unit. There shall be a provision in the disclosure indicating that
the prospective purchaser has read the disclosure and understands all of the information therein pertaining to parking of vehicles on the subject
premises and on streets surrounding the condominium property. (Ord. 2002-20, 6-3-2002)
10-13-4: COPY OF DISCLOSURE TO VILLAGE; AUTHORITY TO INSPECT SELLER'S RECORDS:
The condominium developer or seller shall provide the village with a copy of each executed written disclosure obtained from a purchaser within
five (5) business days after the disclosure has been obtained as set forth in section 10-13-2 of this chapter. Failure to make a timely tender of
the written disclosure to the village shall be a violation of this chapter. The village shall have the right to inspect the files of the condominium
seller to verify that all required written consents have been obtained as required by this chapter. The filing of the disclosure with the village shall
be a condition for final inspection and occupancy and for the final billing for utility service. (Ord. 2002-20, 6-3-2002)
10-13-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating the terms and conditions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2002-20, 6-3-
2002; amd. 2012 Code)
Title 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
TITLE; PURPOSE; INTERPRETATION
11-1-1: TITLE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 338/548
This title shall be known, cited, and referred to as the BLOOMINGDALE ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-1-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. This title is adopted for the purpose of:
1. Promoting the public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience, and general welfare.
2. Securing adequate light, pure air, and safety from fire and other dangers.
3. Conserving the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the village.
4. Dividing the entire village into districts and classifying, restricting, and regulating therein the trades and industries and the location,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, and use of buildings, structures, and land, whether for residence, business, manufacturing, or
other specified uses.
5. Avoiding or lessening congestion in the public streets.
6. Preventing the overcrowding of land through regulating and limiting the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected as related to land
area.
7. Establishing, regulating, and limiting the building or setback lines on or along streets, alleys, trafficways, drives, parkways, or property
lines.
8. Regulating and limiting the intensity of the use of lot areas and regulating and determining the area of open spaces within and surrounding
such buildings.
9. Establishing standards to which buildings or structures therein shall conform.
10. Prohibiting uses, buildings, or structures incompatible with the character of the residence, business, or manufacturing districts.
11. Preventing additions to and alterations or remodeling of existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations imposed hereunder.
12. Providing for the gradual elimination of those uses, buildings, and structures which are incompatible with the character of the districts in
which they are made or located including, without being limited thereto:
a. Elimination of such uses of unimproved lands or lot areas when existing rights of the persons in possession thereof are terminated, or
when the uses to which they are devoted are discontinued;
b. Elimination of uses to which such buildings and structures are devoted if they are adaptable for permitted uses; and
c. Elimination of such buildings and structures when they are destroyed or damaged in major part, or when they have reached the age
fixed by the corporate authorities of the village as the normal useful life of such buildings or structures.
13. Providing for the acquisition, by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, of any buildings or structures which do not conform to the
standards fixed by the village.
14. Defining and limiting the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies as provided herein.
15. Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this title or of any amendment hereto.
B. The zoning district regulations are designed to govern the erecting, enlarging, reconstructing, moving, or structurally altering of each building
or structure and the use or change of use thereof or the use or change of use of land in accordance with the function and type of physical
development intended for a specific zoning district as an integral part of the entire village. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
A. Minimum Requirements: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
B. Conflicting Provisions: Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this title upon: 1) the use of land or buildings; 2) the bulk of
buildings; 3) floor area requirements; 4) lot area requirements; and 5) yard requirements, are either more restrictive or less restrictive than
comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of this title or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind,
the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
C. Easements, Covenants And Agreements: This title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or other private agreement; provided,
that where the regulations of this title are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easements, covenants or
other private agreements, the requirements of this title shall govern.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 339/548
D. Existing Unlawful Structures: No building, structure or use not lawfully existing on the effective date hereof shall become or be made lawful
solely by reason of the adoption of this title; and to the extent and manner said unlawful building, structure, or use is in conflict with the
requirements of this title, said building, structure or use remains unlawful. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-1-4: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the village president and the board of trustees that the several provisions of this title are separable, in
accordance with the following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this title to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of
this title not specifically included in said judgment.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this title to a particular property, building or other
structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building or structure not specifically included
in said judgment. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
Chapter 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
11-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
The language set forth in the text of this title shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction:
A. The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
B. The present tense includes the past and the future tenses, and the future the present.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive.
D. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
E. Whenever a word or term defined in section 11-2-2 of this chapter appears in the text of this title, its meaning shall be construed as set forth
in the definition thereof; and any word appearing in parentheses between a word and its definition herein shall be construed in the same
sense as that word.
F. All measured distances, expressed in feet, shall be to the nearest integral foot; if a fraction is one-half foot (1/2') or more, the integral foot next
above shall be taken. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this title, shall be interpreted as herein defined:
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate building or a portion of a principal building, the use of which is incidental and customary to that of the
principal building. Where an "accessory building" is attached to and made a part of the principal building, such "accessory building" shall comply
in all respects with the requirements of this title applicable to the principal building. An "accessory building", unless attached to and made a part
of the principal building, as above provided, shall not be closer than ten feet (10') to the principal building.
ACCESSORY USE: A subordinate use which is clearly and customarily incident to the principal use of a building or premises and which is
located on the same lot as the principal building or use except for such accessory parking facilities as are specifically authorized to locate
elsewhere.
ADDITION: The increasing of the cubic content of a building or the increasing of its ground area.
AIRCRAFT: Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented for use in or designed for navigation of or flight in the air.
AIRPORT (LANDING STRIP, HELIPORT, OR HELISTOP): Any premises which is used or intended for use for the landing and takeoff of aircraft;
and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for airport buildings or other airport structures or rights of way, together with all
airport buildings and structures located thereon.
ALLEY: A right of way with a width not exceeding twenty four feet (24') which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 340/548
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the care, observation, or treatment of domestic animals.
APARTMENTS: See definition of Dwelling, Multiple-Family.
ARCHITECTURAL DRAWINGS: A geometrical representation of a building in plane, elevation, section or perspective; the process of making
such a representation.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY: Any building or portion thereof where automobiles are washed using a conveyor, blower, steam cleaning equipment,
or other mechanical device of production line nature.
AUTOMOBILE MINIMART STATION: An automobile self-service station which offers or includes, as an accessory use, the retail sale of
prepackaged, nonprescription drugs and convenience type food items.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: Any area of land where three (3) or more motor vehicles not in running condition, or the parts thereof, are
stored in the open and are not being restored to operation, or any land, building, or structure used for the wrecking or storing of such
automobiles or parts thereof.
AWNING: A rooflike cover, temporary in nature, which projects from the wall of a building and which may overhang a street.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: That elevation of the highest flood of record, determined by the Village Engineer's record of the elevations of the
highest flood at locations as indicated on the zoning map. "Base flood elevations" at intermediate locations shall be interpolated along the
watercourse between the two (2) nearest base elevations, one each upstream and downstream. The controlling "base flood elevation" for any
building site shall be the same as the "base flood elevation" at the nearest point of the watercourse, as measured on a line perpendicular to the
direction of the watercourse.
BASEMENT: A portion of a building located partly underground, but having less than half its clear floor to ceiling height below the average grade
of the adjoining ground.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of one or more streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way,
bulkhead lines, or shorelines of waterways or corporate boundary lines.
BOARDING HOUSE (LODGING HOUSE, ROOMING HOUSE, TOURIST HOME): A building in which is carried on the business of providing
food or lodging for three (3) or more persons but not more than twenty (20) persons who are not members of the family of the owner or of the
tenant of the premises where the food or lodging is served, and only to such persons as may make contractual arrangements and not to the
general public.
BREWPUB: A restaurant-brewery that sells its beer on site. The beer is brewed primarily for sale in the restaurant and bar. The beer is often
dispensed directly from the brewery's storage tanks. Where permitted by the establishment's liquor license, the brewpub may be permitted to
sell beer that is produced and packaged in a sealed container on site, "to go".
BUILDABLE AREA (For The Purpose Of Measuring Lot Width): The first thirty feet (30') of lot depth immediately in back of the front yard
setback line.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any person,
animal, or chattel. When any portion thereof is completely separated from every other portion by a party wall, then such portion shall be deemed
to be a separate "building".
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A subordinate building or portion of a principal building, the use of which is incidental to that of the principal building
and customary in connection with that use.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space or from other buildings or structures by
a permanent roof and party walls and by exterior walls pierced only by windows and normal entrance or exit doors.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A principal building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the established curb level or existing terrain, whichever is higher, to the highest point
of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel
roofs. Chimneys, towers, spires, elevator penthouses, cooling towers and similar projections other than signs shall not be included in calculating
"building height".
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which is located.
BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL: A building arranged, designed, used, or intended to be used for residential occupancy by one or more families.
"Residential buildings" include, but are not limited to, the following types: single-family detached dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multiplefamily
dwellings.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: Any building not designed to be permanently located in the place where it is or where it is intended to be placed or
affixed.
BULK: A composite characteristic of a given building as located upon a given lot, not definable as a single quantity, but involving all of the
following characteristics:
A. Size and height of building;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 341/548
B. Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets, or to other buildings;
C. Gross floor area of the building in relation to lot area (floor area ratio);
D. All open spaces allocated to the building; and
E. The amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit.
BUSINESS: An occupation, employment or enterprise which occupies time, attention, labor, and materials, or wherein merchandise is exhibited
or sold, or where services are offered.
CELLAR: The portion of a building located partly or wholly underground and having half or more than half of its clear floor to ceiling height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground. In dwellings, except for single-family residences, a "cellar" shall not be used for the purposes of
sleeping or the preparation of food.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members paying dues which owns, hires, or leases a
building or portion thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests.
CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure which:
A. Complies with all the regulations of this title or of any amendment hereto governing bulk of the zoning district in which said building or
structure is located; or
B. Is designed or intended for a permitted or special use as applicable in the district in which it is located.
COURT, HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the lowest level of a court to the mean height of its bounding walls.
COURT, INNER: An open, uncovered, unoccupied space surrounded on all sides by walls or by walls and an interior lot line. The latter is also a
"lot line court".
COURT, LENGTH OF OUTER: The mean horizontal distance between the open and closed ends of an outer court.
COURT, OUTER: An open, uncovered, unoccupied space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building, extending directly to and having at
least one side thereof open for its full width upon a street, alley or other permanent public open space.
CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of a building or structure measured at the center of such front. Where no "curb level"
has been established, the "curb level" shall be deemed to be the established level of the centerline of the street surface in front of a building or
structure measured at the centerline of such front.
DECIBEL: A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound level meters which are employed to measure the intensity of
sound are calibrated in "decibels".
DISTRICT: Sections of the village of Bloomingdale for which the regulations governing the height, the area, or the use of buildings and premises
are the same.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment, or part thereof, in which is provided facilities to serve or consume commodities, or both, which
is intended to occur primarily in patrons' automobiles parked on the premises.
DRIVE-THROUGH USE: A use or part thereof in which products or services are dispensed to persons at windows, terminals or other locations
of such use where access thereto is gained by such persons by way of motor vehicles. Such uses often include, without limitation, food and
beverage establishments, pharmacies, banks, dry cleaners and merchandise or product drop off areas.
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family dwellings, two-family
dwellings, and multiple-family dwellings; but not including hotels, motels, boarding or rooming houses, tourist homes, and trailers, with or
without wheels.
DWELLING, ATTACHED (GROUP, ROW, AND TOWN HOUSES): A dwelling which is joined to other dwellings at both sides by party walls, as
one of a series of not more than six (6) dwellings arranged in a row including the semidetached dwellings at the ends, and not more than two (2)
stories in height.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SEMIDETACHED: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one side only by a party wall.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached building designed for and intended to be occupied as a residence by only one family and servants.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A dwelling designed for or occupied exclusively by two (2) families living in separate housekeeping units, where
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 342/548
each dwelling unit is detached and not semidetached.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY DUPLEX: A dwelling designed for or occupied exclusively by two (2) families living in separate housekeeping units,
the two (2) dwelling units being semidetached.
DWELLING UNIT: A group of rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling, being a residential accommodation, including complete kitchen
facilities, permanently installed, which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use exclusively as living quarters for one family and not
more than an aggregate of two (2) roomers or boarders. Where a private garage is structurally attached, it shall be considered as a part of the
building in which the "dwelling unit" is located.
EFFECT OF SEPARATE ENTRANCE: Any dwelling wherein there is provided means of ingress and egress separate from those provided for
the first floor shall be considered a two-family or multiple-family dwelling.
EFFICIENCY UNIT (STUDIO APARTMENT): A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room, together with bathroom, kitchen, hallway, and
closets, and may contain a dining alcove directly off the principal room, provided such dining alcove does not exceed one hundred twenty five
(125) square feet in area.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION CENTER: A terminal at which electric energy is received from the transmission system and is delivered to the
distribution system only.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION: A terminal at which electric energy is received from the transmission system and is delivered to other elements of the
transmission system and, generally, to the local distribution system.
ESTABLISHMENT OF USE: Whenever reference is made to the "establishment of a use", or by other words to the same effect, such language
shall refer either to the creation of a new use or to the alteration or modification of an existing use.
FAMILY: One or more persons each related to the other by blood, marriage, or legal adoption, or a group of not more than three (3) persons not
all so related, together with his or their domestic servants, maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit. A "family" may include two (2)
roomers, boarders, or permanent guests, whether or not gratuitous.
FARM: An area which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such as vegetables, fruits, trees, and grain, and their storage on the
area, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals for the use or consumption by the person or persons
operating the farm. The term "farming" includes the operating of such an area for one or more of the above uses, including the necessary
accessory uses for treating or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of
the normal farming activities; and provided further, that "farming" does not include the feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals.
FENCE: See definitions of "fence" at section 11-19-3 of this title.
FILLING STATION: Any building or premises used for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale at retail of any automotive fuels or oils. When the
dispensing, sale, or offering for sale is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises is classified as a "public garage".
FIREARMS PRACTICE FACILITY, INDOOR: An establishment for the practicing of target shooting on an established target range(s) within an
enclosed building and meeting the standards of the U.S. department of energy range design criteria. The sale of firearms and associated
products may be permitted as an accessory use.
FLOOD RESERVOIR: A ponding area created for the purpose of impounding floodwaters and alleviating any flood damage which might result
from manmade fills.
FLOODPLAIN: That contiguous land area adjacent to a watercourse whose elevation is equal to or below the flood base elevation, including
any land which is surrounded on more than one-half (1/2) its perimeter by land having an elevation equal to or lower than the base flood
elevation.
FLOOR AREA (For The Purpose Of Determining The Floor Area Ratio, Conversions Of Existing Structures, And Maximum Size Of Businesses
And Establishments): The sum of the horizontal area of the floor space contained in all floors, including a basement floor, but not including a
cellar floor, of a building or buildings on a lot, measured in square feet from the exterior faces of the exterior walls of each building, or from the
centerline of party walls separating two (2) buildings. Such "floor area" shall also include:
A. Space devoted to elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor;
B. Floor space used for mechanical equipment when the structural headroom exceeds seven feet ten inches (7'10") in height, except
equipment such as bulkheads, water tanks, and cooling towers, when located on the roof, whether or not such equipment is in the open or
enclosed;
C. Floor space in that part of a half story where the headroom is seven feet ten inches (7'10") or more in height;
D. Floor space devoted to interior balconies, mezzanines, and enclosed porches;
E. Floor space devoted to accessory uses in the principal building and in the accessory building or buildings; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 343/548
F. Floor space devoted to enclosed off street parking and off street loading.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The numerical value obtained through dividing the floor area of a building or buildings by the net lot area on which such
building or buildings are located.
FREQUENCY: The number of oscillations per second in a sound or other type of wave measuring the pitch of the resulting sound.
FRONTAGE: All property on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), measured along the line of the
street, or if the street is dead ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
FRONTAGE ROAD: A road constructed parallel to and immediately adjacent to the right of way of a primary highway, and designed to serve the
properties fronting on said primary highway.
FULL SERVICE STATION: An automobile service station which, in addition to the retail dispensing of vehicular fuels, performs, as an accessory
use, automotive maintenance, service, or repair (excluding bodywork) including, but not limited to, the sale and installation of lubricants, tires,
batteries, and similar accessories for automotive vehicles to owner representatives. Such station may also allow, as an option, customer
dispensing of vehicular fuels at certain pump islands.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal building which is intended for and used for storing the
private passenger vehicles and one commercial vehicle of not more than one ton load capacity of a family or families resident upon the
premises, which shall be limited to three (3) parking spaces for single-family dwellings, and in multiple-family dwellings, shall be limited in the
number of parking spaces to one and one-half (11/2) times the number of dwelling units, plus one, and in which no business, service or industry
connected directly or indirectly with the automotive vehicles is carried on; provided, that not more than one-half (1/2) of the space may be rented
for the private passenger vehicles of persons not resident on the premises; except, that all the space in a garage of one or two (2) car capacity
may be so rented.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any building within which automotive vehicles are painted, repaired, rebuilt, reconstructed or stored for compensation.
GARAGE, STORAGE: A building used for housing only of motor vehicles pursuant to previous arrangements and not by transients, and where
no equipment or parts are sold and vehicles are not rebuilt, serviced, repaired, hired or sold; except, that fuel, grease or oil may be dispensed
within the building to vehicles stored therein.
GOLF COURSE: Public, semipublic or private grounds over which the game of golf is played, including accessory buildings and land uses
incidental thereto, and consisting of at least twenty five (25) acres for each nine (9) hole "par 3" course.
GRADE: A. For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the streets.
B. For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the average of the elevations of the sidewalk at the center of all walls adjoining
the streets.
C. For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of
the building.
D. The closest wall approximately parallel to a street line is to be considered as adjoining the street. Where no sidewalk exists, the "grade"
shall be established by the Village Engineer.
GROUND FLOOR AREA: The lot area in square feet covered by a single-family dwelling, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls
of the building. Such area shall include only the area devoted to dwelling purposes, including enclosed utility rooms on the ground floor of a
dwelling, and shall not include area devoted to garage, breezeway or carport.
HEAVY COMMERCIAL USES AND EQUIPMENT: Includes uses and equipment of a kind not generally involving purchase or use by the
average resident in the usual conduct of matters pertaining to living and residence in the community, as contrasted with and distinguished from
the usual general retail and service uses. "Heavy commercial uses" are exemplified by sales and service of earthmoving equipment, prime
source turbines and generators, industrial heating apparatus, factory type machine tools, and data processing equipment.
HOME OCCUPATION: A gainful occupation or profession conducted by a member of a family residing on the premises and where the business
or profession is conducted wholly within the dwelling.
HOTEL: A building containing not less than fourteen (14) lodging rooms, a general kitchen and dining room, a common entrance lobby, halls
and stairway; and where lodging rooms do not have a doorway opening directly to the outdoors, except for emergencies; and where more than
fifty percent (50%) of the lodging rooms are for rent, with or without meals, to transient guests for a continuous period of less than thirty (30)
days.
HOTEL, APARTMENT: A hotel in which at least fifty percent (50%) of the hotel accommodations are for occupancy by permanent guests (30
days or more).
INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a nonprofit organization or a nonprofit establishment for public use.
JUNKYARD: An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or
handled including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles. A "junkyard" includes an auto wrecking
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 344/548
yard, but does not include such uses as are conducted entirely within enclosed buildings.
KENNEL: Any premises where four (4) or more domestic animals over four (4) months of age are owned, boarded, bred and/or offered for sale.
LODGING HOUSE: See definition of boarding house (lodging house, rooming house, tourist home).
LODGING ROOM: A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without cooking facilities, and with or without an individual bathroom. In a
suite of lodging rooms, each room which provides sleeping accommodations shall be counted as one "lodging room".
LOT: Except in the case of a planned development, a parcel of land of record in the office of the recorder of deeds of DuPage County, Illinois,
which is occupied or intended for occupancy by one principal building, together with permitted accessory buildings and required open spaces,
and having its principal frontage upon a street.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes through front, side, and rear lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets; or a lot at the point of deflection in
alignment of a single street, the interior angle of which is one hundred thirty five degrees (135°) or less.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a lot measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT, INTENSITY OF USE: The relation which the built over portion of a lot, called the "building area", has to the whole area of the lot.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE: A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership; except, that where any portion of the lot extends into the
abutting street or alley, the "lot line" shall be deemed to be the street or alley right of way lines.
LOT LINE, FRONT: That boundary line of a lot which is along an existing or dedicated street lot line and which is established by the owner as a
"front lot line". On corner lots, the owner may select either street lot line as the "front lot line".
LOT LINE, REAR: That boundary of a lot which is most distant from and is, or is approximately, parallel to the front lot line. If the "rear lot line" is
less than ten feet (10') in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the "rear lot line" shall be deemed to be a line ten feet (10') in length within
the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front or rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A single parcel of land that is: a) a designated lot created and delineated in a duly recorded plat of subdivision in the office
of the recorder of deeds of DuPage County, Illinois; or b) described and conveyed by a deed recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of
DuPage County, Illinois; provided, however, that: a) a parcel of land that is described and conveyed by recorded deed must have met all
applicable zoning and subdivision requirements then in force; and b) if the party identified in such deed as the grantor or seller of such parcel of
land that is described and conveyed by recorded deed also owned a parcel of land that was then contiguous to such parcel of land that is
described and conveyed by recorded deed, then such contiguous parcel of land must also have met all applicable zoning and subdivision
requirements then in force.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the street side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its
rear.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) more or less parallel streets and which is not a corner lot. On a
"through lot", both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines, except, in the case where an entire block consists of through lots, there shall be
one common front lot line.
MAIN BUILDING OR USE: The main or primary purpose for which land or a structure or use thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for
which it may be occupied or maintained under this title. All other structures or uses on the same lot and incident or supplementary thereto and
permitted under this title shall be considered accessory uses.
MARQUEE (CANOPY): A rooflike structure of permanent nature which projects from the wall of a building and may overhang the public way.
MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an organization or business that is registered by the Illinois department of
agriculture to perform necessary activities to provide only registered medical cannabis grown and cultivated to be packaged and distributed to
registered medical cannabis dispensing organizations with usable medical cannabis in accordance with the laws of the state of Illinois. In
addition a cultivation center must be located at least two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') from any daycare center, school or area zoned for
residential use.
MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING CENTER: A facility operated by an organization or business that is registered by the Illinois department of
financial and professional regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis,
paraphernalia, or related supplies and educational materials to registered qualifying patients in accordance with the laws of the state of Illinois.
In addition a dispensary cannot be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a school or daycare center or located in a residential
neighborhood.
MICROBREWERY: A business establishment where malt beverages of alcoholic content are produced for distribution, retail or wholesale, on or
off premises, with a capacity of less than fifteen thousand (15,000) U.S. barrels of beer per calendar year. The establishment may include, as an
ancillary use, an on site taste testing area and other uses such as a restaurant or tavern as permitted by the village of Bloomingdale zoning
ordinance and/or liquor commissioner.
MOTEL (TOURIST COURT): A building containing lodging rooms having adjoining individual bathrooms, and where each lodging room has a
doorway opening directly to the outdoors, and more than fifty percent (50%) of the lodging rooms are for rent to transient tourists for a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 345/548
continuous period of less than thirty (30) days.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building and premises in which freight shipped by motor truck or railroad is received, assembled, sorted, and
rerouted for local, intrastate or interstate shipment by motor truck.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any self-propelled, wheeled vehicle designed primarily for transportation of persons or goods along public streets.
MOVED: The act of permanently establishing a structure upon a portion of land after removing same from another part of the same or a different
lot, tract or parcel of land.
NET LOT AREA: The area inside of lot lines, exclusive of streets and alleys.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING: Any building which does not comply with all of the regulations of this title governing bulk for the district in which
such building is located, or is designed or intended for a nonconforming use.
NONCONFORMING USE: A building, improvement or use which lawfully existed on any lot or premises prior to the effective date hereof, but
which, at that time and thereafter, does not comply with the regulations of this title for the district within which such building, improvement or use
is located.
NOXIOUS MATTER: Material which is capable of causing injury or malaise to living organisms or is capable of causing detrimental effects upon
the health or the psychological, social, or economic well being of human beings.
NURSING HOME: A long term healthcare facility that provides full time care and medical treatment for people who are unable to take care of
themselves.
OCTAVE BAND: A term denoting all frequencies between any given frequency and double that frequency.
OCTAVE BAND FILTER: An electrical frequency separator, designed according to standards formulated by the American Standards Association
and used in conjunction with a sound level meter to take measurements in specific octave intervals (American standard for sound-level meters,
ASS no. 224.3-1944).
OPEN SALES LOT: Any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling or renting passenger cars, trucks, trailers, motor scooters,
motorcycles, boats, aircraft or monuments, and for the storing of same prior to sale or rental.
PACKAGE LIQUOR STORE: A business establishment where alcoholic beverages are kept and sold and where such alcoholic beverages are
not generally imbibed on the premises. A package liquor store differs from a microbrewery and tavern in that liquors and other alcoholic
beverages are not produced on site.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Material which is suspended in or discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form, as a liquid or solid, at
atmospheric temperature and pressure.
PARTY WALL: A wall starting from the foundation and extending continuously through all stories to or above the roof which separates one
building from another, and is in joint use by each building.
PATIO: A level, unenclosed surface structure, usually brick, concrete, or other form of mostly pervious pavement, located at the finished grade,
usually directly adjacent to or attached to a building.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards or glare or
heat generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PERSON: Every natural individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization of any kind.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A use of land in single ownership or control, where the specific requirements of a zoning district may be modified,
which offers benefits to the neighborhood of which it is a part or to the general public welfare beyond those required by this title, and which use
of land will contain or provide amenities not otherwise required by law including, but not limited to, provisions for common open space,
recreational facilities, or specific design, engineering, architectural, site planning or landscape features.
PLOT: Any parcel of land, subdivided or unsubdivided.
PROMOTIONAL SALE OR PROGRAM: The use of outdoor displays for the promotion of store sales.
REFUSE: All waste products resulting from human habitation, except sewage.
RESALE ESTABLISHMENT: General household merchandise originally sold at retail and previously owned by individuals or households,
including clothing, furniture, home decor items, kitchen utensils and small appliances, consumer electronics, sporting goods, toys, recreational
equipment and other household goods, but excluding merchandise marketed, held out, sold, valued or otherwise considered as antique
merchandise, and excluding pawnshops and precious metal purchase shops.
RESEARCH LABORATORY: A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or
experimentation, but not facilities principally for the manufacture or sale of products.
REST HOME: See definition of Nursing Home.
RINGELMANN CHART: A chart which is described in the U.S. bureau of mines information circular 6888 and on which are illustrated graduated
shades of gray for use in estimating the light obscuring capacity of smoke.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 346/548
RINGELMANN NUMBER: The number of the area on the Ringelmann chart that coincides most nearly with the light obscuring capacity of
smoke.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street between the regularly established curb lines or that part, improved or unimproved, which is used or intended
to be used for vehicular travel.
ROOMING HOUSE: See definition of Boarding House (Lodging House, Rooming House, Tourist Home).
ROW HOUSE: See definition of Dwelling, Attached (Group, Row, And Town Houses).
SCREENING: A structure erected or vegetation planted for concealing from viewers the area behind it.
SELF-SERVICE STATION: An automobile service station where the dispensing of vehicular fuels is performed primarily by individual patrons
and which does not perform any manner of automotive maintenance, service, or repair.
SETBACK, FRONT YARD: The minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the line of any main or accessory building or other
structure located on the lot, disregarding steps.
SIDEWALK SALE: The selling of merchandise on the exterior of a commercial establishment, generally on the sidewalk adjacent to the building.
SMOKE UNITS, NUMBER OF: The number obtained by multiplying the smoke density in Ringelmann numbers by the time of emission in
minutes. For the purpose of this calculation, a Ringelmann density reading is made at least once every minute during the period of observation;
each reading is then multiplied by the time in minutes during which it is observed; the various products are then added together to give the total
number of smoke units observed during the total period under observation.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument standardized by the American Standards Association for measurement of the intensity of sound.
STABLE, PRIVATE: Any building which is located on a lot on which a dwelling is located, designed, arranged or used for not more than four (4)
horses for the private use of occupants of the dwelling, not exceeding six hundred (600) square feet in area.
STABLE, PUBLIC: A building where horses are kept for hire or sale.
STAND, ROADSIDE: A structure for the display and sale of products with no space for customers within the structure itself.
STEEPLE: An unoccupied, ornamental tower built on or above the roof of a building.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above; or if there is no floor above,
the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. A basement shall be counted as a "story" if the floor of such basement is less than three
feet (3') below grade or if the ceiling of such basement is more than five feet (5') above grade.
STORY, HALF: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall not more than three feet (3') above the
top floor level and, in which space, not more than sixty percent (60%) of the floor area, is completed for principal or accessory use.
STREET (AVENUE, PLACE, LANE, ROAD, BOULEVARD, TERRACE OR PARKWAY): All property dedicated or intended for public or private
street, highway, freeway, or roadway purposes or subject to easements therefor.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change, other than incidental repairs, in the supporting members of a building or structure such as bearing
walls, partitions, foundations, columns, beams, or girders; or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground, or attached to something having a
permanent location on the ground. A sign or other advertising device, detached or projecting, shall be construed to be a separate "structure". A
patio, regardless of the material used for construction, shall be construed to be a "structure".
STUDIO APARTMENT: See definition of Efficiency Unit (Studio Apartment).
SWIMMING POOL: Any temporary or permanent artificial pool or receptacle for water installed, constructed or maintained in, on or above the
ground (not including those enclosed and located entirely within a dwelling), having a perimeter of more than twenty five feet (25') and a depth
of more than two feet (2') at any point. A "swimming pool" shall be considered to be a main building and use; provided, however, that a
"swimming pool" may be considered to be an accessory building or use customarily incidental to a dwelling when located on the same lot
therewith and designed and used for swimming or bathing in connection with such dwelling solely by the persons living therein or their private
guests. No "swimming pool" designed or used for any commercial or other nonresidential purpose shall be considered to be an accessory
building or use customarily incident to a dwelling.
TAVERN: An establishment where liquors are sold to be consumed generally on the premises. A tavern differs from a microbrewery and
brewpub, in that liquors and other alcoholic beverages are not produced on site. Packaged liquor may be sold, but only as part of an ancillary
use when permitted by the village of Bloomingdale zoning ordinance and/or liquor commissioner.
TOURIST HOME: See definition of Boarding House (Lodging House, Rooming House, Tourist Home).
TOWNHOUSE DWELLINGS: See definition of Dwelling, Attached (Group, Row, And Town Houses).
TOXIC MATERIAL: A substance (liquid, solid or gaseous) which, by reason of an inherent deleterious property, tends to destroy life or impair
health.
TRAILER (CAMPER) (TRAVEL): An automobile or truck drawn highway vehicle designed to serve as temporary living quarters while traveling or
camping.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 347/548
TRAILER, HOUSE: Any vehicle or portable structure constructed so as to permit occupancy thereof for lodging or dwelling purposes or for use
as an accessory building or structure in the conduct of a business, trade or occupation, and which is so designed and constructed that it is, or
may be, mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on streets and highways, and which is propelled or drawn by its own or other motive
power.
TRAILER PARK: Any premises on which is parked one or more trailers, or any premises used or held out for the purpose of supplying to the
public a parking space for one or more such trailers. The term does not include sales lots on which automobiles or unoccupied trailers, new or
used, are parked for purposes of inspection and sale.
UNIFIED SHOPPING CENTER: Two (2) or more commercial establishments located on the same site and under the control of one association
or management firm.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY: A subordinate use which is clearly and customarily incidental to the principal use of a building or premises, and which is
located on the same lot as the principal building or use, except for such accessory parking facilities as are specifically authorized to be located
elsewhere.
USE, LAWFUL: The use of any building, structure or land that conforms with all the regulations of this title, or any amendment hereto, and which
conforms with all the codes, ordinances and other legal requirements, as existing on the effective date hereof, or any amendments hereto, for
the structure or land that is being examined.
USE, NONCONFORMING: See definition of Nonconforming Use.
USE, PERMITTED: Any use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements,
regulations, and performance standards, if any, of such district.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use of land or building, as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.
USE, SPECIAL: Any building, structure, and use which complies with the applicable regulations governing special uses.
USE, TEMPORARY: A use which is permitted for only a limited period of time.
USED CAR LOT: Any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying and selling secondhand passenger cars and/or trucks and the storing of
same prior to sale.
VENDING MACHINE: A machine for dispensing merchandise or services designed to be operated by the customer.
VISION CLEARANCE: An open, unoccupied triangular space at the street corner or a corner lot, the space being defined as a setback line
extending across the corner between points established on the street lines by measurements from the corner.
YARD: An open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky. A "yard" extends along a lot line and at
right angles to such line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is located.
YARD, CORNER SIDE OR SIDE YARD ABUTTING A STREET: A side yard that adjoins either a roadway right of way or a private street, which,
unlike a typical interior side yard, extends from the front lot line to the rear lot line.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the front of a lot and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main
building or any projection thereof other than the projection of the usual steps.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE: A yard extending along a side lot line between the front yard and the rear yard.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear of a lot and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the
main building or any projections other than steps. On corner lots, the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot
has its least dimension. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall, in all cases, be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
YARD, SIDE: Either a corner side yard/side yard abutting a street or an interior side yard, as the case may be. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd.
Ord. 82-4, 2-8-1981; Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; Ord. 2008-14, 3-24-2008; Ord. 2011-10, 2-28-2011; Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011; 2012 Code; Ord.
2014-26, 6-9-2014; Ord. 2014-42, 10-13-2014; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014; Ord. 2015-03, 1-12-2015; Ord. 2017-09, 3-13-2017; Ord. 2017-42,
11-13-2017)
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
11-3-1: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIALS:
The administration of this title is hereby vested in three (3) offices of the government of the village as follows: (Ord. 2011-10, 2-28-2011; amd.
Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
A. Building and zoning official;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 348/548
B. Police department; and (Ord. 2011-10, 2-28-2011)
C. Planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
11-3-2: BUILDING AND ZONING OFFICIAL:
A. Created: In the village, the village administrator shall appoint a building and zoning official with the authority, responsibility, and duties as set
forth in this title and such other ordinances and codes of the village that may exist from time to time. (Ord. 2007-20, 5-24-2007)
B. Duties: The following shall be the duties of the building and zoning official:
1. Determine conformance of application for building permits with regulations of this title and make and maintain records thereof;
2. Issue certificates of occupancy and make and maintain records thereof;
3. Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and use of land to determine compliance with the terms of this title;
4. Maintain permanent and current records of this title including, but not limited to, all maps, amendments and special uses, variations,
appeals, and applications therefor, and designate on the zoning district map each amendment and special use, in addition to such records
which the village is required to keep; (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
5. Receive all matters to come before the planning and zoning commission and assign a consecutive number for identification in the order in
which they are received and, insofar as is practicable, place them on the agenda of the planning and zoning commission in the numerical
order in which they are received;
6. Initiate, direct, and review, from time to time, a study of the provisions of this title and make written reports of recommendations to the
planning and zoning commission not less frequently than once each year; and (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
7. Issue permits for the erection of temporary structures in accordance with regulations of the village building code. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-3-3: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
A. Certificate Required: Any land vacant on the effective date hereof, and any building or structure, or addition or major alteration thereto,
constructed after the effective date hereof, shall not be used or occupied until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building and
zoning official. No new use shall be made of any land, building, or structure until a certificate of occupancy has been issued.
B. Application For Certificate: Every application for a building permit shall be deemed to be an application for an occupancy certificate. Every
application for an occupancy certificate for a new use of land or existing building or structure where no building permit is required shall be
made to the building and zoning official.
C. Inspection; Issuance Of Certificate: An occupancy certificate shall be issued only after the building and zoning official has inspected the
premises and finds:
1. It to be in compliance with all applicable regulations of the zoning district in which it is located; and
2. That the use or building or structure is in conformance with the plans and specifications for which the building permit was issued.
D. Temporary Certificate: The building and zoning official may issue only one temporary occupancy certificate for each application for a building
permit as follows:
1. For a period not to exceed six (6) months from the date of its issuance, and with provisions, if required, for an extension of not more than
a total of three (3) additional months; and
2. That the portion of the land, building, or structure for which the temporary occupancy certificate is issued has been completed and meets
the requirements as set forth under subsections C1 and C2 of this section, and the remaining portion of the land, building, or structure is in
the process of completion.
E. Contents Of Certificate: Every certificate of occupancy shall be dated, shall state that the use or occupancy complies with the provisions of
this title and shall be signed by the building and zoning official.
F. Approval Or Denial Of Certificate: The occupancy certificate shall be issued, or written notice shall be given, to the applicant specifying the
reasons why a temporary or permanent certificate cannot be issued not later than fourteen (14) days after the building and zoning official is
notified in writing that the building or premises is ready for occupancy. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-3-4: SPECIAL USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 349/548
A. Purpose: The development and execution of this title is based upon the division of the village into districts, within which districts the use of
land and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized,
however, that there are certain uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified in any particular district or
districts without consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use
at the particular location. Such special uses fall into two (2) categories:
1. Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public interest.
2. Uses entirely private in character, but of such an unusual nature that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their
impact upon neighboring property or public facilities.
B. Initiation: Any person having a freehold interest in land, or a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, or a contractual interest
which may become a freehold interest, or an exclusive possessory interest, and which is specifically enforceable, may file an application to
use such land for one or more of the special uses provided in this title in the zoning district in which the land is located. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-
1969)
C. Processing Application:
1. Filing; Required Information: An application for a special use shall be filed with the village clerk on a form prescribed by the president and
board of trustees. The application shall be accompanied by such plans or data, or both, as specified by the planning and zoning
commission, and shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed special use will
conform to the standards set forth herein for special uses. Copies of such application shall be forwarded by the board of trustees to the
planning and zoning commission with the request to hold a public hearing. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
2. Notices: The applicant shall give notices of the public hearing as follows: (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
a. Persons Required To Be Notified: To the persons to whom the current real estate tax bills are sent, if any, as shown on the record of the
local real estate tax assessor, of all lots lying within two hundred fifty feet (250') of a property line of the lot for which the application has
been filed. (Ord. 96-40, 9-9-1996)
b. Contents: All notices shall be in writing and shall give the time, place, and purpose of such hearing and shall be mailed not more than
thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days in advance of such hearing. The notice shall be sent by certified mail, properly addressed
as shown on the tax assessor's rolls and with sufficient postage affixed thereon, with return receipt requested. The applicant shall file a
sworn affidavit with copies of the notices with the village clerk, showing the names and addresses of all notices the applicant has sent.
Said affidavit shall be conclusive presumption of giving of said notices.
c. Publication: The village clerk shall cause a notice of time, place, and purpose of such hearing to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the village not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days in advance of such hearing.
d. Posting: The applicant shall post and maintain for a period of not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing the notice thereof as
furnished by the village clerk. The said notice, showing the time, place and purpose of said hearing, shall be posted on the property for
which the special use is sought as follows:
(1) On an unimproved lot: Not more than fifteen feet (15') from the front lot line and not less than four feet (4') above and not more than
six feet (6') above the ground and placed in such a manner as to be unobscured from the street.
(2) On an improved lot: On the front entrance door of the improvement thereon, or placed in a similar manner as for an unimproved lot.
(Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
e. Additional Notices: Supplemental or additional notices may be distributed, published or posted as the planning and zoning commission
may, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
D. Hearing: Upon receipt, in proper form, of the application and statement referred to above, the planning and zoning commission shall hold at
least one public hearing on the proposed special use. However, the planning and zoning commission may continue the hearing from time to
time without further notices being published.
E. Planning And Zoning Commission Recommendation: No special use permit shall be recommended by the planning and zoning commission
unless there is a concurring vote of a majority of all members present with a minimum of four (4) concurring votes required, based on
findings of fact that: (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
1. The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals,
comfort, or general welfare.
2. The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already
permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood.
3. The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property
for uses permitted in the district.
4. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, or necessary facilities have been or will be provided.
5. Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public
streets. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 350/548
6. The special use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such
regulations, in each instance, be modified by the president and board of trustees pursuant to the recommendations of the planning and
zoning commission.
7. The planning and zoning commission may recommend that there be, in part of the area of a planned development and for the duration of
such development, specified uses not permitted by the use regulations of the district in which said development is located; provided, that
the planning and zoning commission shall find that: (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
a. The uses permitted by such exceptions are necessary or desirable and are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the
development;
b. The uses permitted by such exception are not of such a nature or so located as to exercise a detrimental influence on the surrounding
neighborhood;
c. Not more than twenty percent (20%) of the ground area or of the gross floor area of such development shall be devoted to the uses
permitted by said exception;
d. In an industrial planned development, such additional uses allowed by exception shall conform with the performance standards of the
district in which the development is located as set forth in section 11-9-7 of this title; and
e. That the use exceptions so allowed are reflected by the appropriate zoning district symbols and so recorded on the zoning district map.
(Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
8. The planning and zoning commission may recommend that there be in a planned development exceptions to the bulk regulations set forth
in the district regulations applicable to the district in which the planned development is located; provided, that the planning and zoning
commission shall find: (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
a. That such exception shall be solely for the purpose of promoting a unified site plan no less beneficial to the residents or occupants of
such development as well as the neighboring property than would be obtained by the bulk regulations of this title for buildings developed
on separate lots;
b. That the overall floor area ratio, when applicable, would not exceed, by more than fifteen percent (15%), the floor area ratio regulation
of this title for the district in which it is located; (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
c. That in the part of the planned development containing only residential uses, the minimum lot area per dwelling unit may be less than
required by district regulations applicable to the district in which the planned development is located, provided there is contained within
the planned development permanent open areas having sufficient area to maintain at least the required lot area per dwelling for the
district where it is located, when related to the total area within the planned development, exclusive of areas in rights of way of
thoroughfares, streets and alleys. Such open areas shall be perpetuated by properly recorded covenants extending over the life of the
planned development as common area for use only by the residents of the planned development or dedicated to the village for park,
playground or other open public uses; and (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. 2012 Code)
d. That in part of a planned development devoted to residential uses, the planning and zoning commission may recommend and the
president and board of trustees may approve access to: a dwelling by a driveway or pedestrian walk easement; off street parking
facilities for such dwelling when located not more than one hundred eighty feet (180') from the dwelling served; and spacing between
buildings of lesser widths or depths than required by district regulations for the district in which the planned development is located;
provided: (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
(1) That protective covenants are recorded which perpetuate, during the period of the special use, access easements and off street
parking spaces for use by the residents of the dwellings served;
(2) The spacing between buildings shall be consistent with the application of recognized site planning principles for securing a unified
development and due consideration is given to the openness normally afforded by intervening streets and alleys. Spacing between
principal buildings within a part of a planned development where subsequent transfer of ownership is contemplated shall be
equivalent to such spacing as would be required between buildings by district regulations for the district in which it is located; and
(3) The yards along the periphery of the development shall be not less in width or depth than required for permitted uses in the district
regulations applicable to the district in which the planned development is located.
F. President And Board Of Trustees Decision:
1. Prior to the granting of any special use, the president and board of trustees shall stipulate conditions and restrictions upon the
establishment, location, construction, maintenance, and operation of the special use as deemed necessary for the protection of the public
interest and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in this chapter. In all cases in which special uses are
granted, the president and board of trustees shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the
conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
2. The president and board of trustees may grant or deny any application for a special use permit after receiving the recommendations of the
planning and zoning commission, including the stipulations of additional conditions and guarantees, when they are deemed necessary for
the protection of the public interest. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
3. No application for a special use which has been denied wholly or in part by the president and board of trustees shall be resubmitted for a
period of six (6) months from the date of said order of denial. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
4. In any case, where a special use permit has been granted and a building permit has not been obtained within eighteen (18) months after
the date of granting thereof, then, without further action by the planning and zoning commission and the president and board of trustees,
the special use permit approval shall automatically be terminated and canceled and null and void. In the event that an occupancy
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 351/548
certificate is not issued within five (5) years after the special use permit has been granted, the special use permit shall automatically
terminate. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
11-3-5: AMENDMENTS:
A. Initiation Of Amendment: Amendments to this title may be proposed by the president and board of trustees, the planning and zoning
commission, any property owner or any interested person or organization.
B. Application For Amendment: An application for an amendment shall be filed with the village clerk on a form prescribed by the president and
board of trustees. The application shall be accompanied by such plans or data, or both, as specified by the planning and zoning commission,
and shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed amendment will conform to the
standards set forth herein for amendments. Copies of such application shall be forwarded by the board of trustees to the planning and
zoning commission with the request to hold a public hearing. (Ord. 77-62, 12-28-1977; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
C. Notices: The applicant shall give notices of the public hearing as follows: (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
1. Persons Required To Be Notified: To the persons to whom the current real estate tax bills are sent, if any, as shown on the record of the
local real estate tax assessor, of all lots lying within two hundred fifty feet (250') of a property line of the lot for which the application has
been filed. (Ord. 96-40, 9-9-1996)
2. Contents: All notices shall be in writing and shall give the time, place and purpose of such hearing and shall be mailed not more than thirty
(30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days in advance of such hearing. The notice shall be sent by certified mail, properly addressed as
shown on the tax assessor's rolls and with sufficient postage affixed thereon, with return receipt requested. The applicant shall file a sworn
affidavit with copies of the notices with the village clerk, showing the names and addresses of all notices the applicant has sent. Said
affidavit shall be conclusive presumption of giving of said notices.
3. Publication: The village clerk shall cause a notice of time, place, and purpose of such hearing to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the village not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days in advance of such hearing.
4. Posting: The applicant shall post and maintain, for a period of not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the notice thereof as
furnished by the village clerk. The said notice, showing the time, place and purpose of said hearing, shall be posted on the property for
which the amendment is sought as follows: (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
a. On an unimproved lot: Not more than fifteen feet (15') from the front lot line and not less than four feet (4') above and not more than six
feet (6') above the ground and placed in such a manner as to be unobscured from the street. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. 2012 Code)
b. On an improved lot: On the front entrance door of the improvement thereon, or placed in a similar manner as for an unimproved lot.
(Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
5. Additional Notices: Supplemental or additional notices may be distributed, published or posted as the planning and zoning commission
may, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
D. Hearing: Upon receipt, in proper form, of the application and statement referred to above, the planning and zoning commission shall hold at
least one public hearing on the proposed amendment. However, the planning and zoning commission may continue the hearing from time to
time without further notices being published. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
E. Findings Of Fact And Recommendations Of Planning And Zoning Commission:
1. A basic function of the planning and zoning commission is to advise the president and board of trustees concerning matters relating to this
title. It is imperative that land development and growth of the village be carried on according to an organized and well planned scheme,
calculated and specifically designed to further the best interests of the village. Such interests shall be as manifested from time to time by
the president and board of trustees. (Ord. 77-62, 12-28-1977; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
2. Within forty five (45) days after the close of the hearing on a proposed amendment, the planning and zoning commission shall make
written findings of fact and shall submit same, together with its recommendations, to the president and board of trustees. Where the
purpose and effect of the proposed amendment is to change the zoning classification of particular property, the planning and zoning
commission shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case with respect to the following matters: (Ord.
69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
a. Existing uses of property within the general area of the property in question;
b. The zoning classification of property within the general area of the property in question;
c. The suitability of the property in question to the uses permitted under the existing zoning classification; and
d. The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the property in question, including changes, if any, which have taken place since
the day the property in question was placed in its present zoning classification. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
F. Planning And Zoning Commission Recommendations:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 352/548
1. The planning and zoning commission shall not recommend the adoption of a proposed amendment until after it finds that the adoption of
such amendment is in the public interest and not solely for the interest of the applicant. The planning and zoning commission may
recommend the adoption of an amendment changing the zoning classification of the property in question to any other zoning classification.
(Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
2. A concurring vote of a majority of those members present at the meeting, with a minimum of four (4) concurring votes, shall be required to
recommend granting or denying an application for an amendment.
3. Report to the village board shall contain the number present and names of those voting for or against the motion. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
G. President And Board Of Trustees Decision:
1. The president and board of trustees, upon receiving the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission, may grant or deny any
proposed amendment in accordance with applicable Illinois statutes, or may refer it back to the planning and zoning commission for
further consideration. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
2. If an application for a proposed amendment is not acted upon finally by the president and board of trustees within six (6) months of the
date upon which such application is received by the president and board of trustees, it shall be deemed to have been denied. (Ord. 69-12,
4-23-1969)
11-3-6: AUTHORIZED VARIATIONS:
A. Authority: The planning and zoning commission shall report findings and recommendations to the president and board of trustees regarding
authorized variations of the provisions of this title in harmony with its general purpose and intent, and shall recommend approval of them
only in the specific instances where a concurring vote of a majority of all members present, with a minimum of four (4) concurring votes
required, determines that there are practical difficulties or particular hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the regulations of
this title.
B. Initiation: Any person, firm, or corporation owning or having an interest in a lot or the board of trustees may apply for a variation.
C. Processing Application:
1. Filing Application; Required Information: An application for a variation shall be filed with the village clerk on a form prescribed by the
president and board of trustees. The application shall be accompanied by such plans or data, or both, as specified by the planning and
zoning commission, and shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed variation
will conform to the standards set forth herein for variations. Copies of such application shall be forwarded by the village clerk to the
planning and zoning commission with the request to hold a public hearing.
2. Notices: The applicant shall give notices of the public hearing as follows:
a. Persons Required To Be Notified: To the persons to whom the current real estate tax bills are sent, if any, as shown on the record of the
local real estate tax assessor, of all lots lying within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the property lines of the lot for which the variation is
sought.
b. Contents: All notices shall be in writing and shall give the time, place, and purpose of such hearing and shall be mailed not more than
thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days in advance of such hearing. The notice shall be sent by certified mail, properly addressed
as shown on the tax assessor's rolls and with sufficient postage affixed thereon, with return receipt requested. The applicant shall file a
sworn affidavit with copies of the notices with the village clerk, showing the names and addresses of all notices the applicant has sent.
Said affidavit shall be conclusive presumption of giving of said notices.
c. Publication: The village clerk shall cause a notice of time, place, and purpose of such hearing to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the village not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days in advance of such hearing.
d. Posting: The applicant shall post and maintain, for a period of not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the notice thereof as
furnished by the village clerk. The said notice, showing the time, place and purpose of said hearing, shall be posted on the property for
which the variation is sought as follows:
(1) On an unimproved lot: Not more than fifteen feet (15') from the front lot line and not less than four feet (4') above and not more than
six feet (6') above the ground and placed in such a manner as to be unobscured from the street.
(2) On an improved lot: On the front entrance door of the improvement thereon, or placed in a similar manner as for an unimproved lot.
e. Additional Notices: Supplemental or additional notices may be distributed, published or posted as the planning and zoning commission
may, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
D. Hearing: Upon receipt, in proper form, of the application and statement referred to above, the planning and zoning commission shall hold at
least one public hearing on the proposed variation. However, the planning and zoning commission may continue the hearing from time to
time without further notices being published.
E. Findings Of Fact And Recommendations Of Planning And Zoning Commission:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 353/548
1. Within forty five (45) days after the close of the hearing on a proposed variation, the planning and zoning commission shall make written
findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case with respect to standards identified in subsection E2 of this section
and shall submit same, together with its recommendations, to the president and board of trustees.
2. The planning and zoning commission shall not recommend approval of a variation from the provisions of this title, as authorized in this
section, unless it shall find, by a concurring vote of a majority of all members present, with a minimum of four (4) concurring votes
required, that:
a. The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations in
that zoning district;
b. The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances; and
c. The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality.
3. For the purpose of supplementing the above standards, the planning and zoning commission, in making its findings and recommendations
whenever there are practical difficulties or particular hardship, shall also take into consideration the extent to which the following facts,
favorable to the applicant, have been established by the evidence that:
a. The particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions of the specific property involved would bring a particular
hardship upon the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the regulations were strictly enforced;
b. The conditions upon which the petition for variation is based would not be applicable generally to other property within the same zoning
classification;
c. The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to make more money out of the property;
d. The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the property;
e. The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located; or
f. The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the danger of
fire, or otherwise endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.
4. The planning and zoning commission may place such conditions and restrictions upon any recommendations made thereby regarding the
premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary to comply with the standards set forth in this section to reduce or minimize the
injurious effect of such variation upon other property in the neighborhood, and to implement the general purpose and intent of this title.
F. President And Board Of Trustees Action:
1. The president and board of trustees, upon receiving the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission, may grant or deny any
proposed variation in accordance with applicable Illinois statutes, or may refer it back to the planning and zoning commission for further
consideration.
2. If an application for a proposed variation is not acted upon finally by the president and board of trustees within six (6) months of the date
upon which such application is received by the president and board of trustees, it shall be deemed to have been denied.
G. Types Of Authorized Variations: Variations from the regulations of this title may be heard and reported upon by the planning and zoning
commission to the president and board of trustees and considered and granted by the president and board of trustees only in accordance
with the standards set forth in this section, and only in the following instances and no others:
1. Building Setback, Minimum Yards, Lot Coverage, Lot Area, And Building Height:
a. To permit yards, spacing between buildings, and other required open spaces to have less width or depth than required by the district
regulations, but not the elimination of required yards, spacing between buildings, and other required open spaces;
b. To permit coverage of lots and rear yards to be greater than the maximum permitted by this title; provided, that existing water drainage
patterns are not altered;
c. To permit the establishment of a lot with an area and/or width of less than the minimum required area and/or width permitted by this title
for such lot;
d. To permit a building height greater than the maximum permitted building height permitted by this title;
2. Lot Not Of Record: To permit the use of a lot not of record on the effective date hereof for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of the
insufficient area of the lot;
3. Parking Lot Illumination: To permit parking lots to be illuminated later than thirty (30) minutes after close of business;
4. Number Of Parking Spaces: To reduce the required number of parking spaces to the extent of not more than twenty percent (20%) of the
required number;
5. Distance Of Use From Parking Space: To increase by not more than twenty five percent (25%) the maximum distance that required
parking spaces are permitted to be located from the use served;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 354/548
6. Parking Spaces Qualifying For Two Or More Uses: To permit the same off street parking spaces to qualify as required spaces for two (2)
or more uses; provided, that the maximum use of such facility by each user does not take place during the same hours or on the same
days of the week; and
7. Floor Area Ratio: To allow any permitted nonresidential use in a residence district to exceed the floor area ratio imposed by the applicable
regulations. (Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
11-3-7: APPEALS:
A. Authority: The planning and zoning commission shall hear and report findings and recommendations to the village president and board of
trustees on all appeals from an administrative order, requirement, or determination made by the building and zoning official under this title.
B. Initiation: An appeal may be taken to the planning and zoning commission by any person, firm, or corporation, or by any office, department,
board, bureau, or commission, aggrieved by an administrative order, requirement, decision, or determination under this title by the building
and zoning official.
C. Processing: An application for an appeal shall be filed with the village clerk on a form prescribed by the president and board of trustees. The
application shall be accompanied by such plans or data, or both, as are necessary to evidence that the appeal is warranted, and shall
include a statement in writing by the applicant regarding the same. Copies of such application shall be forwarded by the village clerk to the
planning and zoning commission to hear and report findings and recommendations regarding such appeal to the president and board of
trustees.
D. Hearing On Application: Upon receipt in proper form of the application, information and statement referred to in this section, the planning and
zoning commission shall hold at least one hearing on the appeal, which may be continued to a subsequent date or dates.
E. Findings Of Fact And Recommendations; Decision; Judicial Review:
1. Within forty five (45) days after the close of the hearing on an appeal, the planning and zoning commission shall make written findings
regarding such appeal based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case and shall submit same, together with its
recommendations, to the president and board of trustees.
2. A concurring vote of a majority of those members of the planning and zoning commission present at the meeting at which an appeal is
heard shall be required to recommend granting or denying an appeal by the president and board of trustees; provided, however, not less
than four (4) concurring votes shall be required for such recommendation.
3. All decisions of the president and board of trustees on appeals from an administrative order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
building and zoning official shall, in all instances, be final administrative determinations and shall be subject to judicial review in
accordance with applicable Illinois statutes. (Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
11-3-8: FEES:
An application for a variation, amendment, special use or other zoning permission or relief shall be filed and accompanied by a fee, payable to
the village, for such amount as established by the village board of trustees1. (2012 Code; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
11-3-9: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY:
A. Enforcement Official: The building and zoning official is hereby designated and authorized to enforce this title. (Ord. 2008-14, 3-24-2008;
amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
B. Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of,
any of the provisions of this title shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 2008-
14, 3-24-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
Chapter 4
SITE DEVELOPMENT AND PLAN REVIEW
11-4-1: FINDINGS:
The village board of trustees hereby finds that buildings, landscaping, fences and other structures, streets, curbs, sidewalks, and street lighting
which exist within the context of an established neighborhood are elements that contribute to and preserve the character of the community,
constitute the unique aspects that distinguish neighborhoods from each other, provide for a diversity of housing styles and sizes at various price
points, and enhance and maintain property values. The village board of trustees further finds that compatibility of a building's architectural style,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 355/548
size, mass, roofline, height, building materials, color, and grading with its surrounding neighborhood contribute to the maintenance of property
values and stability within its residential districts. (Ord. 2007-24, 7-9-2007)
11-4-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to:
A. Promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the village.
B. Enhance the aesthetic qualities and economic values within areas developed for business and industrial purposes in the village.
C. Establish a reasonable transition between business, industrial, and residential land uses in the village.
D. Ensure the safe and efficient movement of vehicular traffic and pedestrians.
E. Protect and preserve environmental resources.
F. Implement the village's adopted comprehensive land use plan, as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
11-4-3: APPLICABILITY AND COMPLIANCE:
A. Required Compliance: All applicants for a rezoning, planned development, or special use permit for property located within the following
districts and those districts which may hereafter be created, as well as all applicants for the following types of building permits for property
located within the following zoning districts and those districts which may hereafter be created shall comply with the standards for
development set forth in this chapter: a new building; building addition; or modification to a nonresidential building that has maintained a
vacancy of greater than fifty percent (50%) of that building's gross floor area for a period of at least six (6) months:
ER-1 Estate residence district.
R-1 Single-family residence district.
R-2 Single-family residence district.
R-2A Single-family residence district.
R-2B Single-family residence district.
R-2C Single-family residence district.
R-3 General residence district.
R-4 Multiple-family dwelling residence district.
R-5 Multiple-family dwelling high rise district.
B-1 Neighborhood business district.
B-2 Community business district.
B-3 General service business district.
B-4 Automotive Service Business District.
R-R Hotel-Motel Resort and Recreational District.
O-D Office District.
Business Park Planned Unit Development District of 75 to 250 acres.
Planned Unit Development District of 250 acres or more.
OTP Old Town Preservation District. (Ord. 2008-14, 3-24-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-46, 10-27-2014)
B. Minor Modifications: This chapter shall not, however, apply to minor interior or exterior modifications which do not affect the type or intensity
of use, or substantially alter the facade of the building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 356/548
C. Old Town: Standards of development which are specific to the Old Town District are presented in chapter 11 of this title. In all instances, the
provisions of chapter 11 of this title shall supersede those of this chapter. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
D. Single-Family Residence Buildings:
1. All new buildings or building additions in the Estate, Single-Family, and General Residence Districts identified in subsection A of this
section shall be compatible with the existing buildings in the surrounding neighborhood in which the new building or building addition is
proposed to be located. The compatibility of new buildings or building additions with the surrounding neighborhood shall be determined on
the basis of architectural style, size, mass, height, building materials, roofline, color, and grading, and as more fully identified herein.
Should the building and zoning official make a determination that a proposed building or addition in any Single-Family Residence District is
not compatible with the surrounding neighborhood, the owner of the subject property shall be required to comply with the requirements of
this chapter pursuant to a review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval by the Village Board. (Ord. 2007-24, 7-9-2007;
amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
2. Section 11-4-4-1 of this chapter establishes the standards to be used in evaluating compatibility and in recommending modifications to
increase the level of compatibility of a proposed building or building addition with the character of the surrounding neighborhood in which
the building or building addition is proposed to be located. The Village Board may amend these standards from time to time to reflect
changes in development trends or standards as and when necessary.
3. For purposes of this subsection, the term "surrounding neighborhood" is defined as follows:
a. The full block on which the subject property is located, including both sides of the street.
b. The block face in both directions, if the subject property is a corner lot.
c. The adjoining block face to the rear of the subject property.
d. The general character of the larger neighborhood in which the subject property is located, two (2) blocks in each direction from the
subject property. (Ord. 2007-24, 7-9-2007)
11-4-4: STANDARDS OF DEVELOPMENT:
All site development associated with permitted and special uses in the districts specified under subsection 11-4-3A of this chapter shall comply
with the following:
A. Setback, Bulk And Sign Regulations: Principal and accessory buildings and structures shall comply with yard and setback requirements, floor
area and height limitations, and sign regulations applicable to the district in which the use is located, or as may otherwise be modified as part
of a special use permit or planned development.
B. Vehicular Access:
1. Number: The number of points of vehicular ingress and egress to individual lots shall be limited to maximize the safety and operational
efficiency of Bloomingdale's arterial streets and collector roadways. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
2. Location, Number And Design: The location, number and design of access drives shall be reviewed by the Village Engineer and
coordinated with adjacent uses and properties to provide for safe and efficient movement of vehicles. Where possible, cross easements
between properties shall be provided to minimize the number of drives required on adjacent public streets. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd.
2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
3. Review By Other Agencies: Vehicular access to a site is subject to review by the Bloomingdale fire protection district and by state and
county highway authorities where appropriate.
C. Pedestrian Access:
1. Streets/Drives: Sidewalks, not less than five feet (5') wide, shall be provided along all streets and access drives to provide safe pedestrian
access to, through and from multiple-family R-4 and R-5 residence districts, and the nonresidential districts identified in subsection 11-4-
3A of this chapter.
2. Paths/Linkages: Pedestrian linkages in the form of sidewalks or paths shall also be provided where required to implement linkages
depicted on the comprehensive land use plan, as may be amended from time to time.
3. Parking: Where parking is proposed to be located perpendicular to sidewalks, walks shall be increased to a minimum of seven feet (7') in
width.
D. Off Street Parking And Loading:
1. Compliance With Village Regulations: Parking and loading spaces and drive aisles shall be provided according to standards and
specifications included in chapter 13 of this title.
2. Truck Parking:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 357/548
a. Trucks which are accessory to the conduct of a permitted use may be parked on an individual lot, provided such vehicles do not exceed
one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity. Delivery vehicles may, however, exceed this capacity when deliveries are made at the rear of the
building.
b. The parking of trucks bearing a sign or signs shall be according to regulations set forth in subsection 11-14-8M of this title.
3. Accessibility For Persons With Disabilities: The petitioner shall demonstrate compliance with the Illinois accessibility code and Americans
with disabilities act, as may be amended from time to time.
E. Architecture:
1. Design:
a. Buildings constructed in the R-4 and R-5 districts and in the nonresidential districts referenced in subsection 11-4-3A of this chapter
shall be designed to blend with the site and surrounding development.
b. The use of brightly colored materials or surfaces on multiple-family structures or nonresidential buildings which attract attention to the
premises in the same manner as a sign shall be prohibited.
c. All four (4) facades of nonresidential structures constructed on outlots in a shopping center shall be well articulated and designed to
reflect the fact that they will be visible to the general public.
d. The use of exposed downspouts on nonresidential structures shall be prohibited, unless they can be designed into the column or
support structure of a canopy or otherwise be "hidden" by the design of the building. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
2. Materials:
a. Consistent with existing development in the village, multiple-family residential buildings and nonresidential buildings shall be
constructed primarily of masonry materials. Masonry materials shall consist of clay brick and natural stone. In business park districts,
precast concrete panels and compressed masonry units (CMUs) will be permitted. The building commissioner may approve the use of
cultured stone products in limited applications as an exterior accent. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-27, 6-11-2012)
b. The use of vinyl, aluminum or other metal siding shall be prohibited in the R-4 and R-5 districts and nonresidential districts referenced in
subsection 11-4-3A of this chapter.
c. All exposed chimney chases shall be clad with brick.
d. Cedar or other approved wood siding may be used as an accent, trim, and as siding on the second stories of multiple-family residential
structures.
e. The use of pine on a residential or nonresidential structure for fascia boards or other trim shall be prohibited.
3. Antimonotony: In order to avoid monotonous streetscapes in the R-3 and R-4 districts that could occur with multi-family development, a
written antimonotony standard shall be prepared that includes, but is not limited to, the following:
a. Exterior siding and trim shall vary in color to avoid monotonous streetscapes. Changes in color styling between buildings shall be subtle
rather than provide sharp or harsh contrast.
b. Buildings with identical elevations shall not be sited directly adjacent to or opposite from one another unless otherwise approved by the
village board. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
4. Accent Lighting: Low level accent lighting on the building facades shall be permitted, provided the accent lighting does not attract attention
to the premises in the same manner as a sign (see definition of "sign" in section 11-14-3 of this title). Foot-candle intensities associated
with proposed accent lighting shall be included in the photometric plan submitted for planning and zoning commission and village board
review (see subsection H of this section). (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
F. Mechanical Equipment:
1. All roof mounted mechanical equipment including, but not limited to, heating, ventilating and air conditioning units (HVAC) shall be fully
screened on all sides of the building. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
2. Screening shall be accomplished by the roof structure or parapet walls unless otherwise recommended by the planning and zoning
commission and approved by the village board. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
3. Screening shall be designed to blend with and complement the architecture of the building.
4. The height of the parapet walls, roof structure, or other approved method of screening shall equal the height of the tallest rooftop unit
installed on the building.
G. Landscaping:
1. Landscape Plan:
a. A landscape plan (preferably prepared by a licensed landscape architect) shall be submitted with all applications for site plan review,
and shall be subject to review and recommendation of approval by the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 358/548
b. All areas of the site which are not paved shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, ground cover and flowers to:
(1) Slow surface water runoff.
(2) Restrict blowing trash and litter.
(3) Deter improper access or use of the site by the public.
(4) Improve the visual quality of the site.
c. The landscape plan shall include identification of species, size and location of plant materials and all other landscape treatments
including, but not limited to:
(1) Berms.
(2) Fences.
(3) Ground covers.
(4) Ornamental or accent lighting.
(5) Paving materials.
(6) Areas proposed to be planted with grass seed or sod.
d. Trees and shrubs shall be keyed into a plant list which gives quantities, sizes, botanical names and specifics as to the form of the
plants.
e. Upon installation, trees shall not be less than the following sizes:
(1) Shade trees: Three inch (3") caliper, as measured twelve inches (12") above grade.
(2) Evergreen: Six feet (6') tall.
(3) Ornamental: Six feet (6') tall if multistem, and two and one-half inches (21/2") in caliper if single stem.
f. Final landscape plans shall be required when a petitioner is seeking final plan approval as part of a rezoning, planned development,
special use or variation. The plan shall be superimposed on a grading plan so that the relationship between proposed plantings and
grades can be evaluated.
2. Quality Control:
a. The village reserves the right of inspection and rejection upon delivery at the site, or during the progress of the landscape work, for size
and condition of balls or roots, diseases, insects and latent defects or injuries. Rejected plants shall be removed immediately from the
site.
b. All plant materials shall be maintained per standard nursery practice and kept alive and in good condition or replaced. Trees and shrubs
shall be replaced as necessary to maintain landscaping in accordance with approved plans. Trees and/or shrubs used to replace dead,
diseased, or damaged trees and/or shrubs shall be equal to or greater than sizes originally specified on the approved landscape plan.
3. Screening: Where a multiple-family R-4 or R-5 use or a nonresidential district or use abuts or is across the street from a low or medium
density residential district or use (R-1, R-2, or R-3 district), or an institutional district or use, screening shall be provided in accordance with
the following:
a. A landscaped berm, fence, wall, or combination thereof shall be installed to provide year round screening. Placement of the landscape
screen shall not impair the safety of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
b. Where off street parking is visible from a public right of way, screening shall be at least five feet (5') tall, as measured from the curb of
the adjacent street, upon installation.
c. Where off street parking or loading abuts a residential or institutional use or district, screening shall be not less than five feet (5') tall,
upon installation.
d. Plant materials used for screening shall comply with minimum sizes set forth in subsection G1e of this section.
e. Screening shall be incorporated into the landscape plan prepared for the project and shall require review and recommendation of
approval by the village. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
4. Perimeter Yards: Minimum requirements for perimeter yards and landscape plantings shall, unless otherwise recommended by the
planning and zoning commission and village board, be as follows: (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
a. Front Yard: Perimeter landscaping shall include the first thirty feet (30') of a required front yard. Parking and drive aisles shall not be
permitted in this minimum thirty feet (30'). This shall not, however, apply to drives which are perpendicular to the street and provide
access to the site.
b. Interior Side And Rear Yards:
(1) A minimum ten foot (10') wide perimeter yard shall be provided around the side and rear property lines of a property where a
nonresidential use or district abuts another nonresidential use or district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 359/548
(2) Where a nonresidential use or district abuts a residential or institutional use or district, a minimum twenty foot (20') wide perimeter
yard shall be provided around the side and rear property lines. Landscape screening shall be required according to subsection G3 of
this section.
c. Landscape Requirements: In those instances where landscape screening is not required according to subsection G3 of this section,
shade, evergreen and/or ornamental trees shall be installed in perimeter yards, at a ratio of not less than one tree for every thirty (30)
linear feet of front, side and rear yards. Trees may be informally clustered or grouped, rather than equally spaced. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-
1993)
5. Tree Mitigation: Tree mitigation may be required for new construction in districts identified in subsection 11-4-3A of this chapter. The
removal of existing trees greater than six inches (6") in caliper, as measured twelve inches (12") above grade, shall not occur in these
districts unless approved by the village board. In such instances, where the village board determines, based upon recommendation by the
planning and zoning commission, that development cannot take place without the removal of trees six inches (6") or greater in caliper, the
removal of existing trees shall be mitigated as follows:
a. Trees shall be replaced according to a tree replacement plan that is subject to review by the planning and zoning commission and
approval by the village. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
b. Replacement trees shall consist of high quality hardwood trees not less than three inches (3") in caliper.
c. Unless otherwise approved by the village, the cumulative caliper of replacement trees shall equal the cumulative caliper of trees
removed for development. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
H. Lighting: Plans for parking lot, security, landscape, walkway, accent, and building mounted lighting shall comply with the provisions of chapter
20, "Exterior Lighting", of this title. (Ord. 2013-19, 4-22-2013)
I. Utility Meters/Transformers:
1. Wall mounted utility meters and ground supported transformers shall be painted to match the color of the building.
2. If visible to the public, meters and transformers shall be screened by landscaping which, upon installation, shall equal the height of the
tallest meter or transformer.
J. Trash Enclosure:
1. Trash receptacles shall be enclosed by masonry walls, designed to match the building.
2. Enclosures shall be constructed to be equal or taller than the tallest bin proposed for use.
3. Trash enclosures shall be provided with:
a. Gates to contain trash.
b. A concrete pad and approach apron to bear the weight of trash bins and refuse vehicles, respectively.
K. Outdoor Storage:
1. All business, services, storage, merchandise display and processing shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building, with the
exception of:
a. Off street parking and loading areas.
b. Open sales lots.
c. Outdoor sales of products for automobile service stations, provided they are related to servicing motor vehicles.
d. Display of seasonal accessory products, sidewalk sales, and promotional programs. See standards and procedures set forth in section
11-5-5 of this title, regulations addressing temporary uses.
2. All outdoor storage areas for accessory uses and products shall be enclosed by a fence, wall or plant materials adequate to conceal such
facilities from adjacent properties and public rights of way. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
11-4-4-1: BUILDINGS AND BUILDING ADDITIONS IN ESTATE, SINGLE-FAMILY AND GENERAL RESIDENCE
DISTRICTS:
The provisions of this section apply to the estate, single-family and general residence districts.
A. Building Placement On The Lot: The placement of buildings on their lots and, specifically, the proximity of the buildings to the adjacent rights
of way establishes the overall relationship of the built environment to the streetscape. This pattern should be respected in the construction of
new buildings or additions thereto. Accordingly, the front building setback should be no less than the mean front building setback of the
buildings on the entire block face on which the proposed building or addition is to be located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 360/548
B. Roofing: Required roof pitch should be no less than four to twelve (4:12), and all shingles should be of an architectural design grade.
C. Building Mass: Placement of a building under one large roof volume is discouraged.
D. Hierarchy Of Massing: Emphasis should be placed on the building entry as the prominent feature of the building, de-emphasizing the garage.
E. Roof Pitch: If a building uses a single roof style, such as a hip, then the roof pitch should be common throughout. The roof pitch of a building
proposed to be constructed in an existing neighborhood should be compatible with the predominant roof pitch of the existing buildings on the
block face on which the subject building is proposed to be located.
F. Overhangs: Roof overhangs/eaves should not be less than twelve inches (12").
G. Building Facades: All facades should be equally treated as important elevations by way of articulation throughout and there should be
consistent use of exterior building materials (e.g., if brick is used on the front facade of a building, then it should also be used on the other
facades of the building).
H. Window Finish And Detailing: All windows should have trim detailing.
I. Window Placement And Use: Random, irregular placement of windows should be avoided. Large expanses of wall area without windows
should be avoided.
J. Window Proportion: Window openings and windowpanes should be square or of greater height than width and should be similarly
proportioned throughout the entire building.
K. Shutters: Where proposed, shutters should consist of wood or other material to simulate wood, should be of louvered or paneled
construction, and each be exactly one-half (1/2) the width of the window sash to which they are adjacent to simulate functional shutters.
L. Dormers: Dormers should either be part of a habitable space or a space that can properly simulate a habitable space with respect to size,
location, and related elements of such simulation. Dormers should be enhanced with windows and other architectural elements consistent
with the rest of the building and should have a symmetrical form. Dormers should be in scale with the overall proportion of the building and
are generally more appropriate for more steeply pitched roofs, having a pitch equal to or greater than five to twelve (5:12).
M. Antimonotony: Buildings should not create monotony due to extreme similarities with adjacent buildings in the surrounding neighborhood.
N. Landscaping: Subject properties must comply with chapter 16 of this title, the village tree preservation provisions. A landscaping plan shall be
submitted which shall provide for perimeter as well as foundation plantings. Further, the area on the lot to be cleared should be no greater
than the footprint of the building, plus a ten foot (10') buffer area surrounding the subject building's perimeter, in order to preserve as much
existing vegetation on the subject property as possible.
O. Overlapping Gables: Minimize the use of overlapping gables which are typically appropriate only when a smaller gable is part of a balcony,
porch, or entrance or, in rare instances, when they are appropriate for the architectural style of the building.
P. Scale: The scale of a new building, inclusive of any addition thereto, should be compatible with the scale of existing buildings in the
surrounding neighborhood. Such design elements as porches, porticoes, bay windows, dormers, and pergolas can increase compatibility of
larger new buildings with smaller existing buildings which may predominate the streetscape in certain neighborhoods within the village.
Q. Materials: New buildings should use materials and textures compatible to those of neighboring buildings in existing neighborhoods and
appropriate to the chosen architectural style of the new building to reinforce the neighborhood's image. Stucco and EIFS type treatments are
appropriate only in accent areas and applications where stucco would be used. They should not replicate other architectural details (such as
sills, dentils, etc.).
R. Color: The color of all exterior building materials should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. Color schemes that draw attention
to the building, such as very bright, neon type tints, should be avoided. A color palette of all proposed building colors, including that for trim,
shall be submitted.
S. Ornamentation: Building ornamentation should draw from the surrounding streetscape, but should not exactly mimic the facades of
neighboring buildings. It should be used with restraint and in consideration of the visual character of the neighborhood.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 361/548
T. Architectural Style: Architectural stylistic integrity is encouraged. The style of architecture should be consistent throughout all facades of the
building. Further, additions should be of the same architectural style as the existing building.
U. Chimney Materials: All chimneys located on exterior walls should be sheathed in brick or stone.
V. HVAC Equipment: All exterior HVAC equipment should be ground mounted and screened with landscaping or placed on the building's rooftop
having a surrounding roof structure that is at least as tall as the tallest piece of HVAC equipment enclosed thereby. The HVAC equipment
shall not be placed in any yard fronting a public right of way.
W. Roof Penetrations: All rooftop penetrations, including plumbing venting, attic vents, and chimney and fireplace flues, should be colored or
painted to match the roof color.
X. Porches: Where appropriate, porches are encouraged and should have a depth of at least five feet (5') to make them functional spaces.
Y. Front Entrances: Entries should be ornamented with simple detailing consistent with the building's architectural style.
Z. Garage Doors: Garage bays with individual doors no wider than nine feet (9') are encouraged. Doublewide doors are discouraged.
AA. Architectural Interest: Incorporate bay windows or projecting rooms (e.g., a breakfast nook) to enhance facade articulation and interest.
BB. Grading: Site grading should complement the existing site topography and be consistent with the surrounding neighborhood streetscape,
i.e., if buildings in the surrounding neighborhood do not have walk out basements, the subject property should not be regraded to provide a
walk out basement. Reliance upon retaining walls to accomplish necessary grading may indicate inconsistency between proposed site
grading and existing site topography.
CC. Building Additions: A proposed addition should be consistent with the scale, massing and other architectural elements of the existing
building. Factors such as roofline, trim details, window type and placement and other design elements that affect exterior appearance will
ensure compatibility with the building to which the addition will be made. (Ord. 2007-24, 7-9-2007)
11-4-5: REVIEW PROCEDURES:
New buildings or building additions in districts listed in subsection 11-4-3A of this chapter shall be reviewed according to the following
procedures: (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
A. Planning And Zoning Commission/Village Board Review Generally: Drawings associated with an application for building permits for new
construction, building additions, rezonings, planned developments, or special use permits for properties in multiple-family residential districts
and nonresidential districts referenced in subsection 11-4-3A of this chapter shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and
approved by the village board. The planning and zoning commission shall verify that proposed construction will conform to standards of this
chapter, as well as regulations of the zoning district in which the proposed construction will occur. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. Ord. 2014-48,
10-27-2014)
B. Old Town District: Chapter 11 of this title sets forth review procedures for properties in the old town district. Review by the planning and
zoning commission and village board shall be required for building permits associated with new construction, building additions, rezoning,
planned developments and special use permits in the old town district. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
C. Final Plan Versus Preliminary Plan:
1. The petitioner shall determine, in conjunction with the Village Administrator or appointed designee, whether or not preliminary plan
approval or final plan approval should be requested. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
2. The level of detail submitted on drawings presented for Planning and Zoning Commission and Village Board review shall be
commensurate with the petitioner's request. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
3. Final plans, however, shall be approved by the Village prior to the issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
D. Distribution:
1. Plans shall be received not less than ten (10) working days prior to the scheduled meeting before the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
2. Once all required plans and support documentation have been received (see section 11-4-6 of this chapter), the Village Administrator or
appointed designee shall distribute plans and support documentation to the:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 362/548
a. Village President.
b. Village Administrator. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
c. Village Engineer. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
d. Planning and Zoning Commissioners and Recording Secretary. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
e. Fire Protection District.
f. Village Planner. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
g. Building Commissioner. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
h. Front counter.
E. Public Meeting/Hearing:
1. Unless a request involves a text or map amendment, variation, planned development or special use, site plan review can be
accommodated at a public meeting. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
2. Public hearings for amendments, variations, planned developments or special uses shall be in accordance with procedures set forth in
chapter 3 of this title. No deviation from the zoning requirements set forth herein may be granted except in connection with approval by the
Village Board of a variation or a planned development pursuant to a special use permit following a public hearing therefor and a
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
3. No matter shall be placed upon the Planning and Zoning Commission agenda unless all required materials have been submitted in a
timely fashion to the Village at the time the matter is to be placed on the Planning and Zoning Commission agenda. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993;
amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
F. Reports:
1. Staff: The Village Planner and Village Engineer shall prepare written reports evaluating the proposed project, which shall be forwarded to
the Planning and Zoning Commission the Friday before the scheduled appearance of the petitioner. Other Village officials, including the
Village Attorney, Chief of Police, etc., may submit written reports if determined necessary for a full review. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd.
2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
2. Fire Protection District: A written report shall be obtained from the Village Fire Protection District that evaluates the project against
applicable codes, regulations, and life safety issues. No recommendation of approval shall be forwarded to the Village Board until such
time as the report is presented to, and reviewed by, the Planning and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-
27-2014)
3. Other: The Village Planner, Village Engineer, or Planning and Zoning Commission may, from time to time, request the preparation and
submittal of other reports from agencies or professional consultants, to facilitate review and understanding of the effects a proposed
project may have on the natural environment or surrounding development. Examples of such documentation include, but are not limited to,
reports from: (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
a. Agencies such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Illinois Department of Transportation, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
etc.
b. Professional consultants such as real estate appraisers, traffic engineers, environmental experts, planning and design consultants, etc.
(Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. 2012 Code)
G. Planning And Zoning Commission Review:
1. The commission may continue the review of plans and support documentation from time to time. Multiple meetings may be required in
order to assure adequate time for:
a. The petitioner to present the project.
b. Commissioners to ask questions of the petitioner and staff.
c. Staff to present review comments.
d. Commissioners to deliberate on the proposed project and make specific recommendations to the Village Board. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
2. The petitioner may be requested to modify and re-present plans, drawings and other support documentation before a recommendation is
forwarded to the Village Board. No matter presented will be forwarded to the Village Board for review until drawings and exhibits have
been revised to reflect changes made by the petitioner. Although simple matters may proceed after a single review session by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, most reviews require at least two (2) meetings before the Planning and Zoning Commission.
H. Planning And Zoning Commission Findings Of Fact: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the petition and shall, within forty five
(45) days after the close of the meeting, make its recommendations to the Village Board in a written statement of findings of fact and
recommendations. At a minimum, the statement of findings of fact shall include: (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 363/548
1. A description of the request and proposed project.
2. Identification of requested exceptions from zoning, if any.
3. List of exhibits presented to the commission.
4. Items of particular interest or concern, if any.
5. Recommended conditions of approval, if any.
6. Names of those Commissioners voting for or against the project. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
I. Village Board Review:
1. The Village Board will review the petition and Planning and Zoning Commission findings of fact at a public meeting and either: (Ord. 93-
42, 8-9-1993; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
a. Approve the petition;
b. Approve the petition with conditions;
c. Deny the petition; or (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
d. Send the petition back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for additional review and modification. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. Ord.
2014-48, 10-27-2014)
2. Subsequent to Village Board approval, the Village Attorney or appointed designee will prepare a development ordinance which forms the
basis of approval of a petition and includes conditions of approval, if any. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. 2012 Code)
11-4-6: REQUIRED SUBMITTALS:
A. Drawings:
1. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the owners of the tract of land shall submit to the Village Administrator or appointed designee
seventeen (17) sets of plans, drawings and other information specified in this section, unless specific submittal requirements are waived
by the Village Administrator or appointed designee. Plans and drawings shall be presented at the scale necessary to clearly indicate what
is planned for the property and shall be folded approximately nine inches by twelve inches (9" x 12") in size.
2. Each drawing submitted to the Village shall include the following information:
a. Names and addresses of the planner, architect, engineer, and landscape architect.
b. Dates of all drawings.
c. Scale.
d. North arrow.
e. Sheet number.
f. Title by which the property or project is to be referred.
g. Dates of revision.
B. List Of Submittals:
1. Location Map:
*Boundaries of the subject property.
*Major streets.
2. Site Information:
*Name and address of owner and/or petitioner.
*Proof of ownership.
*Existing and proposed zoning of the subject property.
3. Plat Of Survey:
*Prepared by a registered land surveyor.
*Legal description.
4. Site Plan:
*Total gross acreage of the site.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 364/548
*Percent of impervious and pervious surfaces.
*Existing zoning of adjacent parcels.
*Adjacent development, within 100 feet of the subject property, including:
-Buildings.
-Access drives.
-Parking and loading facilities.
-Fences or walls.
*Lot width and depth.
*Location and size of all structures, existing and proposed.
*Building setbacks from street rights of way and property lines.
*Yards and spaces between all structures.
*Depth of perimeter yards.
*Locations and dimensions of all fences and walls.
*Outdoor storage and/or display areas.
*Waste disposal facilities and proposed method of screening.
*Location of existing and proposed transformers and HVAC equipment.
*Streets and street rights of way.
*Dimensions of street pavement.
*Adjacent streets, alleys and driveways.
*Acceleration and deceleration lanes.
*Location and width of proposed access drive(s).
*Distance between existing and proposed drives, as measured centerline to centerline.
*Emergency access, if required by the fire protection district.
*Vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns.
*Location of sidewalks, both existing and proposed.
*Number/dimensions of parking spaces, loading zones, and drive aisles.
*Calculations for required parking, based on:
-Gross floor area; and/or
-Number of employees, where applicable.
*Identification and location of curbing.
*Barrier free access for the handicapped.
*Striping and signage for required off street loading spaces.
*Turning radii of trucks proposed to maneuver into and out of loading zones. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
*Location of shopping cart storage corral(s) proposed to be located within the interior of the parking lot. Any parking stalls rendered
unusable for vehicular parking due to the placement of such storage corral(s) thereon or within proximity thereof shall be excluded from
the number of parking stalls provided in said parking lot for the purpose of determining compliance with chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 2007-
20, 5-24-2007)
5. Natural Resources:
*Map of existing vegetation, showing:
-Land cover, by vegetative community.
-Location and species of trees over 6 inch caliper.
-Riparian habitat.
*Surface waters and drainageways.
*Floodplain and floodway.
*Wetlands.
*Soils report.
*Threatened or endangered plants and animals, if any.
6. Architectural Drawings:
*Dimensioned elevations of all facades of the proposed structures.
*Height of existing and proposed buildings.
*Materials and colors for all elements of the proposed building(s).
*Material and color sample board for the proposed building(s).
*Color photographs of all existing structures on the site.
*Wall mounted utility meters and method for painting and/or screening.
*Materials, colors and design of trash enclosure(s).
*Ground supported mechanical equipment, and method for screening.
*Roof mounted mechanical equipment, and proposed method for screening, including:
-Elevations of the top of the tallest roof mounted unit and the top of each side of the parapet or roof structure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 365/548
-Cross sections of the building, showing the relationship between all roof mounted mechanical equipment and the top of the parapet walls
and/or roof structure.
7. Antimonotony Standards:
*Regulations for subtle changes in materials and color styling.
*Standards for siting buildings with identical elevations to one another.
*Other requirements which may be appropriate for the type and intensity of the development proposed.
8. Landscape Plan:
*Natural features, such as floodplains, wetlands, woodlots, etc.
*Location and types of existing vegetation.
*Size, condition and species of trees 6 inches or more in caliper.
*Trees proposed for preservation, if any, including methods for preservation.
*Berms, if any, and identification of slopes.
*Detention/retention ponds and identification of slopes.
*Existing and proposed grades (superimpose landscape plan on half toned grading plan).
*Proposed perimeter yard plantings.
*Proposed foundation plantings.
*Parking lot landscaping.
*Retention/detention basin landscaping.
*Location of monument sign(s) and proposed landscaping of the base.
*Trees and shrubs drawn at scale that represents no more than 5 years' growth after installation at sizes specified on the plan.
*Plant list which identifies, for each plant:
-Botanical and common names.
-Size and form.
-Quantity.
*Designated areas for seed, sod and other ground covers.
*Landscape specifications and details.
*Details for tree grates.
*Details for planters.
*Decorative fences or walls.
*Pedestrian plazas, including details for street furniture. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
9. Lighting: Submittal requirements for parking lot, security, landscape, walkway, accent, and building mounted lighting are contained in
chapter 20, "Exterior Lighting", of this title. (Ord. 2013-19, 4-22-2013)
10. Signs:
*Freestanding or directional signs:
-Setbacks from property lines and access drives.
-Sign height, as measured from adjacent curbs.
-Sign area.
-Sign thickness.
-Proposed copy and lettering style.
-Proposed materials and colors.
-Proposed method of illumination.
*Wall signs:
-Sign area.
-Area of the projected elevation of the building facade.
-Sign length, or percent of the facade, as applicable.
-Letter height.
-Number of lines of copy.
-Proposed copy, and lettering style.
-Letters individually applied to the building.
-Proposed materials and colors.
-Proposed method of illumination.
11. Engineering:
*Site geometrics.
*Specifications for:
-Streets.
-Curbs and gutters.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 366/548
-Sidewalks.
*Grades, invert elevations, and locations of catch basins.
*Existing and proposed contours, at 1 foot intervals.
*Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, and culverts.
*Location of telephone and electric utilities.
*Location of utility poles.
*Location of easements.
*Location of fire hydrants.
*Calculations which show compliance with title 10, chapter 12 of this Code.
*Depth, size and slopes of retention/detention facilities. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
*Location of existing and proposed traffic signals.
*Location of existing and proposed traffic regulation signs. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. 2012 Code)
*Traffic study, if requested by the Village Planner, Village Engineer or Planning and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. 2012
Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
*Estimated costs of public improvements. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. 2012 Code)
*Other information as may be required by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
12. Real Estate Appraiser's Report: If requested by the Village Administrator or the Planning and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-
1993; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
13. Revised Drawings:
*Date of all revisions, on each sheet.
*Graphic symbols to identify all changes. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993)
C. Property Of Village: All plans and support documentation submitted shall become the property of the Village and cannot be withdrawn.
Colored renderings presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Village Board may, however, be replaced with colored
photographs not less than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11") in size. (Ord. 93-42, 8-9-1993; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-
2014)
Chapter 5
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
11-5-1: BUILDINGS ON LOTS:
In residence districts, every dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot, and there shall not be more than one
principal building on one lot; except, in the case of planned developments, the planned unit development district of 250 acres or more and the
business park planned unit development district of 75 to 250 acres, only one principal building is permitted on any lot, and no principal building
shall be constructed over the lot line of any lot. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973; amd. 2012 Code)
11-5-2: ALLOWABLE USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS:
The following uses of land or buildings are allowed in the zoning districts established by this title:
A. Uses lawfully established on the effective date hereof.
B. Permitted uses as designated in the zoning districts established by this title.
C. Special uses. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973; amd. 2012 Code)
11-5-3: PUBLIC UTILITY USES:
The following public utility uses are permitted in any district: poles, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves, lift stations and
any other similar distribution equipment; provided, that installation shall conform with rules and regulations of the applicable administrative
authorities. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-5-4: PROHIBITED USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 367/548
No building or tract of land shall be devoted to any use other than the one which is specified as a permitted or special use in the zoning district
in which such building or land is located. However, where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in accordance with law
prior to the effective date hereof, and where construction has begun within six (6) months of such effective date and diligently prosecuted to
completion, said building or structure may be completed in accordance with approved plans on the basis of which the building permit was
issued; and further, may, upon completion, be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use originally designated, subject to the
provisions of chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973; 2012 Code)
11-5-5: TEMPORARY AND INTERIM LAND USES:
Temporary and interim land uses in the following land use categories shall require the issuance of a temporary land use permit which shall be
issued by the building and zoning official. A written application will be required for such use, and the application must demonstrate that the use
and applicant will meet the requirements for a temporary land use permit as stipulated in this section.
A. Unified Shopping Centers:
1. Sidewalk Sales: Sidewalk sales, sponsored by the businesses in a unified shopping center, may be held for a period not exceeding ten
(10) calendar days, with no more than four (4) such sales being permitted in any calendar year. Displays shall be arranged so that no such
display shall cover an area exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the depth of the sidewalk. At the building and zoning official's discretion, the
individual events may be combined, so long as such combined sidewalk sales do not exceed forty (40) days in any calendar year.
2. Other Promotional Events: Other promotional events include, but are not limited to: carnivals, circuses, live performances, charity
fundraisers, holiday events, classic car events, food festivals, farmers' markets, or other events sponsored by the businesses in the
shopping center, or by the ownership or management entity of the unified shopping center. The events, when approved by the building
and zoning official, may be held for a period not exceeding seven (7) days out of a ten (10) day period. No more than a total of six (6)
promotional events shall be permitted in each calendar year. Set up and removal time shall not be counted in the seven (7) day period.
Events, such as farmers' markets, that propose to occur at a frequency exceeding six (6) times within a calendar year shall be approved
as a special use pursuant to section 11-3-4 of this title.
B. Other Locations:
Promotional events, include, but are not limited to: company or church picnics, carnivals, charity fundraisers, holiday events, or other events.
The events, when approved by the building and zoning official, may be held for a period not exceeding three (3) calendar days, with no more
than four (4) such events being permitted in any calendar year. Events, such as farmers' markets, that propose to occur at a frequency
exceeding four (4) times within any calendar year, shall be approved as a special use pursuant to section 11-3-4 of this title.
C. Requirements For Temporary Land Use Permit:
1. Dimensioned site plan indicating the specific location on the site where the event will take place, detailing the major components, such as:
a. Main entrance,
b. Ticket booths,
c. Carnival rides,
d. Food service(s),
e. Portable toilets,
f. Games area,
g. Stage for performances,
h. Fencing locations, and
i. Vehicular parking locations;
2. Information about the proposed outside operator, if any;
3. Carnivals and circuses will require perimeter fencing if installed in parking lots, and be detailed on the site plan;
4. Number of portable toilets;
5. Dates for duration of the event, including a detail of the setup and removal;
6. Hours of operation;
7. Written estimate of the number of attendees, in the overall and peak periods;
8. Evidence of liability insurance and the limits of liability.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 368/548
9. For circuses and carnivals, certificates of insurance naming the village as an additional insured must be provided. The building and zoning
official, in conjunction with the village administrator's office, will provide the required coverage and limits of liability, and if additional
endorsements are needed;
10. Provisions for refuse collection;
11. Explanation of music provided and whether loudspeakers are to be used, and a written plan to notify neighboring businesses or
residents, if applicable;
12. Proof of approval by the appropriate fire protection district;
13. Proof of an approved license from the DuPage County health department, if food is being served;
14. Evidence of arrangements for private security, including any security details provided by the village police department through a "charge
back" process;
15. Provisions for temporary event signage;
16. Other permits and information as required by the building and zoning official, including permits for electrical installation, and to tap into
the village water and sewer system;
17. An application for a temporary use permit, including information required as applicable in subsections C1 through C16 of this section,
shall be submitted to the building and zoning official no less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of setup for the desired event;
18. The building and zoning official may create such application forms as are necessary to obtain the requisite information; and
19. The building and zoning official is authorized to assess permit fees on a daily or event basis as specified in this code.
D. Village Board Approval: When deemed to be acceptable, the village board shall approve all permits for temporary land uses by motion. The
village board may deny approval of the event if there is testimony from the village staff or village chief of police that the arrangements for
private security personnel as provided in writing, or the village's ability to provide security, whether through a charge back process to the
event sponsor or as part of its routine staffing for special events, is not sufficient to ensure public safety. The board may, at its discretion,
waive the requirement for approval of recurring events that occur subsequent to the initial event.
E. Previously Conducted Recurring Events: Recurring events that do not require village board approval as of the date of the adoption of this
code amendment will not need village board approval after the date of adoption of this code amendment so long as future events do not
differ materially from those events conducted previously. (Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
11-5-6: CONTROL OVER USE:
No building or premises shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, raised, moved,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or altered, except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located;
except, that in residence districts, a lot in a subdivision of record at the effective date hereof, even though such lot does not meet the
requirements of this title as to area and width, may be used for single-family residence purposes, provided the use conforms with all other
regulations of the district in which it is located. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-5-7: CHANGES TO APPROVED PLANS, USES AND STRUCTURES:
A. Minor Changes: The building and zoning official may approve minor changes to approved uses, occupancies, building interiors and exteriors,
structures or parts of structures, signage and site layouts or site plans, including those contained in site specific planned developments or
site plan approval ordinances. A change is considered to be minor if a preponderance of the following apply: (Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014;
amd. Ord. 2017-08, 3-13-2017)
1. It conforms to the concept, purpose and intent of the approved plan and any applicable development agreement;
2. It conforms to the concept, purpose, and intent of the comprehensive plan;
3. It conforms to the concept, purpose, and intent of the zoning code;
4. It conforms to the standards in the zoning code or is consistent with the standards established in a planned development ordinance or
permit;
5. It does not increase floor area or number of dwelling units by more than five percent (5%) of that allowed by the applicable zoning district
bulk regulations;
6. It does not increase impervious coverage by more than ten percent (10%) of the area of the applicable zoning lot or planned development
to be affected by the increased impervious area;
7. If a nonresidential use, it is not adjacent to residential uses;
8. The proposed use is within the same zoning classification as the existing or approved use, and the intensity of the use does not increase
as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 369/548
a. When the parking requirement of the new use is greater than that of the prior use; or
b. If in a business district (BP, B, O-D, or M-1), the hours of operation are greater; or
c. There is an increase of noise or other activity resulting from the new use.
9. The proposed exterior facade is harmonious with other properties, and does not result in a change in character with the surrounding
vicinity;
10. Notwithstanding the tree replacement requirements contained in chapter 16 of this title, tree replacement necessitated by changes
determined to be minor shall require a minimum of one 3-inch caliper tree to replace each tree, six inch (6") caliper or greater in size,
removed. Locations for tree replacement shall be shown on a site plan or site landscape plan. (Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
B. Major Changes: A request that cannot be determined to be minor in nature is deemed to be a major change. A major change shall be
reviewed according to the applicable procedure for new site plans or uses as specified in this code.
C. Request For Minor Changes: The property owner shall authorize all requests for minor changes. The property owner or an authorized tenant
shall provide such site plans, elevations, narrative description, or traffic information as necessary in order to make a determination that a
proposed change is minor or major. (Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
D. Minor Changes Denied: Minor changes not approved by the building and zoning official may be approved by the village board without the
review and recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. The village board may at its discretion, however, refer such requests to
the planning and zoning commission for a public meeting, according to the applicable procedure for new site plans as specified in this code.
In that case, the planning and zoning commission will prepare a finding of fact to be submitted to the board containing its review of the
revised plans. (Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
E. Mature Landscaping Installations In Shopping Centers, Retail Districts, Office Buildings, And Business Parks:
1. Notwithstanding the requirements of chapter 16, "Tree Preservation", of this title, property owners shall be allowed to replace mature
plantings, where the duration of the existing plantings exceeds ten (10) years, on a tree for tree or shrub for shrub basis as a minor
change.
2. Prior to a replacement of mature plantings as described in subsection E1 of this section, a new landscaping plan, prepared by a licensed
landscape architect, shall be submitted indicating existing and new species, and shall include a ledger breaking out deciduous canopy
trees, evergreen trees, ornamental trees, perennials and annuals, with species, size, and quantity of plantings. Size of plantings and other
landscaping requirements of chapter 4, "Site Development And Plan Review", of this title shall apply.
3. For unified shopping centers or other retail concentrations the property owner may also propose the regrading of landscaped yards to
reduce height of landscaped berms ranging from four feet (4') to six feet (6') to three feet (3'). A landscaping plan shall be submitted
showing the plantings on the proposed regrading plan.
4. The village may at its discretion obtain the assistance of a landscape or planning consulting firm to evaluate the appropriateness of any
replacement plantings. (Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
5. The village board shall approve the revised landscape plan. At their discretion, the board may refer the revised landscape plan to the
planning and zoning commission for its review at a public meeting, according to the applicable procedure for new site plans as specified in
this code. In that case, the planning and zoning commission will prepare a finding of fact to be submitted to the board containing its review
of the revised landscape plans. (Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
11-5-8: CONTROL OVER BULK:
Except in the case of planned developments, all new buildings shall conform to the bulk regulations established herein for the district in which
each building is located. Further, no existing building shall be enlarged, reconstructed, structurally altered, converted, or relocated in such a
manner as to conflict with the bulk regulations of this title for the district in which such building shall be located. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd.
Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
11-5-9: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES:
A. Accessory Uses:
1. Accessory uses shall be compatible with the principal use and shall not be established prior to the establishment of the principal use, and
shall not include the keeping, propagation or culture of pigeons, poultry or livestock, whether or not for profit.
2. Private swimming pools shall be permitted accessory uses in any residence district, provided they conform with the regulations of this title
and other applicable ordinances of the village. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
B. Accessory Structures:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 370/548
1. Location: No accessory structure, unless it is structurally a part of the principal structure, and unless it conforms with requirements of
accessory structures for special uses, shall be erected or altered, nor moved to a location within ten feet (10') of the nearest wall of the
principal structure or any structure on any adjacent lot, nor within the required area for a front or side yard of the lot, as set forth for the
district. An accessory structure in a rear yard shall not be less than five feet (5') from any property line; except, where a driveway along the
side lot line is not adjacent to a driveway on an adjoining lot, a detached garage need not be more than three feet (3') from the side lot
line; except, on corner lots, an accessory structure shall be not nearer than the required depth of the front yard along the property line
adjoining the street; and on through lots, not less than the distance required for a front yard from the rear lot line abutting a street.
2. Encroachment Upon Yards: No accessory structure shall encroach upon that side yard of a corner lot which is adjacent to the street, nor
upon that side yard of a reversed corner lot which is adjacent to the street, nor upon the rear yard of a through lot.
3. Height: No accessory structure shall have more than one story, nor exceed fifteen feet (15') in height, or the height of the principal
structure, whichever is less, unless otherwise permitted as accessory to business and manufacturing uses or to authorized special uses.
4. Access From Alley: An accessory structure having vehicular access from an alley shall not be less than five feet (5') from the lot line
abutting the alley.
5. Number Allowed: One general purpose accessory structure no larger than two hundred (200) square feet in area is permitted on any lot in
the single-family residence districts. One other accessory structure with a maximum area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet is also
permitted as either: a) a structure to be used in conjunction with a recreational activity, such as for swimming pool equipment storage or
horticultural equipment storage; or b) a gazebo.
6. Access Doors: Accessory structures shall have access through traditional, hinged doors. For lots over eighteen thousand (18,000) square
feet in area, access may be gained with overhead doors seven feet (7') or less in width and seven feet (7') or less in height.
7. Garages:
a. Detached garages shall be permitted only in the R-2 single-family residence district, and shall not be deemed accessory structures. The
area of such garages, however, shall be included in the thirty percent (30%) rear yard coverage limitation provided by subsection 11-5-
12E of this chapter.
b. Single-family residential properties located in the ER-1 and R-1 single-family residence districts shall be allowed a garage for motor
vehicle ("vehicle") storage with an area not to exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet, and containing doors sufficient to
accommodate four (4) vehicles. A single garage door may consist of either a single stall width for one vehicle or a double stall width for
two (2) vehicles.
(1) On interior lots, the garage may be either side or front loaded.
(A) If front loaded only, the garage can have a maximum of three (3) single stall garage doors, or one single stall and one double stall
garage door facing the street.
(B) If side loaded only, the garage can have any combination of single stall or double stall garage doors, to accommodate a maximum
number of four (4) garage doors.
(C) If front loaded and side loaded, the garage can have a maximum number of three (3) garage doors facing the street, with the
fourth garage door facing the side yard, as long as the total number of garage doors, both front and side loaded, accommodates no
more than four (4) vehicles.
(2) On corner lots, the garage can have a maximum number of garage doors for four (4) vehicles. A maximum number of four (4) doors
for four (4) vehicles are permitted facing the corner side property line, or some other arrangement as determined by the building and
zoning official. The four (4) doors may consist of two (2) double stall doors, or one double stall door and two (2) single stall doors, or
four (4) single stall doors.
(3) On through lots, a maximum number of four (4) doors are permitted, provided there are no more than three (3) stall doors facing the
front yard. The three (3) stall doors may consist of a double stall door and a single stall door, or three (3) single stall doors.
c. Single-family residences in the R-2, R-2A, R-2B, and R-3 single-family residence districts shall be allowed for a maximum of three (3)
garage doors to accommodate garage storage of not more than eight hundred (800) square feet in area facing a front, side, or rear lot
line on any interior, corner, or through lots. The three (3) garage stall door openings may consist of any combination of a double stall
door or a single stall door.
d. The total square footage of a garage may not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total floor area of the dwelling unit.
e. All garage doors shall be of a uniform height, but shall not exceed nine feet (9') in height.
f. Garage doors for a double stall to accommodate two (2) passenger vehicles shall be no wider than eighteen (18) linear feet, and for a
single stall to accommodate one passenger vehicle shall be no wider than ten (10) linear feet. (Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
11-5-10: SPECIAL USES:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the location of certain uses hereinafter specified which are deemed desirable for the
public welfare within a given district or districts, but which might have an adverse effect upon nearby properties or upon the character and
future development of the district in which they are located. A classification of special uses is hereby established. Procedures for special
uses are set forth in section 11-3-4 of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 371/548
B. Existing Special Uses: Where a use exists on the effective date hereof, and it is classified as a special use by this title, it shall be considered
to be a lawful special use. Additions or alterations to existing buildings or land improvements for expansion of lawful special uses may be
made within the area of the lot included in the ownership existing at the effective date hereof, and they shall be subject to yard, floor area
ratio, and building height requirements set forth in this title for permitted uses in the districts in which they are located. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-
1969; amd. Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
11-5-11: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A. The minimum yard space required for one structure shall not again be considered as yard space for another adjoining structure.
B. No lot shall be reduced in area so that the yards or other open spaces become less than required by this title.
C. On streets where a front yard setback has been maintained for buildings existing on lots or tracts having a frontage of thirty percent (30%) or
more of the total frontage on one side of that portion of any street lying between two (2) intersecting streets, or from an intersecting street
and a corporate limits line, no new building or portion thereof shall project beyond a straight line drawn between the point closest to the
street line of the residence upon either side of the proposed structure, or if there be residences upon only one side, then beyond the straight
line projected from the front of the two (2) nearest residences, but this regulation shall not be interpreted to require a front yard of more than
one hundred twenty five feet (125'), nor to permit a front yard of less depth than that of the nearest building. Where the street is curved, the
line shall follow the curve of the street rather than be a straight line.
D. On a vacant, through or corner lot, either of the lot lines abutting a street right of way line may be established as its front lot line; except, that
where two (2) or more through lots are contiguous and a front lot line has been duly established by the construction of a building on one of
the lots, the same street lot line shall thereafter be deemed to be the front lot line of all such contiguous lots. On a through lot, a front yard
shall be provided along any lot line abutting a street. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
11-5-12: PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN YARDS:
For the purpose of this title, the following are permitted obstructions in yards: (Ord. 2008-14, 3-24-2008; amd. Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
A. In Any Yard: Chimneys, overhanging roof eaves, awnings, porches, and steps and landings leading to or from an exterior door adjoining the
principal building, arbors and trellises, provided they do not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the depth of the yard; ornamental light
standards and flagpoles; and vegetation. Fences shall be permitted to the extent in compliance with chapter 19, "Fencing And Screening", of
this title. (Ord. 2008-14, 3-24-2008; amd. Ord. 2012-27, 6-11-2012; Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
B. In Front Yards:
1. Any yard which adjoins a street shall be considered a front yard.
2. In addition to those obstructions identified by subsection A of this section, off street parking and driveways are permitted in accordance
with chapter 13 of this title.
C. In Corner Side Yards: In addition to those obstructions identified by subsection A of this section, off street parking and driveways are
permitted in accordance with chapter 13 of this title. All permitted obstructions shall be sufficiently set back from the intersection of street
lines so as to avoid blocking sightlines for motorists.
D. In Interior Side Yards: In addition to those obstructions identified by subsection A of this section, off street parking and driveways are
permitted in accordance with chapter 13 of this title. Permitted accessory buildings, structures, and uses are allowed in an interior side yard;
provided, that the placement of same is consistent with this chapter and chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 2008-14, 3-24-2008; amd. Ord. 2013-
33, 10-28-2013)
E. In Rear Yards: Accessory sheds, toolrooms or other similar accessory buildings, gazebos, patios, decks, recreational equipment, private
swimming pools, tennis courts, provided the placement of same is in accordance with this chapter. Off street parking, private garages, and
driveways are permitted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 13 of this title. Accessory buildings or structures may not occupy more
than thirty percent (30%) of a rear yard. (Ord. 2012-27, 6-11-2012; amd. Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
F. Recreational Ramps:
1. Definition: The term "recreational ramp", as used in this subsection, shall refer to all outdoor structures commonly known as ramps or
halfpipes, designed and principally intended for recreational use by persons on skates, skateboards, or rollerblades. (Ord. 90-38, 6-25-
1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
2. Permitted Accessory Use: A recreational ramp may be located as a temporary accessory use in the rear yard of a zoning lot in any Single-
Family Residential District, provided:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 372/548
a. Number And Coverage: Not more than one ramp is located on a single zoning lot, and the recreational ramp, together with any other
accessory buildings or structures, does not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of a rear yard.
b. Commercial Use Prohibited: The ramp is not used for commercial purposes.
c. Location: The ramp is located not less than:
(1) Ten feet (10') from an interior side lot line.
(2) Twenty feet (20') from a corner lot line.
(3) Ten feet (10') from a rear lot line.
(4) Ten feet (10') from the principal building on the lot.
(5) Fifteen feet (15') from any utility pole and ten feet (10') from any point directly underneath any overhead utility line. (Ord. 90-38, 6-25-
1990; amd. Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
d. Screening: The ramp must be screened to buffer the view from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. The location and extent of
required screening shall be as determined by the Village Engineer.
(1) Screens must be at least as high as the ramp and may be accomplished through the use of a fence, wall, berm, or landscaping, or a
combination of any of these methods.
(2) Landscaping used to screen recreational ramps shall, at a minimum, include the installation of one (1) 8-foot tall, clump form
ornamental tree per ten (10) linear feet of ramp. Unless otherwise approved by the Village Engineer, trees installed for screening shall
be selected from one or more of the following: (Ord. 90-38, 6-25-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013; Ord. 2017-42,
11-13-2017)
Amur maple
Black alder
Crabtree varieties
River birch
Serviceberry
Thornless hawthorn
e. Use Restrictions: Recreational ramps shall be used in the following manner:
(1) Only one person may use the ramp at any time.
(2) Except on Sundays, when ramps shall not be used until after twelve o'clock (12:00) noon, use of the ramp shall be permitted only
between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. or dusk, whichever comes first.
(3) Use of the recreational ramp or those using such ramp shall not violate any provisions of this Code, including, without limitation, all
ordinances related to noise and nuisances, and as such ordinances may be amended.
(4) When not in use, the ramp shall have a chain, no less than one inch (1") thick, locked across the skating or riding surface. (Ord. 90-
38, 6-25-1990; amd. Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
f. Permit Requirements: No recreational ramp over thirty six inches (36") in height shall be constructed without first receiving a building
permit from the Village Engineer. Individuals applying for a building permit must submit the following information with their application
and a review fee established by the Village Board of Trustees1: (Ord. 90-38, 6-25-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013;
Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
(1) Plans for the proposed ramp which show materials, method of construction, dimensions, and design, in conformity with subsection
F2g of this section.
(2) Plat of survey for the property upon which the ramp is located, detailing the location and method of screening proposed.
(3) Details for the proposed fence, wall, berm, or landscape plantings, including height and size of all plant materials.
(4) Pictures of the proposed location of the ramp, including its surroundings and adjacent property lines.
(5) Statement in writing by applicant stating that the proposed ramp will conform to all standards and specifications established in this
subsection.
g. Building Requirements:
(1) No recreational ramp shall be more than six feet (6') in height as measured from the adjacent grade to the top of the structure
excluding the guardrail.
(2) All ramps greater than thirty inches (30") in height shall have a guardrail at least thirty six inches (36") in height on the platform(s).
(3) All lumber in direct contact with the ground shall be pressure treated with wood preservative.
(4) Plywood used in the ramp construction shall be exterior grade; the surface of the ramp being at least two (2) layers of three-eighths
inch (3/8") thick plywood.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 373/548
(5) All wood used in ramp construction shall be smooth finished to prevent injury and shall be properly surface coated to prevent
deterioration and unsightliness.
(6) The ramp shall be painted a single color in conformity with the principal structure and shall not contain any designs, logos, writing, or
other artwork.
(7) Ramps shall be "soundproofed" by placing tar paper in between the plywood layers of the skating or riding surface and by first
insulating and then enclosing the ends with plywood. (Ord. 90-38, 6-25-1990; amd. Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
h. Approval: The location, design, method of screening, and method of construction shall be subject to review and approval by the Village
Engineer. A building permit for a recreational ramp shall not be issued unless all information required by this subsection has been
furnished by the applicant. (Ord. 90-38, 6-25-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
i. Existing Ramps: All property owners with recreational ramps in place on the effective date hereof shall have a period of thirty (30) days
from said effective date to either remove the ramp, bring it into compliance with the provisions of this subsection or apply for and receive
a variation from the Village Planning and Zoning Commission as set forth in subsection F4 of this section.
3. Special Use Permit: Recreational ramps may be permitted in a commercial recreation area or neighborhood parks; provided, however, a
special use permit is obtained for the ramp or ramps in accordance with procedures and evaluative criteria set forth in chapter 3 of this
title. The location, design, screening, and hours of use shall be as recommended by the planning and zoning commission and approved
by the village board as part of the special use permit. Information furnished as part of the application for a special use permit shall be as
specified in subsection F2f of this section.
4. Authorized Variations:
a. The planning and zoning commission shall decide upon authorized variations from the provisions of this subsection, and shall grant
them only in the specific instances where there are demonstrated practical difficulties or particular hardships in implementing the
regulations hereof. (Ord. 90-38, 6-25-1990; amd. Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
b. Any individual applying for a variation shall be subject to the procedures contained in section 11-3-6 of this title. (Ord. 90-38, 6-25-1990;
amd. Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
c. The decision by the planning and zoning commission to grant a variation to any regulations specified in subsections F2c, F2d and F2g
of this section shall be based upon a showing by the petitioner: (Ord. 90-38, 6-25-1990; amd. Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013; Ord. 2014-48,
10-27-2014)
(1) That the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved would bring a particular
hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the regulations were strictly enforced;
(2) That the recreational ramp should be located in a corner side or interior side yard in lieu of the required rear yard due to the
particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved;
(3) That the proposed recreational ramp will not have an adverse effect upon the ability of the persons who own, occupy or reside on
nearby properties to use and enjoy their property;
(4) That the recreational ramp will not constitute a hazard to the safety of persons or property;
(5) That the proposed recreational ramp will not have an adverse effect on the value of nearby properties;
(6) That the proposed recreational ramp will be adequately screened from view of adjacent properties and public rights of way; and
(7) That the proposed recreational ramp will not be detrimental to the public welfare. (Ord. 90-38, 6-25-1990; amd. Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-
2013)
d. The planning and zoning commission may require such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variation as may
be necessary to comply with the standards set forth in this subsection to reduce or eliminate any negative effect of such variation upon
other property in the neighborhood and to implement the general purpose and intent of this subsection. (Ord. 90-38, 6-25-1990; amd.
Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
11-5-13: SANITARY SEWER AND WATER SYSTEMS:
A lot within a subdivision or planned development, or an individual lot not a part of an organized subdivision, shall be served by community or
public sanitary sewer and water supply systems, except such a lot, recorded after the effective date hereof, which contains at least twenty four
thousand (24,000) square feet of area and is at least one hundred fifty feet (150') in width, or in a duly recorded subdivision located within the
village limits on the effective date hereof. Any lot of record, when used for a single-family dwelling, may be served by individual sewage
treatment and water supply systems. Such individual sewage treatment and water supply systems shall be installed in accordance with
applicable village of Bloomingdale, DuPage County, and state of Illinois regulations and standards. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 2013-33,
10-28-2013)
11-5-14: GARAGE AND RUMMAGE SALES:
The following are regulations for garage and rummage sales:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 374/548
A. No sale items shall be located and no activities shall be conducted on a public sidewalk, parkway area or other public property. Further, no
sale items shall be left out for display later than seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on any day.
B. No more than three (3) rummage or garage sales shall be conducted on the same premises in any calendar year. One rummage or garage
sale shall be limited to a period of not more than three (3) consecutive days and shall be conducted only during the hours between nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. The sale shall be conducted without the use of outdoor speakers, other amplification
equipment, or illuminated advertising devices.
C. The person conducting the garage sale must notify the chief of police or his designee of the sale prior to the commencement of the sale.
(Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
Chapter 6
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
11-6-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
In order to carry out the purpose and provisions of this title, the village is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
Residence districts:
ER-1 Estate residence district
R-1 Single-family residence district
R-2 Single-family residence district
R-2A Single-family residence district
R-2B Single-family residence district
R-2C Single-family residence district
R-3 General residence district
R-4 Multiple-family dwelling residence district
R-5 Multiple-family dwelling high rise district
Business districts:
B-1 Neighborhood business district
B-2 Community business district
B-3 General service business district
B-4 Automotive service business district
O-D Office district
R-R Hotel-motel resort and recreational district
M-1 Limited manufacturing district
Planned unit development districts:
Business park planned unit development district of 75 to 250 acres
Planned unit development district of 250 acres or more
OTP Old town preservation district
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 375/548
(Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973; Ord. 74-7, 2-13-1974; Ord. 74-24, 6-24-1974; Ord. 76-36, 7-12-1976; Ord. 76-57, 9-13-
1976; Ord. 77-21, 4-11-1977; Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981; Ord. 83-28, 8-11-1983; Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; Ord. 2002-34, 8-12-2002; Ord. 2006-03, 1-
23-2006; 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-46, 10-27-2014)
11-6-2: ZONING MAP:
The districts and their boundaries are as shown upon the zoning map entitled "Village Of Bloomingdale, Illinois, Zoning Map", dated April 23,
1969, which map and all amendments thereto and all notations, references and other information shown thereon are hereby incorporated and
made a part of this title with the same force and effect as if the said zoning map, amendments, notations, references and other information were
fully herein set forth. The map shall be filed with the office of the village clerk and certified copies thereof in the office of the building and zoning
official, and shall be open to public reference at all times during which those offices are open. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. 2012 Code)
11-6-3: DETERMINATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning district map, the following rules shall
apply:
A. District boundary lines are either the centerlines of railroads, highways, streets, alleys, rights of way, easements, tract or lot lines, or such
lines extended, unless otherwise indicated.
B. In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, wherever a district is indicated as a strip adjacent to and paralleling a street, highway, or railroad
right of way, the depth of such strips shall be in accordance with dimensions shown on the maps measured at right angles from the
centerline of a street, highway, or railroad, and the length of frontage shall be in accordance with dimensions shown on the map from
centerlines of streets, highways, or railroad rights of way unless otherwise indicated.
C. Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership, the regulations for either portion of the lot may, in the owner's discretion,
extend to the entire lot, but not more than twenty five feet (25') beyond the boundary line of the district. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-6-4: ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND:
Any additions to the incorporated area of the village shall automatically be classified in the ER-1 estate residence district. Nothing contained in
this section shall prevent an interested party from requesting that any property be rezoned upon annexation to the village. (Ord. 2002-34, 8-12-
2002)
Chapter 7
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
11-7A-1: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Home occupations shall be governed by the following regulations:
A. Permitted home occupations may include any of the following:
Art studio.
Dressmaking.
Professional offices of a clergyman, physician, dentist, lawyer, architect, engineer, or accountant, but limited to one employee at any one
time.
Teaching, including musical instruments or dancing, but limited to one pupil at a time. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
B. Permitted home occupations shall not include any other use such as, but not limited to, the following:
Barbershop or salon.
Clinic or hospital.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 376/548
Manufacturing or processing of goods, materials, or products.
Repair shop or service establishment of any kind operating on or from the premises.
Stable or kennel.
The operation of any wholesale or retail business or service unless conducted entirely by mail or telephone and does not involve the sale,
repair, receipt, or delivery of merchandise on the premises. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. 2012 Code)
11-7A-2: SIGNS:
Signs shall be subject to the regulations of chapter 14 of this title. (2012 Code)
11-7A-3: NOISE:
Noise shall be limited in accordance with the provisions set forth in subsection 11-9-7A of this title. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-7A-4: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Parking spaces and loading berths shall be in accordance with the provisions set forth in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-7A-5: PUBLIC PROPERTIES AND INSTITUTIONS:
A. Publicly owned properties and institutions including, but not limited to, buildings and properties used, or intended for use, primarily as
municipal works, fire and police protection, public schools, parks and playgrounds, are herewith exempted from the general conditions, yard
and other bulk requirements of this article. All such properties and institutions shall be and are herewith declared to be special uses and
shall be subject to the requirements of section 11-5-10 of this title.
B. All publicly owned properties and institutions which existed lawfully at the effective date hereof may continue in accordance with the
applicable regulations of chapter 12 of this title.
C. The regulations, development and use of publicly owned properties and institutions shall be considered and treated on the same basis as
planned developments as provided in chapter 18 of this title; except, subsections 11-18-2D, F6 and H of this title are herewith declared
inapplicable. (Ord. 77-59, 11-28-1977)
ARTICLE B. ER-1 ESTATE RESIDENCE DISTRICT
11-7B-1: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Area: Lot area to be not less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
B. Lot Width: Lot width to be not less than one hundred twenty five feet (125').
C. Minimum Floor Area Per Dwelling:
1. One-story buildings: Not less than one thousand seven hundred fifty (1,750) square feet on the ground floor.
2. Dwellings having more than one story: Not less than one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') on the ground floor and not less than two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet for all floors.
D. Floor Area Ratio: Floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.25.
E. Building Height: Building height is not to exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty feet (30'), whichever is lower.
F. Yards:
1. Front Yard: Front yard is to be not less than fifty feet (50') in depth. (Ord. 2002-34, 8-12-2002)
2. Side Yards:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 377/548
a. Two (2) side yards having a combined width of forty feet (40') and neither side yard less than twenty feet (20') in width. (Ord. 2002-34,
8-12-2002; amd. 2012 Code)
b. A side yard abutting a street shall not be less than fifty feet (50') wide. Where a lot, subdivided and recorded on the effective date
hereof, has insufficient width to provide such fifty feet (50') maintaining a buildable width of thirty eight feet (38'), then the side yard
abutting the street may be reduced in width to maintain such thirty eight feet (38'), provided the said side yard is not reduced to less
than thirty percent (30%) of the width of the lot.
3. Rear Yard: Rear yard is to be not less than fifty feet (50') in depth.
G. Garage:
1. No detached garage will be permitted.
2. A garage shall have a maximum capacity for four (4) vehicles. (Ord. 2002-34, 8-12-2002)
11-7B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Parks and playgrounds, publicly owned and operated.
Schools, nonboarding elementary, junior high, high, or junior college.
Single-family detached dwellings.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed such construction.
Accessory uses to the above permitted uses. (Ord. 2002-34, 8-12-2002)
11-7B-3: SPECIAL USES:
Art galleries and museums.
Churches.
Colleges and universities and uses accessory and incidental thereto, but not colleges or trade schools operated for profit.
Convents, monasteries, and seminaries.
Golf courses, but not including commercially operated driving ranges or miniature par 3 courses.
Growing of farm crops in the open, including truck gardens and nurseries; provided, that no livestock, poultry, or pigeons are kept, and that no
offensive odors or dust is created; and further, that no retail sales are conducted from a store or stand erected or maintained on the premises.
Hospitals or clinics.
Libraries.
Municipal or nonprofit privately owned recreational buildings and community centers.
Park district or municipally owned lighted miniature golf facilities.
Park district or municipally owned lighted recreational fields.
Parks and playgrounds, privately owned and operated, but not for profit.
Planned developments.
Schools, private: nursery, elementary, or high.
Utility and public service, including:
Electric substation or distribution centers.
Fire stations.
Municipal water filtration plants, pumping stations, reservoirs, and sewage treatment plants.
Police stations.
Radio or television transmission or receiving towers.
Railroad right of way and passenger stations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 378/548
Telephone exchanges and substations, microwave relay towers, and telephone transmission equipment buildings. (Ord. 2002-34, 8-12-2002)
ARTICLE C. R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
11-7C-1: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Area: Lot area is to be not less than eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet.
B. Lot Width: Lot width is to be not less than one hundred feet (100').
C. Minimum Floor Area Per Dwelling:
1. One-story dwellings: Not less than one thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) square feet on the ground floor.
2. Dwellings having more than one story: Not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet on the ground floor and not less than one thousand
three hundred fifty (1,350) square feet for all floors.
3. Split level dwellings: Not less than one thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) square feet for the first two (2) floors of the living area, which
floors must be fully exposed on all elevations, without including in the computation thereof of any living area below, or partially below,
ground level.
D. Floor Area Ratio: Floor area ratio is not to exceed 0.3.
E. Building Height: Building height is not to exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty feet (30'), whichever is lower.
F. Yards:
1. Front Yard: Front yard is to be not less than forty feet (40') in depth.
2. Side Yards:
a. Two (2) side yards having a combined width of twenty feet (20') and neither side yard less than eight feet (8') in width.
b. A side yard abutting a street shall not be less than forty feet (40') wide. Where a lot, subdivided and recorded on the effective date
hereof, has insufficient width to provide such forty feet (40') maintaining a buildable width of thirty eight feet (38'), then the side yard
abutting the street may be reduced in width to maintain such thirty eight feet (38'), provided the said side yard is not reduced to less
than thirty percent (30%) of the width of the lot.
3. Rear Yard: Rear yard is to be not less than fifty feet (50') in depth. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
4. Requirements For Specific Areas: Notwithstanding the yard requirements established in this subsection, the minimum front, side, or rear
yard required for all lots fronting Lake Street, Bloomingdale Road, Army Trail Road, Schmale Road, and Gary Avenue shall be seventy
five feet (75') for whichever yard(s) of said lots fronts said streets; the minimum front, side, or rear yard required for all lots fronting Schick
Road shall be sixty feet (60') for whichever yard(s) of said lots fronts said street. (Ord. 2007-20, 5-24-2007)
G. Garage: No detached garage will be permitted. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-7C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Parks and playgrounds publicly owned and operated.
Schools, nonboarding elementary, junior high, high, or junior college.
Single-family detached dwellings.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed such construction.
Accessory uses to the above permitted uses. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-7C-3: SPECIAL USES:
Art galleries and museums.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 379/548
Churches.
Colleges and universities and uses accessory and incidental thereto but not colleges or trade schools operated for profit.
Convents, monasteries, and seminaries.
Golf courses, but not including commercially operated driving ranges or miniature par 3 courses.
Growing of farm crops in the open, including truck gardens and nurseries; provided, that no livestock, poultry, or pigeons are kept, and that no
offensive odors or dust is created; and further, that no retail sales are conducted from a store or stand erected or maintained on the premises.
Hospitals or clinics.
Libraries.
Municipal or nonprofit privately owned recreational buildings and community centers.
Park district or municipally owned lighted miniature golf facilities.
Park district or municipally owned lighted recreational fields.
Parks and playgrounds privately owned and operated, but not for profit.
Planned developments.
Publicly or privately operated early childhood learning centers and preschools, and privately operated elementary schools, junior high schools,
middle schools, or high schools.
Utility and public service uses, including:
Electric substations and distribution centers.
Fire stations.
Municipal water filtration plants, pumping stations, reservoirs, and sewage treatment plants.
Police stations.
Radio or television transmission or receiving towers.
Railroad rights of way and passenger stations.
Telephone exchanges and substations, microwave relay towers, and telephone transmission equipment buildings. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd.
Ord. 89-21, 5-8-1989; Ord. 2011-40, 11-28-2011)
ARTICLE D. R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
11-7D-1: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Area: Lot area is to be not less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
B. Lot Width: Lot width is to be not less than eighty feet (80').
C. Minimum Floor Area Per Dwelling:
1. One-story dwellings: Not less than one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet on the ground floor.
2. Dwellings having more than one story: Not less than eight hundred fifty (850) square feet on the ground floor and not less than one
thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet for all floors.
3. Split level dwellings: Not less than one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet on the first two (2) floors of the living area without
including, in the computation thereof, any living area below, or partially below, ground level.
D. Floor Area Ratio: Floor area ratio is not to exceed 0.3.
E. Building Height: Building height is not to exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty feet (30'), whichever is lower.
F. Yards:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 380/548
1. Front Yard: Front yard is not to be less than forty feet (40') in depth.
2. Side Yards:
a. Two (2) side yards having a combined width of twenty feet (20') and neither side yard less than eight feet (8') in width.
b. A side yard abutting a street is not to be less than forty feet (40') wide.
c. If a corner lot, subdivided and duly recorded on the effective date hereof, has insufficient width to provide such yard of forty feet (40') in
width and still to maintain a buildable width of thirty eight feet (38'), including the side yard along the opposite lot line, then the side yard
abutting the street may be reduced in width by the distance necessary to maintain a buildable width of thirty eight feet (38'), provided the
side yard abutting the street is not reduced to less than thirty percent (30%) of the width of the lot.
3. Rear Yard: Rear yard is not to be less than forty feet (40') in depth. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
4. Requirements For Specific Areas: Notwithstanding the yard requirements established in this subsection, the minimum front, side, or rear
yard required for all lots fronting Lake Street, Bloomingdale Road, Army Trail Road, Schmale Road, and Gary Avenue shall be seventy
five feet (75') for whichever yard(s) of said lots fronts said streets; the minimum front, side, or rear yard required for all lots fronting Schick
Road shall be sixty feet (60') for whichever yard(s) of said lots fronts said street. (Ord. 2007-20, 5-24-2007)
11-7D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Uses permitted in the R-1 district. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-7D-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses permitted in the R-1 district. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
ARTICLE E. R-2A SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
11-7E-1: PURPOSE:
The R-2A single-family residence district is intended primarily to preserve and protect existing single-family residences constructed on smaller
lots. The district should be mapped in those areas where dwellings are presently constructed on smaller lots and where small tracts of
developable land are available in order to maintain and enhance the character of these areas. (Ord. 74-24, 6-24-1974)
11-7E-2: PERMITTED USES:
Any use permitted in the R-1 single-family residence district. (Ord. 2011-10, 2-28-2011)
11-7E-3: SPECIAL USES:
Any special use permitted in the R-1 single-family residence district. (Ord. 2011-10, 2-28-2011)
11-7E-4: LOT SIZE:
A. Lot Required: With the exception of planned developments, a separate ground area, herein called the "zoning lot", shall be designated,
provided, and continuously maintained for each structure containing a permitted use. (Ord. 74-24, 6-24-1974; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Permitted Use Lot Sizes:
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot Width
Parks and playground buildings 60,000 square feet 150 feet
Schools 30,000 square feet 125 feet
Single-family detached dwellings 10,800 square feet 70 feet
(Ord. 74-24, 6-24-1974; amd. Ord. 2011-10, 2-28-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 381/548
11-7E-5: YARDS:
A. Unobstructed Space: Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, the space resulting from the setbacks (yard requirements) in this section
shall be open and unobstructed.
B. Permitted Uses:
Front Interior Side Yard Corner Yard Rear Yard
Parks and playground buildings 45 feet 25 feet1 35 feet 50 feet
Schools 50 feet 25 feet1 35 feet 75 feet
Single-family detached dwellings 35 feet 10 feet 35 feet 30 feet
Note:
1. Plus 1 foot for each 2 feet by which the building or structure height exceeds 15 feet.
(Ord. 74-24, 6-24-1974; amd. Ord. 2011-10, 2-28-2011)
C. Yards Fronting Specific Streets: Notwithstanding the yard requirements established in this section, the minimum front, side, or rear yard
required for all lots fronting Lake Street, Bloomingdale Road, Army Trail Road, Schmale Road, and Gary Avenue shall be seventy five feet
(75') for whichever yard(s) of said lots fronts said streets. The minimum front, side, or rear yard required for all lots fronting Schick Road shall
be sixty feet (60') for whichever yard(s) of said lots fronts said street. (Ord. 2007-20, 5-24-2007)
11-7E-6: BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit:
1. One-story single-family dwellings shall have not less than one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet on the ground floor.
2. Dwellings having more than one story shall have not less than eight hundred fifty (850) square feet on the ground floor and shall have not
less than one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet for all floors. (Ord. 74-24, 6-24-1974)
B. Maximum Floor Area Ratio: All permitted uses other than those referenced in subsection A of this section shall be regulated on the basis of
maximum floor area ratio.
1. Single-family detached dwellings: 0.30.
2. Park and playground buildings: 0.25.
3. Schools, elementary and/or secondary: 0.25.
4. Cultural institutions: 0.25. (Ord. 74-24, 6-24-1974; amd. Ord. 2011-10, 2-28-2011; 2012 Code)
5. Planned developments, residential: As specified by the planning and zoning commission.
6. Public utility and service uses: As specified by the planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 74-24, 6-24-1974; amd. Ord. 2011-10, 2-28-
2011; 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
C. Maximum Building Height: Two and one-half (21/2) stories but not to exceed thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 74-24, 6-24-1974)
ARTICLE F. R-2B SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
11-7F-1: PURPOSE:
The R-2B single-family residence district is intended primarily to preserve and protect existing single-family residences constructed on smaller
lots. The district should be mapped in those areas where dwellings are presently constructed on smaller lots and where small tracts of
developable land are available in order to maintain and enhance the character of these areas. (Ord. 76-36, 7-12-1976)
11-7F-2: PERMITTED USES:
Any use permitted in the R-1 single-family residence district. (Ord. 2011-10, 2-28-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 382/548
11-7F-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses shall be provided in accordance with section 11-5-9 of this title. (Ord. 76-36, 7-12-1976)
11-7F-4: SPECIAL USES:
Any use permitted in the R-1 single-family residence district. (Ord. 2011-10, 2-28-2011)
11-7F-5: LOT SIZE:
With the exception of planned residential developments (special use), a separate ground area, herein called the "zoning lot", shall be
designated, provided and continuously maintained for each structure containing a permitted use or special use and shall comply with the
following minimum lot area requirements: (Ord. 76-36, 7-12-1976)
A. Permitted Special Uses:
Uses Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width
Parks and playground buildings 60,000 square feet 150 feet
Schools 30,000 square feet 150 feet
Single-family dwelling 9,000 square feet 70 feet
(Ord. 76-36, 7-12-1976; amd. Ord. 2011-10, 2-28-2011)
B. All Other Uses: All other uses, except public utilities, shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet, with a minimum width of two hundred feet (200'). The minimum lot area and lot width for public utilities shall be
subject to approval by the planning and zoning commission on a special use basis. (Ord. 76-36, 7-12-1976; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
11-7F-6: YARDS:
Minimum front yard, corner side yard, side yard and rear yard requirements for each lot in an R-2B single-family residence district shall be as
follows:
A. Minimum Front Yard:
1. Single-family dwelling: Thirty feet (30').
2. Schools: Fifty feet (50').
3. All other uses: Fifty feet (50').
B. Minimum Corner Side Yard:
1. Single-family dwelling: Thirty feet (30').
2. Schools: Fifty feet (50').
3. All other uses: Thirty five feet (35').
C. Minimum Side Yard:
1. Single-family dwelling: The two (2) side yards shall have a combined width of eighteen feet (18'), and neither side yard shall be less than
eight feet (8').
2. Schools: Fifty feet (50').
3. All other uses: Eighty feet (80').
D. Minimum Rear Yard:
1. Single-family dwelling: Forty feet (40').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 383/548
2. Schools: Eighty feet (80').
3. All other uses: Eighty feet (80'). (Ord. 76-36, 7-12-1976)
E. Yards Fronting Specific Streets: Notwithstanding the yard requirements established in this section, the minimum front, side, or rear yard
required for all lots fronting Lake Street, Bloomingdale Road, Army Trail Road, Schmale Road, and Gary Avenue shall be seventy five feet
(75') for whichever yard(s) of said lots fronts said streets. The minimum front, side, or rear yard required for all lots fronting Schick Road shall
be sixty feet (60') for whichever yard(s) of said lots fronts said street. (Ord. 2007-20, 5-24-2007)
11-7F-7: BULK REGULATIONS:
Maximum structure height and floor area ratio for building structures on lots in an R-2B single-family residence district shall be as follows:
A. Maximum Building Height: No building shall exceed thirty feet (30') in height.
B. Floor Area Ratio:
1. Single-family dwelling: 0.30. (Ord. 76-36, 7-12-1976)
2. Planned development, residential: As specified by the planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 76-36, 7-12-1976; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-
27-2014)
3. All other uses: 0.30. (Ord. 76-36, 7-12-1976)
11-7F-8: DWELLING STANDARDS:
A. Every one-story dwelling shall have a total ground floor area of not less than one thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) square feet, measured
from the outside of the exterior walls, including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages and other
spaces that are not used or intended to be used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes.
B. Dwellings having more than one story shall have not less than eight hundred (800) square feet on the ground floor and not less than one
thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) square feet for all floors, including utility rooms but excluding cellars, basements, open porches,
breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes.
C. Split level dwellings shall not have less than one thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) square feet, including utility rooms but excluding
cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods for living,
eating or sleeping purposes. (Ord. 76-36, 7-12-1976)
ARTICLE F1. R-2C SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
11-7F1-1: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Area: Lot area is to be not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet.
B. Lot Width: Lot width is to be not less than sixty feet (60').
C. Minimum Floor Area Per Dwelling:
1. One-story dwellings: Not less than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet on the ground floor.
2. Dwellings having more than one story: Not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet on the ground floor and not less than two thousand
two hundred (2,200) square feet for all floors.
D. Floor Area Ratio: Floor area ratio is not to exceed 0.5.
E. Building Height: Building height is not to exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty feet (30'), whichever is lower.
F. Yards:
1. Front Yard: Front yard is not to be less than twenty feet (20') in depth.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 384/548
2. Side Yards:
a. Two (2) side yards having a combined width of ten feet (10') and neither side yard less than five feet (5') in width.
b. A side yard abutting a street is not to be less than twenty feet (20') wide.
3. Rear Yard: Rear yard is not to be less than twenty feet (20') in depth.
4. Requirements For Specific Areas: Notwithstanding the yard requirements established in this subsection, the minimum front, side, or rear
yard required for all lots fronting Lake Street, Bloomingdale Road, Army Trail Road, Schmale Road, and Gary Avenue shall be seventy
five feet (75') for whichever yard(s) of said lots fronts said streets; the minimum front, side, or rear yard required for all lots fronting Schick
Road shall be sixty feet (60') for whichever yard(s) of said lots fronts said street. (Ord. 2014-46, 10-27-2014)
11-7F1-2: PERMITTED USES:
Uses permitted in the R-1 district. (Ord. 2014-46, 10-27-2014)
11-7F1-3: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses permitted in the R-1 district. (Ord. 2014-46, 10-27-2014)
11-7F1-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating the terms and conditions of this article shall, following prior notice thereof by the village to such offending person and such
opportunity to correct such violation(s) as the village may determine appropriate, be subject to a penalty not exceeding one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), with each and every day that such violation of this article is allowed to remain in effect being deemed a complete and separate
offense. In addition, the appropriate authorities of the village may take such other actions they deem proper to enforce the terms and conditions
of this article, including, without limitation, an action in equity to compel compliance with its terms. Any person violating the terms of this article
shall be subject, in addition to the foregoing penalties, to the payment of court costs and reasonable attorney fees of the village. (Ord. 2014-46,
10-27-2014)
ARTICLE G. R-3 GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT
11-7G-1: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Area:
1. Single-family detached dwellings: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
2. Two-family detached dwellings: Eight thousand (8,000) square feet per dwelling unit.
3. Two-family semidetached dwellings (duplex): Eight thousand (8,000) square feet per dwelling unit.
4. Attached dwellings (group, row and town houses): Eight thousand (8,000) square feet per dwelling unit.
B. Lot Width:
1. Not less than eighty feet (80') at the buildable area for single-family detached or two-family detached dwellings.
2. Not less than ninety feet (90') for two-family semidetached and attached dwellings and multiple-family dwellings.
C. Floor Area:
1. Single-family detached dwellings: Same as the R-2 district.
2. Two-family semidetached dwellings:
a. One-story dwellings: Not less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet on the ground floor of each dwelling unit.
b. Dwellings having more than one story: Not less than six hundred (600) square feet on the ground floor and not less than one thousand
two hundred (1,200) square feet for all floors of each dwelling unit.
c. Split level dwellings: Not less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet on the first two (2) floors of living area, without
including, in the computation thereof, any living area below, or partially below, ground level of each dwelling unit.
3. Two-family detached dwellings: Not less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet per each dwelling unit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 385/548
D. Floor Area Ratio: Floor area ratio not to exceed 0.4.
E. Building Height:
1. Building height not to exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty feet (30'), whichever is lower. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
2. Building height of special uses shall not exceed three (3) stories or thirty five feet (35'), whichever is lower, notwithstanding subsection E1
of this section. (Ord. 75-2, 1-13-1975)
F. Yards: Yards are the same as in the R-2 district.
G. Efficiency Dwelling Units: Efficiency dwelling units are not permitted. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-7G-2: PERMITTED USES:
Uses permitted in the R-1 district.
Attached dwellings: Maximum of three (3) bedrooms per dwelling unit.
Two-family detached and two-family semidetached dwellings: Maximum of three (3) bedrooms per dwelling unit. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd.
2012 Code)
11-7G-3: SPECIAL USES:
Uses permitted in the R-1 district.
Attached dwellings: One 4-bedroom unit for every ten (10) units.
Nursing homes. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 75-2, 1-13-1975)
ARTICLE H. R-4 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING RESIDENCE DISTRICT
11-7H-1: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Area: Multiple-family dwellings as follows:
1. Two (2) bedroom: Not less than two thousand eight hundred (2,800) square feet.
2. One bedroom: Not less than two thousand six hundred (2,600) square feet.
B. Lot Width: Lot width is to be not less than one hundred feet (100').
C. Minimum Floor Area:
1. Efficiency units (special use): Not less than five hundred (500) square feet.
2. One bedroom: Not less than six hundred fifty (650) square feet.
3. Two (2) bedroom: Not less than eight hundred fifty (850) square feet.
4. Three (3) bedroom (special use): Not less than one thousand fifty (1,050) square feet.
D. Floor Area Ratio: Floor area ratio not to exceed 0.4.
E. Building Height:
1. Building height shall not exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty feet (30'), whichever is lower. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
2. Building height for special uses shall not exceed six and one-half (61/2) stories or sixty five feet (65'), whichever is lower, notwithstanding
subsection E1 of this section. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 386/548
F. Yards: Yards are the same as the R-2 district.
G. Efficiency Dwelling Units: Efficiency dwelling units are not permitted except under special uses.
H. Spacing Between Buildings:
1. Not less than fifty feet (50') when any part of the front wall of a dwelling is opposite the front wall or rear wall of the dwelling located on the
same lot or adjoining lot.
2. Not less than forty feet (40') when any part of the rear wall of a dwelling is opposite the rear wall of the nearest dwelling located on the
same lot or an adjoining lot.
3. Not less than twenty feet (20') when any part of the side wall of a dwelling is opposite the side wall of the nearest dwelling located on the
same lot or adjoining lot.
4. Not less than thirty feet (30') when any part of the side wall of the dwelling is opposite the front or rear wall of the nearest dwelling located
on the same lot or adjoining lot.
5. In courts, a corner at the ends of a front or rear wall of a dwelling that is located at the end of a court shall be at least twenty feet (20') from
the nearest corner of a front or rear wall of a dwelling forming the side of the court.
I. Number Of Bedrooms: The number of bedrooms per dwelling unit allowable shall not exceed two (2), except under special uses. (Ord. 69-12,
4-23-1969)
11-7H-2: PERMITTED USES:
Same as the R-1 district, except no single-family dwellings.
Multiple-family dwellings, provided such dwellings contain five (5) or more dwelling units. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-7H-3: SPECIAL USES:
Same as the R-1 district.
Efficiency units, the lot area of which shall not be less than two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet. One such efficiency unit shall be
allowable for each ten (10) units.
Three (3) bedroom dwelling units, the lot area of which shall not be less than three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet. One such three
(3) bedroom dwelling unit shall be allowable for each twenty (20) units. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
ARTICLE I. R-5 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING HIGH RISE DISTRICT
11-7I-1: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
A. Planned Developments By Special Use: No building or structure may be erected or structurally altered in the R-5 district unless and until a
special use permit for a planned development has been granted therefor in accordance with the provisions of chapter 18 of this title. The
provisions of this article shall not apply to the erection of buildings and structures or the structural alteration thereof in a planned unit
development district of 250 acres or more governed by chapter 10, article B of this title. (Ord. 74-7, 2-13-1974)
B. Additional Standards Governing Granting Of Approval Of Special Use Permit: In addition to the standards contained in chapter 18 of this title
concerning the approval of a special use permit for a planned development in the R-5 district, the planning and zoning commission and
village board shall be guided by the following considerations: (Ord. 74-7, 2-13-1974; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
1. The R-5 district is primarily intended for high density residential areas that are adjacent to principal commercial centers and only where
there are existing or proposed utilities of adequate capacity.
2. There are adequate, existing or proposed community recreational facilities to accommodate the number of persons reasonably expected
to live in the district and adjacent thereto, and where the existing or proposed street system is or will be capable of handling not only the
existing traffic but that reasonably expected to be added by the proposed development. (Ord. 74-7, 2-13-1974)
11-7I-2: PERMITTED SPECIAL USES:
Any use permitted in the R-4 district (including special uses permitted in the R-4 district) may be a special use in the R-5 district. Any use
permitted as a special use in the R-3 district may be a special use in the R-5 district. (Ord. 74-7, 2-13-1974)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 387/548
11-7I-3: LOT SIZE:
A. The minimum zoning lot shall be not less than one hundred feet (100') wide at the front setback line and shall contain not less than ten
thousand (10,000) square feet, plus two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet for each dwelling unit in excess of eight (8) dwelling
units. (Ord. 74-7, 2-13-1974)
B. The planning and zoning commission may recommend approval of, and the village board may approve, a planned development in this district
in which one or more lots: 1) do not meet the minimum width and area requirements set forth in subsection A of this section; or 2) do not
abut a public street; provided, however, that the spacing of buildings in such planned development meets the requirements of the planned
unit development district of 250 acres or more, pertaining to the residential use areas; and provided further, that the plan provides that lots
that do not abut a public street are connected thereto by a private paved driveway and/or a paved parking area; and provided further, that
the plan requires the construction of such private driveways and private parking areas to be in accordance with the village subdivision
regulations. (Ord. 74-7, 2-13-1974; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
11-7I-4: YARDS:
A. Yards shall be not less than the following:
1. Front yard: Sixty five feet (65') in depth.
2. Side yard: Fifty feet (50') in depth.
3. Rear yard: Sixty five feet (65') in depth.
B. The space contained in yards shall be open and unobstructed. (Ord. 74-7, 2-13-1974)
C. The planning and zoning commission may recommend approval of, and the village board may approve, a planned development in the R-5
district in which the minimum yard building setback requirements set forth in subsection A of this section are not met; provided, however, that
the spacing of buildings in such planned development meet the requirements of the planned unit development district of 250 acres or more,
pertaining to residential use areas. (Ord. 74-7, 2-13-1974; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
D. Notwithstanding the yard requirements established in this section, the minimum front, side, or rear yard required for all lots fronting Lake
Street, Bloomingdale Road, Army Trail Road, Schmale Road, and Gary Avenue shall be seventy five feet (75') for whichever yard(s) of said
lots fronts said streets. The minimum front, side, or rear yard required for all lots fronting Schick Road shall be sixty feet (60') for whichever
yard(s) of said lots fronts said street. (Ord. 2007-20, 5-24-2007)
11-7I-5: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered in the R-5 district in excess of twelve (12) stories or higher than one hundred
thirty feet (130'), whichever is lower. (Ord. 74-7, 2-13-1974)
11-7I-6: FLOOR AREA RATIO:
No building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered in the R-5 district that has a floor area ratio in excess of 0.4. (Ord. 74-7, 2-13-
1974)
11-7I-7: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA:
The minimum floor area of residential units shall be as follows:
A. Efficiency units: Five hundred (500) square feet.
B. One bedroom units: Seven hundred seventy five (775) square feet.
C. Two (2) bedroom units: One thousand fifty (1,050) square feet. (Ord. 74-7, 2-13-1974)
Chapter 8
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 388/548
ARTICLE A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL BUSINESS DISTRICTS
11-8A-1: PURPOSE:
The business districts set forth herein are established to protect the public health, to promote public safety, comfort, convenience and the
general welfare and to protect the economic base of the village and the value of the property. These general purposes include, among others,
the following objectives:
A. To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well considered plan so that adequate space is provided in appropriate
locations for the various types of business uses, thereby protecting and strengthening the economic base of the village.
B. To place in separate districts those businesses which may create noise, odors, hazards, or unsightliness, or which may generate excessive
traffic.
C. To permit selected business uses in districts adjacent to residential areas where sufficient value or convenience to the residential area offsets
the disadvantages of the business use.
D. To encourage the grouping in appropriate locations of compatible business uses which will tend to draw trade that is mutually
interchangeable and so promote public convenience and business prosperity and contribute to the alleviation of traffic and pedestrian
congestion by encouraging the use of a common ingress and egress.
E. To promote the establishment of off street parking facilities, permitted and required, so as to alleviate traffic congestion and so promote
shopping convenience and business prosperity.
F. To promote design appearance, style and construction of structures in the business districts which will be essentially compatible with the
residential character of the village. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8A-2: ALLOWABLE USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS:
The following uses of land or buildings are allowed in the business districts contained herein under the conditions specified in this title:
A. Uses lawfully established on the effective date hereof.
B. Permitted uses as designated for each business district.
C. Special uses. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8A-3: PERMITTED USES:
A. Permitted uses of land or buildings, as listed in this chapter, shall be permitted in accord with the conditions specified. No building or zoning
lot shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted in this chapter, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered, enlarged, or
occupied, except as a permitted use in this chapter, in the zoning district in which such building or zoning lot shall be located unless
otherwise specifically allowed by this chapter. Uses lawfully established on the effective date hereof and rendered nonconforming by the
provisions hereof shall be subject to the regulations of chapter 12 of this title.
B. Uses permitted in the B-3 district include those listed in the B-2 and B-1 districts. Uses listed in the B-2 district include those listed in the B-1
District. Uses listed in the B-4 District do not include automatically those permitted in the other districts. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8A-4: SPECIAL USES:
A. It is recognized that there are certain uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified without consideration
of the impact, in each case, of these uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use at the particular location.
These uses fall into two (2) categories:
1. Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public interest.
2. Private uses of such an unusual nature that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring
property. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 389/548
B. The special uses listed in each district may be permitted by the adoption of an ordinance by the Village Board of Trustees granting a special
use permit upon receiving the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The procedures for requesting a special use permit
are described in section 11-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
11-8A-5: ACCESSORY USES:
A. Accessory uses include buildings or other structures customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted or special use.
These uses may be permitted, provided they are operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the same lot as the permitted
or special use and do not include structures or structural features inconsistent with these uses and do not involve the conduct of any
business, profession, trade or industry.
B. A further discussion on, and the standards for accessory buildings and uses, are described in section 11-5-9 of this title. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-
1981)
11-8A-6: LOT AND BULK REGULATIONS:
With the exception of planned developments, lot and bulk regulations shall be as set forth under each specific business district contained
herein. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8A-7: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required in chapter 13 of this title and other sections of this title, as applicable. (Ord.
81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8A-8: STORMWATER DRAINAGE AND ENTRANCE CURBS:
Storm drainage and entrance curbs are required on all street frontages and shall meet the approval of the Village Engineer and be in
accordance with Village ordinances. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
11-8A-9: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All activities shall conform with the performance standards established for the M-1 Limited Manufacturing District except where otherwise
stated. These standards are presented in section 11-9-7 of this title. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8A-10: ADDITIONAL STANDARDS:
The following standards shall apply to all business districts.
A. All business shall be retail, wholesale, service or office establishments dealing directly with the consumer.
B. All business, service, storage, merchandise display and processing shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building with the exception
of off street parking or loading, automotive service stations, open sales lots, and outdoor amusement and recreation areas in districts where
they are permitted. There shall be no storage or overnight parking at gas stations with the exception of vehicles under active repair but not to
exceed four (4) vehicles.
C. Except in the case of a planned development, only one principal structure will be allowed on any subdivided lot, and no principal structure
shall be constructed across a subdivision lot line.
D. Additional special provisions are contained in each of the individual district regulations. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8A-11: SIGNS:
Signs shall be subject to the regulations contained in chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8A-12: SITE PLAN APPROVAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 390/548
Site plan approval shall be as provided in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
ARTICLE B. B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT
11-8B-1: PURPOSE:
The B-1 neighborhood business district is intended to provide areas to be used by retail or service establishments to supply convenience goods
or personal services for the daily needs of the residents living in adjacent residential neighborhoods. This district is normally located on
secondary thoroughfares, is relatively small in size, not to exceed two (2) acres, and has bulk standards that are compatible with the bulk
standards for low to medium density residential districts. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Personal service establishments:
Barbershop.
Dancing school or studio.
Locksmith.
Music school with sales of musical instruments and accessory items.
Photographic studio, including developing and printing as part of the retail business.
Salon. In addition to customary hairstyling, facial, manicure and pedicure services, a salon may include a single therapeutic massage
station conducted as accessory to the larger salon operation. The amount of floor area devoted to therapeutic massage shall not exceed
thirty five percent (35%) of the total floor area of the salon. Customer changing may be located within the massage treatment room. Hand
washing sinks may be located outside of the changing room. Compliance with all other massage establishment restrictions in this code,
stand alone ordinances and state and local licensing procedures is required.
Shoe repair shop.
Tailor, hat and clothes repair or dressmaker shop.
Retail businesses:
Art and school supply store.
Bakery, in which the manufacture of goods is limited to goods retailed on the premises only.
Bicycle store; sales, retail or repair.
Book and stationery store.
Candy and confectionery store.
Coin, philatelic, stamp and numismatic store.
Dairy products store.
Delicatessen.
Drugstore; pharmacy.
Dry cleaning and laundry receiving establishment, processing to be done elsewhere.
Flower shop.
Gift shop.
Grocery and food store.
Hobby shop.
Ice cream store. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 391/548
11-8B-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 11-5-9 of this title. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8B-4: SPECIAL USES:
Clubs and lodges; private, fraternal or religious (no live entertainment or dancing).
Convalescent center, nursing home, geriatric center and rest home.
Essential services: gas regulator station, telephone exchange, electric substation, pumping station, well site.
Library and branch library.
Nursery school, children's day school, day nursery, childcare center, and daycare center, provided at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of
outdoor play area is provided for each child that is cared for.
Outdoor dining area with available seating for not more than eight (8) individuals; provided, however, all applicable village health and safety
ordinances shall apply to all outdoor dining areas regardless of seating capacity.
Planned unit development as defined in chapter 10, article A of this title.
Police-fire station.
Transit and transportation passenger shelter.
Similar and compatible uses to those listed as permitted for special uses. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981; amd. Ord. 97-51, 9-22-1997; Ord. 2007-20, 5-
24-2007; Ord. 2008-14, 3-24-2008)
11-8B-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary building for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed the duration of such construction. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8B-6: LOT SIZE:
With the exception of planned unit developments, a separate ground area, herein called the "zoning lot", shall be designated, provided and
continuously maintained for each structure containing a permitted use or special use.
A. Minimum lot area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: One hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8B-7: YARDS:
Minimum yard requirements for each lot in the B-1 district shall be as follows:
A. Minimum Front Yard:
1. All structures shall maintain a setback of not less than fifty feet (50') from the front lot line, with the exception of Lake Street, Gary Avenue,
Bloomingdale Road, Schick Road and Army Trail Road. On Lake Street, Gary Avenue, Bloomingdale Road, Schick Road, and Army Trail
Road, all structures shall maintain a minimum setback of seventy five feet (75') from the front lot line.
2. The first thirty feet (30') of all front yards shall be devoted to landscape materials such as sod, trees, a means of ingress and egress,
signs, and obstructions as permitted by other provisions of this title.
B. Minimum Corner Side Yard: Forty feet (40').
C. Minimum Interior Side Yard: Twenty feet (20') combined, with one side not less than twelve feet (12').
D. Minimum Rear Yard: Thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 392/548
E. Transition Yards: Where a side or rear lot line in the B-1 district coincides with a side or rear lot line of a residential district, the minimum yard
requirement will be the greater of the B-1 district yard requirement or the applicable residential district yard requirement. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-
1981; amd. 2012 Code)
11-8B-8: BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Maximum structure height: Thirty feet (30') or two (2) stories, whichever is less.
B. Floor area ratio: 0.6. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8B-9: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Enclosure Of Operations: All business, servicing or processing shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except:
1. Off street parking or loading.
2. Accessory uses when allowed by the special use procedure.
B. Scope Of Operations: All business establishments shall be retail trade or service establishments dealing directly with consumers, and all
goods produced on the premises shall be sold primarily at retail on the premises where produced. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981; amd. Ord. 90-59,
10-8-1990)
ARTICLE C. B-2 COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT
11-8C-1: PURPOSE:
The B-2 community business district is intended to provide areas to be used as the primary shopping area for residents of the village and other
nearby towns, transients, and for the shopping area for occupants of various business and manufacturing establishments. This district permits
most all types of business and commercial enterprises, offices, and service establishments. This district is normally centrally located with
respect to the shopping service area and located at the convergence or along the major thoroughfares of the village. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Business service establishments:
Banks.
Better business bureau.
Business and management consultant.
Business office.
Business school.
Chamber of commerce.
Charitable organization.
Civic association.
Credit agency.
Currency exchange.
Detective agency.
Employment agency.
Financial institution.
Insurance agency.
Investment company.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 393/548
Labor union and organization.
Loan company.
Merchants' association.
News syndicate.
Newspaper office, not including printing.
Parking lot, commercial.
Picture framing conducted for retail trade.
Political organization.
Professional membership association.
Real estate office.
Savings and loan.
Security and commodity broker.
Social service and fraternal association.
Trade association.
Personal service establishments:
Personal service establishments permitted in the B-1 district.
Business school.
Clothing and costume rental store.
Dry cleaning, employing not more than five (5) persons and where equipment for dry cleaning does not exceed units of thirty (30) pounds'
capacity.
General minor repair or fix it shop.
Hearing aid store.
Interior decorating studio including upholstery and making of draperies, slipcovers and other similar articles when conducted as a
secondary activity to the principal use.
Travel bureau and transportation ticket office.
Professional office establishments:
Accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping.
Artists and industrial design studio.
Attorney and law office.
Chiropodist office and podiatrist office.
Chiropractor office.
Dentist office.
Doctor, surgeon and/or physician office.
Engineering and architectural service.
Laboratory; medical and dental.
Land surveyor.
Landscape architect.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 394/548
Medical and dental clinic.
Optician office.
Osteopath office.
Professional consultant.
Scientific research agency.
Retail business, which supplies commodities on the premises:
Retail business permitted in the B-1 district.
Apparel store, including clothing, coats, millinery and footwear items.
Appliance store.
Art gallery.
Business machines store.
Butcher shop.
Catalog store.
China and glassware store.
Department store.
Drapery store.
Drugstore.
Floor covering, including rugs, linoleum and carpets.
Furniture store, including upholstering when conducted as part of the retail operation and secondary to the principal use.
Furrier shop, including the incidental storage and conditioning of furs.
Leather goods and luggage store.
Music shop.
Office supplies and stationery.
Paint and wallpaper store.
Pet shop.
Restaurant, excluding drive-in services (no live entertainment or dancing).
Restricted production and repair for retail sales limited to the following: art needlework, clothing, custom manufacturing and alterations,
jewelry from precious metals and watches.
Sewing machine sales and service.
Sporting goods store.
Tack shop.
Tile store (wall or floor).
Toy store.
Trading stamp store.
Variety and notions store. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981; amd. Ord. 97-51, 9-22-1997; Ord. 2011-10, 2-28-2011)
11-8C-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 11-5-9 of this title. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 395/548
11-8C-4: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses allowed in the B-1 district.
Clubs, lodges, and restaurants with live entertainment and dancing.
Game rooms employing amusement devices commonly known as pinball machines, shuffleboards, bowling machines, and coin operated
games of skill, but shall not include regulation bowling alleys or pool or billiard tables.
Massage establishments.
Meeting hall.
Off street parking facility as a principal use on a zoning lot, provided the parking lot is part of an overall planned development, and is
constructed to serve one or more principal uses in the same planned development.
Outdoor dining. Outdoor dining may be approved by the building and zoning official, if, upon review, the use has been shown to comply with the
following conditions:
A. The seating area consists of twenty four (24) seats or less;
B. The property is not adjacent to a residential district;
C. There is no live entertainment, music on speakers, or video screens on the outdoor patio;
D. A railing is added to protect diners from vehicular traffic. The building and zoning official may waive this requirement if, in his discretion,
the proposed seating is not adjacent to, or endangered by, vehicular traffic;
E. At least one accessible seat is provided;
F. Screening, either a landscaped area with plantings or containers (planters), shall be added to buffer the area;
G. No signage, not otherwise permitted in chapter 14 of this title, is added;
H. No lighting is added that will create light trespass on any residential properties.
Outdoor seating in excess of twenty four (24) seats or otherwise not consistent with the above conditions shall require approval of a special use.
The village may request a security deposit to cover the cost of the review by the building and zoning official, or his designee, in addition to any
other applicable building permit fees.
Package liquor store.
Planned unit development, as defined in chapter 18 of this title.
Professional office (other than those listed in section 11-8C-2 of this article, entry reading "Professional office establishments").
Theater, indoor only.
United States post office.
Similar and compatible uses to those listed as permitted or special uses. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981; amd. Ord. 85-43, 12-9-1985; Ord. 95-12, 2-13-
1995; Ord. 2007-20, 5-24-2007; Ord. 2012-27, 6-11-2012; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014; Ord. 2015-49, 11-23-2015)
11-8C-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary building for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed the duration of such construction. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8C-6: LOT SIZE:
With the exception of planned developments, a separate ground area, herein called the "zoning lot", shall be designated, provided and
continuously maintained for each structure containing a permitted use or special use.
A. Minimum lot area: Thirty thousand (30,000) square feet.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 396/548
B. Minimum lot width: One hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8C-7: YARDS:
A. Minimum Front Yard:
1. All structures shall maintain a setback of not less than fifty feet (50') from the front lot line, with the exception of Lake Street, Gary Avenue,
Bloomingdale Road, Schick Road and Army Trail Road. On Lake Street, Gary Avenue, Bloomingdale Road, Schick Road, and Army Trail
Road, all structures shall maintain a minimum setback of seventy five feet (75') from the front lot line.
2. The first thirty feet (30') of all front yards shall be devoted to landscape materials such as sod, trees, a means of ingress and egress,
signs, and obstructions as permitted by other provisions of this title.
B. Minimum Corner Side Yard: Forty feet (40').
C. Minimum Interior Side Yard: Twenty feet (20') combined (with 1 side at least 12 feet).
D. Minimum Rear Yard: Thirty feet (30').
E. Transition Yards: Where a side or rear lot line in the B-2 district coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residential district, the
respective yard requirements of the residential district shall apply to the side or rear yard requirements of the B-2 district. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-
1981)
11-8C-8: BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Maximum structure height: Thirty feet (30') or two (2) stories, whichever is less.
B. Floor area ratio: 0.6. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8C-9: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Enclosure Of Operations: All business, servicing or processing shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except:
1. Off street parking or loading.
2. Accessory uses when allowed by the special use procedure.
B. Scope Of Operations: All business establishments shall be retail trade or service establishments dealing directly with consumers, and all
goods produced on the premises shall be sold primarily at retail on the premises where produced. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981; amd. Ord. 90-59,
10-8-1990)
ARTICLE D. B-3 GENERAL SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT
11-8D-1: PURPOSE:
The B-3 general service business district is intended to provide areas to be used for most types of retailing and service uses, certain wholesale
and warehousing uses, and some limited industrial activities that are normally associated with business uses. The uses allowed are often large
space uses and cater to customers who do not make frequent purchases. The market area for the permitted uses extends to an area much
larger than the village. This district is normally located along major thoroughfares where adequately sized parcels of land allow for large
setbacks, clear vision, and safe ingress and egress. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Those uses of land and buildings identified as permitted uses within the B-2 community business district and B-1 neighborhood business
district.
Business service establishments:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 397/548
Blueprint and photocopy establishment.
Electrical shop and supply shop.
Equipment and appliance repair shop.
Equipment rental and leasing service.
Exterminating service.
Frozen food locker.
Furnace supply and service.
Furniture repair and upholstery.
Greenhouse; retail sales.
Lawn mower repair shop.
Mail order service shop.
Milk machine sales.
Paint shop.
Plumbing and heating showroom and shop.
Refrigeration shop (service and repair).
Sewer cleaning and rodding service.
Sign contractor, no outside storage.
Swimming clubs and pools.
Swimming pool sales and service.
Taxidermist.
Water softener service.
Window cleaning firm.
Personal service establishments:
Museum.
Recreation building such as ice and roller skating, including community center.
Professional office establishments:
Offices ancillary to any of the uses permitted or allowed in this district.
Retail business:
Building services and supplies, not including outside storage.
Casket and casket supplies.
Catering establishment.
Direct selling establishment, where products are stored.
Farm and garden supply store.
Hay, grain and seed store.
Job printing shops, using presses having beds of not more than fourteen inches by twenty inches (14" x 20") (size).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 398/548
Nursery retail sales.
Orthopedic and medical appliance store, but not including the assembly or manufacture of such articles.
Recording studio.
Tombstone and monument sales. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981; amd. Ord. 2008-14, 3-24-2008)
11-8D-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 11-5-9 of this title. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8D-4: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses allowed in the B-2 district.
Billiard and pool hall.
Bowling alley.
Drive-through uses.
Gymnasium.
Hotel, including dining and meeting rooms.
Indoor skating rink and other recreational facility.
Lumberyard.
Motel.
Outdoor amusement establishment; trampoline center, miniature golf course, kiddy park, etc.
Outdoor dining.
Outdoor display lot for display and sales of goods, fixtures and equipment of swimming pools and related accessories, said display and sales to
be in conjunction with and part of the adjacent business use.
Pet adoption service accessory to a pet store.
Planned unit development, as defined in chapter 18 of this title.
Resale establishment, subject to the following:
A. All sales of merchandise permitted hereunder shall be conducted entirely from within a retail space not less than fifteen thousand (15,000)
square feet in area;
B. All buildings used for the sale of merchandise permitted hereunder shall include separate entrances for retail customers and persons
delivering previously owned merchandise to the establishment;
C. All deliveries of merchandise to a building used for the sale of merchandise as permitted hereunder shall be made in person to an
employee of the establishment during such hours as the establishment is open to the general public; and
D. The use of unattended containers, receptacles, depositories, boxes or like devices for the receipt or collection of merchandise to be sold
as contemplated hereunder shall be prohibited.
Roadside stand.
Sheet metal fabrication in accordance with the following terms and conditions:
A. That the use shall be part of a planned unit development of not less than four (4) acres.
B. That not less than sixty six percent (66%) of the subject property be devoted to open space, exclusive of off street parking.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 399/548
C. That development shall take place in accordance with a site plan and landscape plan approved by the village board and incorporated into
the planned unit development ordinance.
D. That all fabrication shall take place within enclosed buildings.
E. That loading and unloading of trucks shall take place within enclosed buildings.
F. That all performance standards shall be in keeping with those set forth in the ordinances of the village including, without limitation, chapter
9 of this title.
G. That no fabrication of sheet metal may take place closer than one hundred forty feet (140') to any residential property.
H. That fabrication is limited to the storage, cutting, shaping and assembling of metal for later off site installation. No raw material shall be
processed into metal.
I. That a building permit shall be obtained and construction begun within one year from the date of granting the special use, and that
construction shall be completed and a certificate of occupancy issued within three (3) years from the granting of the special use.
Tavern and cocktail lounge.
Testing laboratory.
Tire, battery, and accessory dealer.
Veterinary clinic, animal hospital. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981; amd. Ord. 84-9, 4-9-1984; Ord. 84-51, 9-24-1984; Ord. 2007-20, 5-24-2007; Ord.
2011-10, 2-28-2011; Ord. 2011-34, 9-12-2011; Ord. 2014-26, 6-9-2014)
11-8D-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary building for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed the duration of such construction. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8D-6: LOT SIZE:
With the exception of planned developments, a separate ground area, herein called the "zoning lot", shall be designated, provided and
continuously maintained for each structure containing a permitted use or special use.
A. Minimum lot area: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: One hundred twenty five feet (125'). (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8D-7: YARDS:
A. Minimum front yard:
1. All structures shall maintain a setback of not less than fifty feet (50') from the front lot line, with the exception of Lake Street, Gary Avenue,
Bloomingdale Road, Schick Road and Army Trail Road. On Lake Street, Gary Avenue, Bloomingdale Road, Schick Road, and Army Trail
Road, all structures shall maintain a minimum setback of seventy five feet (75') from the front lot line.
2. The first thirty feet (30') of all front yards shall be devoted to landscape materials such as sod, trees, a means of ingress and egress,
signs, and obstructions as permitted by other provisions of this title.
B. Minimum corner side yard: Fifty feet (50').
C. Minimum interior side yard: Thirty feet (30') (with 1 side at least 12 feet).
D. Minimum rear yard: Forty feet (40').
E. Transition yards: Where a side or rear lot line in the B-3 district coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residential district, the
respective yard requirements of the residential district shall apply to the side or rear yard requirements of the B-3 district. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 400/548
1981)
11-8D-8: BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Maximum structure height: Thirty five feet (35') or three (3) stories, whichever is less.
B. Floor area ratio: 0.8. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8D-9: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Outdoor Sales: All outdoor sales space shall be provided with a permanent, durable, and dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained
as to dispose of all surface water.
B. Outdoor Storage: All outdoor storage facilities for accessory uses and products shall be enclosed by a fence, wall or plant materials adequate
to conceal such facilities from adjacent properties and the public right of way.
C. Waste Materials: No material or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such a form that they may be transferred off the property by natural
causes or forces. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981; amd. Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
ARTICLE E. B-4 AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT
11-8E-1: PURPOSE:
The B-4 automotive service business district is intended to provide certain land and structures for automotive service type use and automotive
associated uses such as drive-ins. This district is intended to be located only along major thoroughfares where adequately sized and properly
located parcels of land will allow for adequate setbacks, clear vision, and safe ingress and egress. Frontage roads should be provided where
possible. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8E-2: PERMITTED USES:
Personal service establishments which perform services on the premises:
Drive-in cleaners.
Drive-in theater.
Undertaking establishment and funeral parlor.
Retail businesses which supply commodities on the premises:
Boat dealer.
Bottled gas dealer.
Camper sale.
Mobile home dealer.
Motor vehicle dealer.
Motorcycle sales.
Recreation vehicle sale or rental.
Restaurant, drive-in.
Snowmobile sales and service.
Tire, battery, and accessory dealer.
Trailer sale or rental.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 401/548
Used car lot. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8E-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 11-5-9 of this title. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8E-4: SPECIAL USES:
Ambulance service.
Amusement establishment, dance hall, skating rink.
Auction room.
Automobile accessory store.
Automobile car wash.
Automobile repair garage.
Automobile service station.
Contractor and construction office.
Essential services: gas regulator station, telephone exchange, electric substation, pumping station, sewage disposal plant, well site.
Library and branch library.
Motel.
Off street parking facility.
Open sales lot.
Planned unit development.
Police-fire station.
Post office and post office substation.
Public service or municipal garage.
Public utility establishment.
Radio and television broadcasting studio.
Reservoir.
Storage yard for material or equipment sales.
Transit and transportation facility.
Similar and compatible uses to those listed as permitted or special uses. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8E-5: TEMPORARY USES:
Temporary building for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed the duration of such construction. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8E-6: LOT SIZE:
With the exception of planned developments, a separate ground area, herein called the "zoning lot", shall be designated, provided and
continuously maintained for each structure containing a permitted use or a special use.
A. Minimum lot area: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: One hundred twenty five feet (125'). (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 402/548
11-8E-7: YARDS:
A. Minimum Front Yard:
1. All structures shall maintain a setback of not less than fifty feet (50') from the front lot line, with the exception of Lake Street, Gary Avenue,
Bloomingdale Road, Schick Road and Army Trail Road. On Lake Street, Gary Avenue, Bloomingdale Road, Schick Road, and Army Trail
Road, all structures shall maintain a minimum setback of seventy five feet (75') from the front lot line.
2. The first thirty feet (30') of all front yards shall be devoted to landscape materials such as sod, trees, a means of ingress and egress,
signs, and obstructions as permitted by other provisions of this title.
B. Minimum Corner Side Yard: Fifty feet (50').
C. Minimum Interior Side Yard: Thirty feet (30') (with 1 side at least 12 feet).
D. Minimum Rear Yard: Forty feet (40').
E. Transition Yards: Where a side or rear lot line in the B-4 district coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residential district, the
respective yard requirements of the residential district shall apply to the side or rear yard requirements of the B-4 district. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-
1981)
11-8E-8: BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Maximum structure height: Thirty five feet (35') or three (3) stories, whichever is less.
B. Floor area ratio: 0.8. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981)
11-8E-9: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Outdoor Sales: All outdoor sales space shall be provided with a permanent, durable, and dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained
as to dispose of all surface water.
B. Outdoor Storage: All outdoor storage facilities for accessory uses and products shall be enclosed by a fence, wall or plant materials adequate
to conceal such facilities from adjacent properties and the public rights of way.
C. Waste Materials: No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such a form that they may be transferred off the property by natural
causes or forces. (Ord. 81-49, 11-9-1981; amd. Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
ARTICLE F. O-D OFFICE DISTRICT
11-8F-1: PURPOSE:
The O-D office district is intended to provide office space for uses which do not require any form of research or industrial operations on the
premises. The uses permitted are characterized by a low volume of traffic and limited outdoor advertising so as to protect any surrounding
residential uses. This district may be used as a buffer between residential and commercial areas. (Ord. 77-21, 4-11-1977)
11-8F-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services.
Artists and industrial designers.
Attorney and law offices.
Better business bureau.
Business and management consultants.
Business office in which goods, wares or merchandise are displayed or sold on the premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 403/548
Chamber of commerce.
Charitable organizations.
Chiropodist offices.
Chiropractor offices.
Civic associations.
Clubs, private (nonprofit) lodges and fraternal organizations.
Credit agencies.
Dentist offices.
Detective agencies.
Doctor, surgeon and/or physician offices.
Employment agencies.
Engineering and architectural services.
Financial institutions.
Insurance agencies.
Investment companies.
Labor unions and organizations.
Laboratories, medical and dental.
Land surveyors.
Landscape architectural services.
Loan companies.
Medical and dental clinics.
Merchant associations.
News syndicates.
Newspaper offices.
Offices, business and professional.
Optician offices.
Osteopath offices.
Political organizations.
Private clinics.
Professional consultants.
Professional membership associations.
Real estate boards.
Real estate offices.
Religious reading rooms.
Scientific research agencies.
Secretarial service.
Security and commodity brokers.
Ticket agencies (amusement).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 404/548
Trade associations.
Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices. (Ord. 77-21, 4-11-1977; amd. Ord. 2008-14, 3-24-2008)
11-8F-3: ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses shall be provided in accordance with the regulations contained in section 11-5-9 of this title. (Ord. 77-21, 4-11-1977)
11-8F-4: SPECIAL USES:
Special uses, as hereinafter listed, may be allowed subject to the provisions of sections 11-3-4 and 11-5-10 of this title. Unless otherwise
specifically set forth, wherever a special use is named as a major category, it shall be deemed to include all and only those itemized uses listed
under the said major category. The following special uses are permitted:
Churches, chapels, temples, synagogues.
Drive-through uses accessory to permitted and special uses.
Health, medical and care institutions:
Convalescent centers, nursing homes, geriatric centers and rest homes.
Nursery schools, children's day school, day nurseries, childcare centers, and daycare centers, provided at least one hundred fifty (150)
square feet of outdoor play area is provided for each child that is cared for.
Public, quasi-public and governmental building and facilities:
Essential services: gas regulator stations, telephone exchanges, electric substations.
Historical buildings and landmarks.
Public libraries.
Telephone booths.
Public utility and service uses:
Convention halls and centers.
Fire stations.
Planned unit developments.
Police stations.
Railroad right of way, but not including railroad yards and shops other than for passenger purposes.
Telephone transmission equipment buildings and microwave relay towers.
Waterworks, reservoirs, pumping stations and filtration plants.
Recreational and social facilities:
Community center buildings, clubhouses, recreation buildings, swim clubs, swimming pools and indoor pools, tennis clubs, tennis courts,
and buildings for indoor tennis.
Parks.
Residential uses:
Hotel/apartment hotel.
Residence of the proprietor of a commercial use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 405/548
Similar and compatible use to those allowed as permitted uses in this district. (Ord. 77-21, 4-11-1977; amd. Ord. 2008-14, 3-24-2008; 2012
Code; Ord. 2015-11, 1-26-2015)
11-8F-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minimum Lot Area: The minimum lot area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet shall be provided.
B. Minimum Lot Width: A minimum lot width of one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use.
C. Yards:
1. Front Yard: All structures shall be set back from the front lot line at least seventy feet (70'), with parking permitted after thirty feet (30') of
landscaped area from the front of the lot line.
2. Interior Side Yard (Adjacent To Zoning Lot): All structures shall be set in from the side lot line a distance of not less than fifteen feet (15')
or one-half (1/2) the height of the structure, whichever is greater, as defined in this title.
3. Corner Side Yard (Adjacent To Street): All structures shall be set in from the side lot line adjacent to the street right of way a distance of
not less than seventy feet (70').
4. Rear Yard: All structures shall be set back from the rear lot line a distance of not less than twenty feet (20') or one-half (1/2) the height of
the structure, whichever is greater, as defined in this title.
D. Floor Area Ratio: The maximum floor area ratio shall be 1.0. (Ord. 77-21, 4-11-1977)
11-8F-6: STANDARDS:
All of the property located in the O-D district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this title. To conserve space, these standards
and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Property located in the O-D district is also subject to the following
additional standards:
A. All operations, activities and storage shall be conducted wholly inside a building or buildings.
B. No retail sales or services shall be permitted except as incidental or accessory to a permitted use.
C. Service and maintenance of vehicles shall be permitted only such as is necessary to the conduct of a permitted use.
D. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting excessive glare upon adjacent property.
E. All premises shall be furnished with all weather, hard surface walks and, except for parking areas, the grounds shall be landscaped.
F. If the lot adjoins a lot containing a residential building, screening shall be provided at the lot line sufficient to protect, on a year round basis,
the privacy of the adjoining residential uses.
G. Site plan and architectural approval shall be required for all uses except public and quasi-public uses. (Ord. 77-21, 4-11-1977; amd. 2012
Code)
11-8F-7: SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING:
A. The entire site shall be adequately and attractively landscaped in accord with plans prepared by a professional landscape designer, and shall
be subject to approval by the planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 77-21, 4-11-1977; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
B. When the proposed office use abuts a street, the initial thirty feet (30') of setback from the right of way shall be landscaped in accordance
with a landscape plan. Parking shall not be permitted within the thirty foot (30') front yard landscaped strip. (Ord. 77-21, 4-11-1977)
ARTICLE G. R-R HOTEL-MOTEL RESORT AND RECREATIONAL DISTRICT
11-8G-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 406/548
A. The R-R hotel-motel resort and recreational district shall be established only for parcels of land in excess of thirty (30) acres and under single
ownership or unified control. The requirements of this title shall be applied to the entire parcel under single ownership or unified control
without regard to zoning lots, and such a parcel with the classification hotel-motel resort and recreational district is hereinafter referred to as
a "tract".
B. All activities conducted in a hotel-motel resort and recreational district shall comply with the performance standards for noise, smoke and
particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter, odors, fire and explosion hazard, glare or heat and vibration set forth in section 11-9-7 of this title.
No certification of adherence to these standards shall be required as a prerequisite to the issuance of a building permit in this district unless
a use specified in section 11-9-7 of this title is to be conducted in the building. (Ord. 76-57, 9-13-1976)
11-8G-2: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Coverage: Not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the tract, net of all roads and highways, shall be covered by buildings.
B. Floor Area Ratio: Floor area ratio is not to exceed 1.0.
C. Building Height: Building height is not to exceed one hundred feet (100').
D. Yards:
1. Front yards shall not be less than sixty feet (60') in depth.
2. Side and rear yards shall not be less than thirty five feet (35').
3. The minimum distance between the nearest exterior wall of any building and a boundary line of the tract shall be one-half (1/2) the building
height or a minimum of thirty five feet (35'), whichever is greater.
4. Parking and signs are permitted in required yards. A ten foot (10') greenbelt must be provided along all the property lines.
5. If a tract abuts two (2) or more streets, the front yard shall be that adjacent to the more heavily traveled street. (Ord. 76-57, 9-13-1976)
11-8G-3: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses are permitted which are clearly and customarily incident to the principal use of a building or premises.
Amusement establishments; bowling alleys, swimming pools, skating rinks, indoor tennis courts, and similar activities.
Assembly rooms, auditoriums, banquet halls and meeting rooms.
Cocktail lounges, with or without live entertainment and dancing.
Hotels and motels with services and retail shops of the type customarily found in hotels including, without limitation, newsstands, gift shops,
clothing stores, barbershops, salons, food shops, liquor stores, travel agents, car rental offices, game rooms and flower shops.
Outdoor recreation including, without limitation, golf courses, tennis courts, swimming pools, bicycle paths, ski hills, skating rinks, toboggan
slides, playgrounds and ball fields. These facilities may be lighted for use at night; provided, that direct rays of light shall not beam upon any
part of an existing residential building or into a street.
Physical culture and health services, gymnasiums, reducing salons and masseurs.
Restaurants, with or without live entertainment and dancing.
Theaters, but not drive-in theaters. (Ord. 76-57, 9-13-1976; amd. 2012 Code)
11-8G-4: SPECIAL USES:
Any permitted or special use in any business district which is not a permitted use hereunder. (Ord. 76-57, 9-13-1976)
Chapter 9
M-1 LIMITED MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
11-9-1: PROHIBITED USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 407/548
A. No lot, parcel, or tract of land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered, or remodeled for any of the following uses:
abattoir; acid manufacture; arsenals; crematories, creosote treatment or manufacture; fat rendering; fertilizer manufacture; fireworks or
explosive manufacture or storage; dumping or reduction of garbage, dead animals, offal, or refuse; ore reduction, petroleum processing or
refining; nitrocellulose manufacture; synthetic polymers manufacture; gutta percha manufacture or treatment; salt works; sauerkraut
manufacture; soap manufacture; smelters; stockyard or slaughter of animals or fowls; tallow, grease, or lard manufacture or treatment;
tanning, curing, or storage of rawhides or skins; tar distillation or manufacture; junkyards; or batch asphaltic concrete, cement concrete, or
mortar mixing plants.
B. No activities involving the storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted,
except such as specifically licensed by the village. Such materials shall include, but not be confined to, all primary explosives such as lead
azide, lead styphnate, and tetracene; all high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN, and picric acid, propellants and components
thereof such as nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium
powder, potassium chlorate and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerine; unstable compounds such as
acetylides, tetrazoles, perchloric acid, perchlorates, chlorates, hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than thirty five percent (35%),
and nuclear fuels, fissionable materials, and products and reactor elements such as uranium 235 and plutonium 239. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-
1969)
11-9-2: PERMITTED USES:
All B-4 district uses, permitted and special.
Boat showrooms.
Building material sales.
Cartage and express establishments, not including motor freight terminals.
Contractor shops and storage.
Dry cleaning, dyeing, and rug cleaning establishments with no limitation on the number of employees.
Feed stores.
Greenhouses, retail and wholesale.
Laundries, with no limitation on the number of employees.
Machinery sales establishments.
Mail order sales and warehousing.
Manufacturing, assembly, disassembly, fabricating, repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing or testing establishments, provided operation of such
establishment conforms with applicable performance standards set forth in section 11-9-7 of this chapter, and provided such use is not
specifically prohibited by this title.
Monument sales and production.
Packaging and crating.
Printing and publishing establishments.
Public utility and public service uses, including:
Electric distribution centers and substations.
Public transportation facilities, including shelters, terminals, parking areas, and service buildings.
Radio or television transmission or receiving towers.
Railroad rights of way and passenger stations.
Telephone exchanges, microwave relay towers, and telephone transmission equipment buildings.
Water filtration plants, sewage treatment plants, pumping stations, and reservoirs, municipally owned and operated.
Signs, as regulated in chapter 14 of this title.
Storage, warehousing, and wholesale establishments, except fuel oil, gasoline, and other flammable materials. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 408/548
11-9-3: SPECIAL USES:
Airports.
Firearms practice facility, indoor, in accordance with the following terms and conditions:
A. It is required that all shooters must complete an orientation safety program or show a valid firearm owners identification (FOID) card,
before they are allowed to discharge firearms.
B. There shall be remote monitoring of air filtration device at regular intervals.
C. No more than one person shall use a shooting lane at any one time.
D. The amount and location of ammunition intended for use at the range shall comply with the requirements of the Bloomingdale fire
protection district.
E. There shall be either remote or on site real time monitoring of security cameras at all times.
F. The firearms practice facility shall be required to obtain a business license that shall include a criminal background check of owners and
managers, and other employees as deemed necessary by the village board.
G. The firearms practice facility is required to provide parking for its customers on site. If parking demand exceeds the supply, the facility
shall reduce the number of lanes that can be occupied for shooting, or otherwise reduce customer demand for the facility so that parking
can be contained on site.
H. All shooting ranges shall provide ceiling and in-wall sound barriers to prevent sound in excess of fifty five (55) db at the property line of
the subject property, and at zero db at any property line of a residential district.
I. Complaints regarding noise, odors, and traffic congestion resulting from the firearms practice facility shall be directed to the planning and
zoning commission at a public hearing for a recommendation to the village board of trustees.
J. The shooting range must comply with all village, state of Illinois, and federal laws and regulations. Where the foregoing requirements
conflict with any other local, state, and federal requirements, the more restrictive shall apply.
Medical cannabis cultivation and dispensing centers, subject to the following:
A. Compliance with the compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program act ("act"), also known as Illinois public act 098-0122;
B. Submission and performance requirements in addition to those set forth in chapter 4, "Site Development And Plan Review", of this title
and other performance requirements in district regulations:
1. Floor Plan: At minimum a concept floor plan indicating principal function areas, to include where nonpatients will be permitted, private
consulting areas, storage areas, and retail areas.
2. Disposal Plan: A plan for disposal of any medical cannabis or byproducts that are not sold to a patient or primary caregiver in a manner
that protects any portion thereof from being possessed or ingested by any person or animal and shall abide by applicable state or local
regulations.
3. Ventilation Plan: A plan for ventilation of the medical cannabis business that describes the ventilation systems that will be used to
prevent any odor of medical cannabis off the premises of the business. For cultivation centers, such plan shall also include all ventilation
systems used to control the environment for the plants and describe how such systems operate with the systems preventing any odor
leaving the premises.
4. Security Plan: A security plan for the medical cannabis business that includes facility access controls, surveillance systems, on site
security personnel, and other security measures required by state or local regulations.
5. Exterior Appearance: Elevations of the exterior appearance of the building of a cultivation center or dispensary demonstrating
compatibility with commercial structures already constructed or under construction within the immediate neighborhood, to ensure
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 409/548
against blight, deterioration, or substantial diminishment or impairment of property values in the vicinity.
6. Entrance And Means Of Egress: Plans shall depict more than one means of egress from the interior so as to meet building codes and
public safety concerns; however, it shall have a single secure public entrance and shall implement appropriate security measures to
deter and prevent the theft of medical cannabis and unauthorized entrance into areas containing cannabis. The dispensary entrance
shall be located and maintained clear of any barriers, landscaping and similar obstructions that may block the view so that the entrance
and pedestrian access is clearly visible from the public street, sidewalk and parking area.
7. Cannabis Paraphernalia And Product Display At Dispensaries: No retail sales of cannabis paraphernalia are permitted except as
permitted by law to qualifying patients and/or designated caregivers. No medical cannabis or paraphernalia shall be displayed or kept in
a dispensary so as to be visible from outside the premises.
8. On Site Use Prohibited: No cannabis shall be smoked, eaten or otherwise consumed or ingested within the medical cannabis business.
Planned developments.
Stone or gravel quarries, when crushing, grading, washing, and loading operations conform with not less than the applicable regulations set
forth in this chapter. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014; Ord. 2015-03, 1-12-2015)
11-9-4: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Area: Lot area is to be not less than eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet.
B. Lot Width: Lot width is to be not less than one hundred feet (100').
C. Floor Area: Floor area is to be not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
D. Floor Area Ratio: Floor area ratio is not to exceed 1.5.
E. Building Height: Building height is not to exceed thirty five feet (35').
F. Yards:
1. Front Yard: Front yard is to be not less than forty feet (40') in depth.
2. Side Yards: Side yards shall not be less than twenty five feet (25') in width, except a side yard abutting a street shall not be less than forty
feet (40') in width.
3. Rear Yard: Rear yard is to be not less than forty feet (40') in depth, except a rear yard abutting an alley or railroad right of way may be
reduced to twenty feet (20') in depth.
G. Dwellings: No dwelling units will be allowed, except for that of the owner or caretaker. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
H. Signs: Signs shall be subject to the regulations of chapter 14 of this title. (2012 Code)
11-9-5: ENCLOSED OPERATIONS:
Within three hundred feet (300') of a residence district boundary line, all activities and operations shall be within completely enclosed buildings,
or may be out of doors if completely screened by a solid wall or uniformly painted fence at least eight feet (8') in height, and open storage shall
not be of a greater height than that of the enclosing fence; except, that off street parking for vehicles in operable condition and off street loading
and unloading spaces may be located in accordance with requirements set forth in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-9-6: PROXIMITY TO RESIDENCE DISTRICTS:
No buildings or structures shall be used for the manufacture, fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing, cleaning, or servicing of
materials, products, or goods within three hundred feet (300') of any lot line of a lot located in a residence district. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-9-7: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 410/548
Any use established in manufacturing districts which involves the manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing,
cleaning, servicing, or testing of materials, goods, or products shall be operated in such a manner as to comply with applicable performance
standards as hereinafter set forth governing noise, smoke, particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter, odors, fire and explosive hazards, or
vibration, glare, or heat, and no use already established on the effective date hereof shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further
conflict with, such applicable performance standards. The application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a certification from a
recognized testing laboratory selected from a panel approved by the village board.
A. Noise:
1. Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band filter manufactured according to standards
prescribed by the American Standards Association. Measurements shall be made using the flat network of the sound level meter.
Impulsive type noises shall be subject to the performance standards hereinafter prescribed; provided, that such noises shall be capable of
being accurately measured with such equipment. Noises capable of being so measured, for the purpose of this title, shall be those noises
which cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of the sound level meter with a variation of no more than plus or minus two (±2) decibels.
Noises incapable of being so measured, such as those of an irregular and intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a
nuisance to adjacent uses.
2. At no point on the boundary of a residence or business district shall the sound intensity level of any individual operation or plant (other
than the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities) exceed the decibel levels in the designated octave bands shown in
the following table: (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
Octave Band Maximum Permitted Sound Level (Decibels)
(Frequency Cycles Per Second) Along Or In Residence District Boundaries Along Or In Business District Boundaries
1 to 75 72 75
76 to 150 67 70
151 to 300 59 63
301 to 600 52 57
601 to 1,200 46 52
1,201 to 2,400 40 45
2,401 to 4,800 34 40
above 4,800 32 38
(Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Smoke And Particulate Matter:
1. The emission of smoke or particulate matter in such manner or quantity as to endanger or to be detrimental to the public health, safety,
comfort, or welfare is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall henceforth be unlawful.
2. For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann chart, published and used by the United States bureau of mines, shall
be employed. The emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density greater than no. 2 on the Ringelmann chart is prohibited at all
times, except as otherwise provided hereinafter.
3. The emission, from all sources within any lot area, of particulate matter containing more than ten percent (10%) by weight of particles
having a particle diameter larger than forty four (44) microns is prohibited.
4. Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by the wind from such sources as storage areas, yards, roads, and the like, within lot
boundaries, shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, fencing, or acceptable means. Emission of particulate
matter from such sources in excess of the weight limitation hereinafter specified is prohibited.
5. The emission of more than eight (8) smoke units per hour per stack is prohibited, including smoke of a density in excess of Ringelmann
no. 2. However, during one 1-hour period in each twenty four (24) hour day, each stack may emit up to sixteen (16) smoke units when
blowing soot or cleaning fires. Only during fire cleaning periods, however, shall smoke of Ringelmann no. 3 be permitted, and then for not
more than three (3) minutes.
C. Toxic Or Noxious Matter: No use shall, for any period of time, discharge across the boundaries of the lot wherein it is located, toxic or noxious
matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to
property or business.
D. Odors: The emission of odorous matter in such a quantity as to be readily detectable at any point along lot lines, or as to produce a public
nuisance or hazard beyond lot lines, is prohibited.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 411/548
E. Fire And Explosion Hazard:
1. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning, as determined for liquids
by a closed cup flashpoint of not less than one hundred eighty seven degrees Fahrenheit (187°F), is permitted subject to compliance with
all other performance standards for this district.
2. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials or products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning, as determined for
liquids by a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred eighty seven degrees Fahrenheit (187°F) but not less than one hundred five
degrees Fahrenheit (105°F), is permitted subject to compliance with all other performance standards for this district, and provided the
following conditions are met:
a. Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized, or produced within completely enclosed buildings or structures having exterior walls
of fire resistive construction in accordance with other provisions of this code.
b. Unless otherwise provided in this title, all such buildings or structures shall be set back at least forty feet (40') from lot lines, or in lieu
thereof, all such buildings or structures shall be protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system complying with installation
standards prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association, or if the materials, goods, or products are liquids, the protection
thereof shall be in conformity with standards prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association.
3. The utilization in manufacturing processes of materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases, as determined for liquids
by a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred five degrees Fahrenheit (105°F), shall be permitted in this district; provided:
a. That the final manufactured product does not itself have a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred eighty seven degrees
Fahrenheit (187°F);
b. That the use and storage of such materials shall be in conformity with standards prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association
and with the requirements of other provisions of this code; and
c. That the storage of said materials shall be prohibited aboveground.
F. Glare Or Heat: Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such a manner as
not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines.
G. Vibration: No industrial operation or activity (except those not under the direct control of the manufacturer) shall cause, at any time, ground
transmitted vibrations in excess of the limits set forth below. Vibration (the periodic displacement, measured in inches, of earth) shall be
measured at any point along a residence district boundary line with a three (3) component measuring instrument approved by the village
board, and shall be expressed as displacement in inches as follows:
Frequency (Cycles Per Second) Maximum Permitted Displacement Along Residence District Boundaries (In Inches)
0 to 10 0.0008
10 to 20 0.0005
20 to 30 0.0002
30 to 40 0.0002
40 and over 0.0001
(Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-9-8: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
Parking spaces and loading berths shall be in accordance with provisions set forth in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
Chapter 10
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. BUSINESS PARK PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT OF 75
TO 250 ACRES
11-10A-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. A business park district shall be a planned unit development district by special use of seventy five (75) to two hundred fifty (250) acres
("business park district"). The business park district is intended to provide for a unified development of mixed uses, in a campuslike setting,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 412/548
which will promote and maintain desirable economic activities.
B. A business park district, as a planned development, is of such a substantially different character from other planned developments that the
public welfare requires that development within the business park district be treated in a different manner from other planned developments.
(Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. 2012 Code)
C. The purpose of this article is to set forth specific standards and exceptions to govern the recommendations of the planning and zoning
commission and the action of the board of trustees with respect to granting approvals for such districts and development therein. These
regulations are designed to provide for an integrated development considering all the elements of good land planning so as to provide an
adequate relationship between structures and land uses, while at the same time providing for adequate space, light, air, use and bulk
limitations, and promoting the health, safety and welfare of the village and its residents. (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-
2014)
D. A business park district is a tract of land between seventy five (75) and two hundred fifty (250) acres of contiguous property; provided, that
properties separated by highways, streets, public ways or railroad or other public utility rights of way may be deemed to be contiguous for
the purpose of qualifying as a business park district.
E. After the establishment of a business park district in accordance with procedures set forth in this article, contiguous property of any size may
be added to such business park district. All procedures required by this article for the establishment of a business park district, or any other
ordinance of the village which refers to or applies to the establishment of a business park district, shall be applicable to the addition of
property to such business park district. (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. 2012 Code)
11-10A-2: USES:
A. Permitted And Special Uses: The following permitted and special uses shall be allowed in the district:
1. Permitted Uses:
Any municipal or governmental building or use;
Institutions of an educational, governmental, religious, philanthropic or fraternal nature;
Light industrial, assembly and laboratory facilities, as such uses relate to the production of products and parts, excluding, however, uses
that require EPA or NPDES approval;
Professional and administrative offices (excluding medical and dental) and brokerages, but no goods or retail residential real estate may
be offered for sale in the district unless accessory to a principal use located along a major arterial;
Recreational facilities including, but not limited to, golf courses, tennis courts and health clubs;
Technology and research centers, including medical and hospital research establishments; and
Wholesale establishments; storage and warehousing (excluding miniwarehouse facilities) in conjunction with an office use or wholesale
establishment. Storage of fuel oil and gasoline shall be prohibited unless incidental to the on site operation and approved by the fire
protection district. (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987)
2. Special Uses: The following uses will be allowed within the district; provided, that:
a. Each use shall be subject to review by the planning and zoning commission and approval by the village board in accordance with
requirements contained in section 11-3-4 of this title. (Note: Requires a public hearing.):
(1) Permitted and special uses listed in districts B-1, B-2 and B-3, chapter 8, articles B, C and D of this title; provided, that:
(A) The uses do not fall within those uses identified in subsection A1 of this section; and
(B) The uses are located along a major arterial.
(2) Hotels or motels.
(3) Multiple-family residential.
(4) Firearms practice facility, indoor, in accordance with the following terms and conditions:
(A) It is required that all shooters must complete an orientation safety program or show a valid firearm owners identification (FOID)
card, before they are allowed to discharge firearms.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 413/548
(B) There shall be remote monitoring of air filtration device at regular intervals.
(C) No more than one person shall use a shooting lane at any one time.
(D) The amount and location of ammunition intended for use at the range shall comply with the requirements of the Bloomingdale fire
protection district.
(E) There shall be either remote or on site real time monitoring of security cameras at all times.
(F) The firearms practice facility shall be required to obtain a business license that shall include a criminal background check of
owners and managers, and other employees as deemed necessary by the village board.
(G) The firearms practice facility is required to provide parking for its customers on site. If parking demand exceeds the supply, the
facility shall reduce the number of lanes that can be occupied for shooting, or otherwise reduce customer demand for the facility so
that parking can be contained on site.
(H) All shooting ranges shall provide ceiling and in-wall sound barriers to prevent sound in excess of fifty five (55) db at the property
line of the subject property, and at zero db at any property line of a residential district.
(I) Complaints regarding noise, odors, and traffic congestion resulting from the firearms practice facility shall be directed to the
planning and zoning commission at a public hearing for a recommendation to the village board of trustees.
(J) The shooting range must comply with all village, state of Illinois, and federal laws and regulations. Where the foregoing
requirements conflict with any other local, state, and federal requirements, the more restrictive shall apply.
(5) Medical cannabis cultivation and dispensing centers, subject to the following:
(A) Compliance with the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act ("Act"), also known as Illinois Public Act 098-
0122;
(B) Submission and performance requirements in addition to those set forth in chapter 4, "Site Development And Plan Review", of this
title and other performance requirements in district regulations:
(i) Floor Plan: At minimum a concept floor plan indicating principal function areas, to include where nonpatients will be permitted,
private consulting areas, storage areas, and retail areas.
(ii) Disposal Plan: A plan for disposal of any medical cannabis or byproducts that are not sold to a patient or primary caregiver in a
manner that protects any portion thereof from being possessed or ingested by any person or animal and shall abide by applicable
State or local regulations.
(iii) Ventilation Plan: A plan for ventilation of the medical cannabis business that describes the ventilation systems that will be used
to prevent any odor of medical cannabis off the premises of the business. For cultivation centers, such plan shall also include all
ventilation systems used to control the environment for the plants and describe how such systems operate with the systems
preventing any odor leaving the premises.
(iv) Security Plan: A security plan for the medical cannabis business that includes facility access controls, surveillance systems, on
site security personnel, and other security measures required by State or local regulations.
(v) Exterior Appearance: Elevations of the exterior appearance of the building of a cultivation center or dispensary demonstrating
compatibility with commercial structures already constructed or under construction within the immediate neighborhood, to ensure
against blight, deterioration, or substantial diminishment or impairment of property values in the vicinity.
(vi) Entrance And Means Of Egress: Plans shall depict more than one means of egress from the interior so as to meet Building
Codes and public safety concerns; however, it shall have a single secure public entrance and shall implement appropriate
security measures to deter and prevent the theft of medical cannabis and unauthorized entrance into areas containing cannabis.
The dispensary entrance shall be located and maintained clear of any barriers, landscaping and similar obstructions that may
block the view so that the entrance and pedestrian access is clearly visible from the public street, sidewalk and parking area.
(vii) Cannabis Paraphernalia And Product Display At Dispensaries: No retail sales of cannabis paraphernalia are permitted except
as permitted by law to qualifying patients and/or designated caregivers. No medical cannabis or paraphernalia shall be displayed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 414/548
or kept in a dispensary so as to be visible from outside the premises.
(viii) On Site Use Prohibited: No cannabis shall be smoked, eaten or otherwise consumed or ingested within the medical cannabis
business.
b. Each use shall comply with the lot size, yard and bulk requirements of their respective zoning classifications. (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987;
amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014; Ord. 2015-03, 1-12-2015)
B. Accessory Uses: All accessory uses shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations contained in section 11-5-9 of this title. (Ord. 87-
29, 6-22-1987)
C. Temporary Uses: Temporary structures for construction purposes shall be permitted on an individual lot in accordance with a construction
schedule to be submitted by the developer and approved by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42,
11-13-2017)
11-10A-3: LOT SIZE:
A separate ground area, or zoning lot, shall be designated for each structure containing a permitted use or special use in accordance with the
following:
A. Minimum lot area: Two (2) acres.
B. Minimum lot width, as measured at the front building setback line: Two hundred feet (200'). (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987)
11-10A-4: YARDS:
A. Minimum Front Yard:
1. All structures fronting on streets which form the boundary of the district shall maintain a minimum setback of fifty feet (50') from the front
lot line, with the exception of Lake Street, Gary Avenue and Bloomingdale, Schick, Army Trail and Schmale Roads. On lots that abut Lake
Street, Gary Avenue and Bloomingdale, Schick, Army Trail and Schmale Roads, all structures shall maintain a minimum setback of
seventy five feet (75') from a front lot line;
2. Structures that front on streets that are internal to the district shall be set back thirty five feet (35') from the front lot line;
3. Landscaping within a front yard shall be in accordance with the requirements contained in this subsection A3 and section 11-10A-8 of this
article. Means of ingress and egress, signs and obstructions permitted in section 11-10A-7 of this article and chapters 13 and 14 of this
title shall be permitted in the front yard.
a. Lots Fronting On Streets Outside District:
(1) The first thirty feet (30') of the front yard of all lots fronting on streets forming the boundary of the district, as measured from the front
lot line, shall be sodded or seeded and landscaped; and
(2) No parking or roads shall be permitted within the first thirty feet (30') of the front yard;
b. Lots Fronting On Streets Within District:
(1) The first thirty five feet (35') of the front yard of all lots fronting on interior streets within the district, as measured from the edge of the
pavement, shall be sodded or seeded and landscaped;
(2) No parking or roads shall be permitted within the first thirty five feet (35') of the front yard;
(3) A five foot (5') wide sidewalk may be installed within the required thirty five foot (35') landscaped area in accordance with subsection
11-10A-10E of this article; and
4. Loading berths shall not be permitted in the front yard of any lot within this district, unless enclosed.
B. Minimum Corner Side Yard:
1. All structures shall maintain a minimum setback of fifty feet (50') from the corner side lot line along streets which form the boundary of the
district, with the exception of lots that abut Lake Street, Gary Avenue and Bloomingdale, Schick, Army Trail and Schmale Roads. On lots
that abut Lake Street, Gary Avenue and Bloomingdale, Schick, Army Trail and Schmale Roads, structures shall maintain a minimum
setback of seventy five feet (75') from a corner side lot line;
2. On lots that are interior to the business park and do not abut a boundary line of the district, structures may be set back thirty five feet (35')
from the corner side lot line;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 415/548
3. Landscaping within a corner side yard shall be in accordance with the requirements contained in this subsection B3 and section 11-10A-8
of this article. Means of ingress and egress, signs and obstructions permitted in section 11-10A-7 of this article and chapters 13 and 14 of
this title shall be permitted in the corner side yard.
a. Lots Abutting Streets Outside District:
(1) The first thirty feet (30') of the corner side yard of all lots that abut streets forming the boundary of the district, as measured from the
corner side lot line, shall be sodded or seeded and landscaped; and
(2) No parking or roads shall be permitted within the first thirty feet (30') of the corner side yard;
b. Lots Abutting Streets Within District:
(1) The first thirty five feet (35') of the corner side yard of all lots which abut interior streets, as measured from the edge of the
pavement, shall be sodded or seeded and landscaped;
(2) No parking, roads or loading berths shall be permitted within the first thirty five feet (35') of the corner side yard;
(3) A five foot (5') wide sidewalk may be installed within the required thirty five foot (35') landscaped area in accordance with subsection
11-10A-10E of this article; and
4. No parking, loading berths or access roads shall be permitted in the first thirty feet (30') of the minimum corner side yard.
C. Minimum Interior Side Yard:
1. All structures shall be set back from the side lot line a distance of not less than twenty five feet (25'), plus one additional foot for each two
feet (2') of building height above thirty five feet (35');
2. Parking, loading berths and access roads shall be prohibited from the first twenty five feet (25') along an interior side lot line that extends
from the front property line to the rear facade of a building; and
3. Parking, loading berths and access roads shall be permitted no closer than ten feet (10') to an interior side lot line that extends from the
rear facade of a building to the rear lot line.
D. Minimum Rear Yard:
1. All structures shall maintain a minimum setback of fifty feet (50') from a rear lot line which forms the boundary of the district, with the
exception of lots that abut Lake Street, Gary Avenue and Bloomingdale, Schick, Army Trail and Schmale Roads. On lots that abut Lake
Street, Gary Avenue and Bloomingdale, Schick, Army Trail and Schmale Roads, all structures shall maintain a minimum setback of
seventy five feet (75') from a rear lot line;
2. On lots that are interior to the business park and do not abut a boundary line of the district, structures may be set back a minimum of
twenty feet (20') from a rear lot line; provided, that they are set back one additional foot for each two feet (2') of building height above thirty
five feet (35');
3. Pavement for parking, loading berths and access roads shall be permitted no closer than ten feet (10') to an interior rear lot line; and
4. Parking, loading berths and access roads shall be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50') from a rear lot line which forms the boundary line
of the district.
E. Transition Yards: All structures in the district shall be set back a minimum of seventy five feet (75') from a side or rear lot line which abuts or
is across the street from a front, side or rear lot line in a residential district. (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987)
11-10A-5: BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Maximum Structure Height:
1. No building or structure shall exceed one hundred feet (100') in height;
2. All buildings or structures shall adhere to the following height restrictions: (Note: For purposes of determining allowable height, the
number of feet from a residential district is measured from the residential lot line, and is inclusive of streets and rights of way.)
a. Thirty five feet (35'), when located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of any residential district;
b. Fifty feet (50'), when located a distance between one hundred fifty (150) and three hundred feet (300') from any residential district;
c. Any building or structure that is located more than three hundred feet (300') from a residential district may be erected above fifty feet
(50') in height if set back an additional one foot (1') for each two feet (2') in height that exceeds fifty feet (50'); and (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-
1987)
d. Any building or structure that exceeds sixty feet (60') in height shall be subject to review and approval by the planning and zoning
commission and village board in accordance with procedures set forth in subsection 11-10A-11H of this article. (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987;
amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 416/548
B. Maximum Lot Coverage: The maximum coverage of any lot within this district (for permitted uses listed in subsection 11-10A-2A of this
article) by buildings, parking, roads, or any other impervious surface shall not exceed seventy five percent (75%). (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987)
11-10A-6: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
A. Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with requirements contained in chapter 13 of this title; and (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987)
B. All unenclosed loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with requirements contained in chapter 13 of this title, and shall be subject to
review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Village Board in accordance with procedures set forth in subsection 11-
10A-11H of this article; and (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
C. No parking facility or loading berth shall be closer than fifty feet (50') to any lot line that is adjacent to a residential property line; and
D. Development of all lots shall include six inch (6") curbing along the perimeter of all parking lots, access roads and unenclosed loading berths.
(Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987)
11-10A-7: SIGNS:
A. Unless otherwise approved by ordinance subsequent to the date of approval of the Business Park District (ordinance 87-29, passed June 22,
1987), signage shall be provided in accordance with requirements contained in chapter 14 of this title for office use; and (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-
1987; amd. 2012 Code)
B. All signs shall fit into a uniform design framework which includes compatibility of structure, materials, color palette and method of illumination.
(Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987)
11-10A-8: LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING:
The applicant shall submit six (6) copies of the final landscape plan prepared for each lot for review and approval by the Village Planner and
Village Engineer. Landscaping shall be designed to coordinate the appearance of the varying design elements within the Business Park District,
and shall be in accordance with the following: (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
A. Preservation Of Natural Features:
1. An evaluation of each building site shall be made to determine whether desirable tree stands, ponds, or other existing natural features can
be preserved and included in the landscape plan; and (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. 2012 Code)
2. Existing trees shall be preserved, wherever possible, in accordance with a tree preservation plan, subject to review and approval by the
Village Engineer and Village Planner. (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
B. Front And Corner Side Yards:
1. The front and corner side yards of all lots shall be landscaped in accordance with subsections 11-10A-4A and B of this article and
requirements of this subsection;
2. At a minimum, landscaping in the front and corner side yards shall include the installation of evergreen, deciduous, or ornamental trees
averaging thirty feet (30') on center (as measured per linear foot of frontage) and planted in naturalistic groupings; and
3. Landscaped berms and/or evergreen plantings shall be provided in the front and corner side yards in accordance with criteria set forth in
subsections B2 and E of this section in order to minimize the visual effect of large paved areas and standing automobiles.
C. Interior Side Yards:
1. Landscaping shall also be required within the minimum interior side yard of each lot.
2. At a minimum, landscaping in the interior side yard shall include the installation of evergreen, deciduous, or ornamental trees averaging
eighty feet (80') on center (as measured per linear foot along the side lot line), and alternately spaced with the existing or proposed trees
within an interior side or rear yard of an adjoining parcel.
3. When loading facilities are located in an interior side yard and are visible from an adjacent developed property or public right-of-way,
landscaped berms or evergreen plantings shall be provided in accordance with criteria set forth in subsection E of this section to screen
loading activities from public view.
D. Interior Rear Yard:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 417/548
1. At a minimum, interior rear yards shall be seeded or sodded and landscaped with evergreen, deciduous or ornamental trees averaging
eighty feet (80') on center (as measured per linear foot along the rear lot line); and
2. Trees shall be alternately spaced with the existing or proposed trees within an interior rear or side yard of an adjoining parcel.
E. Screening:
1. a. Screening shall be provided when off street parking and/or unenclosed loading facilities are adjacent to a major arterial, adjacent to or
across from residential or institutional land uses, or between commercial and office/industrial land uses;
b. Such screening may be accomplished through the provision of landscaped berms, a compact hedge, fence, or wall, or a combination of
any of these methods;
c. Required screening shall be at least five feet (5') high;
d. The placement of the screen around the parking or loading facility shall not impair the safety of pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
2. Tree and shrub buffers, not less than fifty feet (50') in depth, shall be developed along all lot lines that are adjacent to or across the street
from residential and institutional uses. At a minimum, trees planted within this buffer yard shall include:
a. Deciduous: Three (3) per one hundred (100) linear feet;
b. Evergreen: Five (5) per one hundred (100) linear feet; and
c. Flowering: Five (5) per one hundred (100) linear feet.
F. Streets And Rights-Of-Way:
1. To create "gateways" into the business park, landscaping adjacent to the rights-of-way at intersections into the district shall be accented
with denser and more mature plantings than required by other sections of this article, and shall include the installation of evergreen and
flowering trees and shrubs; and
2. Plants shall be arranged and maintained to provide for proper sightlines at intersecting streets.
G. Interior Parking Lot Landscaping:
1. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of any unenclosed parking facility shall be provided with interior landscaping to create visual relief and
break (soften) the expanse of paving (note: foundation plantings adjacent to the parking lot shall be included in this calculation);
2. All parking lot landscaping shall be curbed to prevent destruction of the landscaping by vehicles;
3. The design of interior parking lot landscaping shall accommodate pedestrian traffic or shall be located away from anticipated pedestrian
paths to avoid potential maintenance problems;
4. Interior parking lot landscaping shall include, at a minimum, one deciduous street tree for each ten (10) parking spaces (note: trees used
in landscaping required yards shall count toward this calculation, provided the parking lot adjoins these buffer yards);
5. Parking lot islands and median strips shall be mounded, for improved drainage, with slopes not to exceed four to one (4:1); and
6. An area between two feet (2') and five feet (5') aboveground shall be kept clear of plant growth, except for tree trunks, in order to assure
that pedestrians and automobiles will be visible to the motorist.
H. Recommended Plant Materials:
1. Trees and shrubs shall be selected from the recommended species list attached to ordinance 87-29 as exhibit A, or other species as
approved by the Village Planner. (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987)
2. Unless otherwise approved by the Village Engineer or the Village Planner, the minimum size of trees, when installed, shall be as follows:
(Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
a. Deciduous: Three inch (3") caliper;
b. Evergreen: Six feet (6') high; and
c. Flowering: Six feet (6') high.
3. Once the minimum landscape requirements have been met, any size tree may be installed on a lot to supplement minimum requirements.
I. Berming: Berming used for landscaping and/or screening purposes shall be in accordance with the following:
1. Mounding shall be located between the right-of-way and the building setback lines;
2. Earth mounding shall generally vary in height, width, and length to create a free form, naturalistic effect; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 418/548
3. The height of berms shall range between three feet (3') and four feet (4') in front yards along major arterials, and between four feet (4')
and seven feet (7') adjacent to residential districts; slopes of berms shall not exceed a three to one (3:1) ratio.
J. Maintenance:
1. All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance, and free of refuse and debris; and
2. All dead plant materials shall be removed and replaced as required in order to maintain an attractive landscape at all times. (Ord. 87-29,
6-22-1987)
11-10A-9: BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN:
A. Materials: Buildings shall be constructed of masonry brick, stone, or block (excluding plain concrete block), architectural steel and glass, or
precast concrete panels; (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987)
B. Compatible Design: Design of all buildings shall be compatible in form, textures and colors, consistent with a campuslike setting, and shall be
approved by the Village Planner and Building Commissioner, whose approval shall not be unreasonably withheld; (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987;
amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
C. Planned Unit Developments Near Residence Districts: Where a rear or side elevation of a structure is adjacent to or across the street from a
residential district, the facade shall be articulated through architectural design, change in building materials, use of berms and/or
landscaping in order to avoid the monotonous view of a flat, linear and unbroken facade.
D. Screening:
1. All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be effectively screened from public view by the roof structure or a parapet wall;
2. All meters and other mechanical equipment located on the exterior wall of a building shall be effectively screened from public view by
landscaping or architectural elements; and
3. Exposed exterior downspouts shall be prohibited. (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987)
11-10A-10: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Performance Standards: All uses within the district shall comply with the performance standards contained in section 11-9-7 of this title.
B. Outdoor Storage:
1. All outdoor storage facilities shall be located adjacent to a railroad right-of-way;
2. All outdoor storage facilities and trash receptacles shall be enclosed by a fence, wall, and/or landscaping not less than five feet (5') high,
and shall be screened from view of adjacent residential or institutional properties and public rights-of-way; and
3. No materials or wastes shall be deposited or stored on any lot in a district so that they may be transferred off the property by natural
causes or forces.
C. Outdoor Sales: All outdoor sales space shall be provided with a permanent, durable and dustless surface, graded and drained to dispose of
all surface water.
D. Streets And Public Rights-Of-Way:
1. All new streets constructed within the district shall be curvilinear, designed to fit the terrain and protect existing vegetation; and (Ord. 87-
29, 6-22-1987)
2. Proposed rights-of-way, street widths and specifications for pavement shall require approval of the Village Engineer. (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-
1987; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
E. Sidewalks:
1. Five foot (5') wide sidewalks shall be provided within the rights-of-way one foot (1') off the property line of major arterials that abut the
boundary line of a district; construction standards for sidewalks shall be in accordance with the Village subdivision regulations and
construction and design standards for public improvements; and
2. An integrated pedestrian system shall be provided within the district which links all development parcels to one another and to external
systems.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 419/548
F. Lighting:
1. The developer of a district shall be responsible for selecting and implementing a unified system of lighting in the district;
2. Any lighting used to illuminate an unenclosed off street parking and/or loading area, pedestrianway, sign or structure shall be located
and/or shielded to avoid glare and excessive light spillage upon adjacent residential properties or public rights-of-way;
3. Illumination levels shall not exceed 0.5 foot-candle beyond the boundary lines of the district;
4. The average maintained foot-candle within a parking facility shall not be less than 1.0 nor greater than 3.0, and the maximum to minimum
ratio shall not exceed eight to one (8:1); and
5. Lights used to illuminate the facade of a building shall be located and directed so as to avoid glare or excessive light spillage upon
adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.
G. Drainage:
1. No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that results in water runoff causing flooding, erosion or deposit of minerals on
adjacent properties;
2. Such runoff shall be properly channeled into a storm drain, watercourse, ponding area or other public facilities in accordance with title 10,
chapter 12 of this Code and any other applicable Village ordinances or agreements pertaining to stormwater runoff; and (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-
1987)
3. Any change in grade affecting water runoff onto adjacent properties must be as approved by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987;
amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
H. Preservation Of Natural Features:
1. Existing upland vegetation, wetlands, surface waters, and other natural features shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible in
order to maintain important natural functions such as groundwater recharge, flood storage/desynchronization, sediment trapping, nutrient
retention, erosion control, and wildlife habitat; and
2. The applicant shall incorporate such natural features into required buffer yards, using them as visual screens, where possible, or
capitalize upon existing wetlands and stands of trees to frame views of buildings from the public rights-of-way; and (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-
1987)
3. Wetlands or other natural features which cannot be preserved shall be replaced on site, with due regard for their functional values, in
accordance with requirements of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Proposals for replacement of wetlands or other significant natural
features shall be subject to review by the Village Engineer and the Village Planner, whose approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
(Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
11-10A-11: PROCEDURE FOR ESTABLISHING DISTRICT:
A. Application:
1. Application for a Business Park District may be made by the owner or contract purchaser by filing an application for a zoning amendment
with the Village Clerk in accordance with requirements of section 11-3-5 of this title;
2. At the time the application is filed, the developer shall also submit plans, data, and other information as required by subsection C of this
section; (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987)
3. Copies of the application and submittals shall be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission with the request to hold a public
hearing; and (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
4. The applicant shall give notice of the public hearing in accordance with procedures outlined in subsection 11-3-5C of this title. (Ord. 87-29,
6-22-1987)
B. Public Hearing:
1. Upon receipt of the application and other required submittals, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed amendment, which shall be continued at least once; and
2. The Planning and Zoning Commission may continue the hearing from time to time without publication of additional notices. (Ord. 87-29, 6-
22-1987; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
C. Concept Plan; Submittals: At the time of the application, the developer shall submit thirteen (13) copies of the following materials, each
folded to an eight and one-half inch by fourteen inch (81/2" x 14") size, with the title block clearly displayed:
1. A location map, which illustrates the relationship of the property to surrounding land uses;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 420/548
2. A plat of survey prepared by a registered surveyor, including a legal description of the subject property to be included in the district;
3. A Concept Land Use Plan, presented in a general schematic fashion, which includes the following:
a. Proposed land uses and existing uses within one hundred feet (100') of the district;
b. Natural features on the subject property and within one hundred feet (100') of the district, including topography, floodplains, wetlands
and existing vegetation;
c. Pattern of public and private roads, including rights-of-way, and intended design standards;
d. Size, area and location of lots;
e. Dimensioned setbacks, easements and minimum yards;
f. Description of the anticipated use, type, and location of structures;
g. Location, type and size of landscaping;
h. Proposed open space and/or stormwater detention/retention facilities;
4. Architectural drawings and sketches illustrating the design and character of proposed structures;
5. Concept landscape plan for the district, prepared by a landscape architect, identifying existing vegetation that will be preserved and
showing proposed treatment of major entryways, rights-of-way, and perimeter buffers;
6. Concept plan for signage, including proposed materials, color scheme and method of illumination;
7. Details on lighting, including height, type of luminaire, and method of illumination;
8. Illustrative site plans, showing typical building footprints, off street parking and loading areas, pedestrianways and landscaping, including
typical screening of parking and loading facilities, outdoor storage areas, or screening from adjacent residential properties, as appropriate,
for the following situations:
a. Development of an interior lot;
b. Transition between two (2) different land uses, if applicable;
c. Buffering of a lot which is adjacent to a residential district;
d. Development of a lot which fronts on a major arterial; and
e. Development of a lot on a corner and/or cul-de-sac;
9. A preliminary engineering study, including the following:
a. A general description of and location map showing existing sanitary, stormwater and potable water facilities within and adjacent to the
proposed district; and
b. Proposed improvements necessary to properly handle the potable water, sanitary sewer, stormwater drainage and other service needs
upon development of the district;
10. A market analysis of proposed commercial uses, if any;
11. A preliminary traffic study providing a general description of existing roads on and adjacent to the proposed district and the proposed
road improvements necessary to properly handle the traffic anticipated to be generated upon development of the district;
12. The relationship of the proposed district to existing land uses in the surrounding area and the Village Comprehensive Plan, including a
statement of the effect on surrounding land uses;
13. A description of the modifications and exceptions from this title, if any, or from the Village subdivision control ordinance, if any, which are
being requested as part of the application for the establishment of a district;
14. A development plan, showing proposed phasing of the project and estimated time of completion for each phase; and (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-
1987)
15. Prior to final plat approval, the developer shall submit declarations of covenants, conditions and restrictions and a maintenance plan for
the proposed district. Said documents shall be subject to review and approval by the Village Attorney, Village Engineer and Village
Planner. (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
D. Concept Plan Approval:
1. Planning And Zoning Commission Action:
a. After the concept plan submittals have been presented and reviewed during the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall submit its recommendation with respect to the application to the village board of trustees. A recommendation shall require a
concurring vote of a majority of those members present, with a minimum of four (4) concurring votes. The planning and zoning
commission may recommend: (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 421/548
(1) Approval of the application, including any, all or none of the modifications to this title or the village subdivision control ordinance
requested by the applicant, if any;
(2) Approval of the application, with conditions, or changes or revisions to the plans; or
(3) Disapproval of the application; (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987)
b. Any recommendation by the planning and zoning commission for the grant of any, all or none of the modifications to this title or the
village subdivision control ordinance requested by the applicant, or any recommendation by the planning and zoning commission that
conditions, changes or revisions to the concept plan submittals be required, shall be based on findings of fact that said modifications to
this title or the village subdivision control ordinance, and/or conditions, changes or revisions to the concept plan submittals are the
following: (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
(1) Necessary in the interest and needs of the community and in keeping with the intent of this title;
(2) Necessary or desirable and appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the district;
(3) Will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity, nor substantially diminish and/or impair
property values within the surrounding neighborhood, and are in accordance with good planning standards; and
(4) Will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare; (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987)
c. The planning and zoning commission shall set forth the reasons for its recommendation in a statement of findings of fact and
recommendations, which shall be forwarded to the village board within forty five (45) days after the close of the hearing as follows: (Ord.
87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
(1) Any requested exceptions or modifications from this title or from the village subdivision control ordinance shall be set forth in the
statement of findings of fact and recommendations; (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987)
(2) In the event of a favorable recommendation, the planning and zoning commission shall specify particular conditions to be
incorporated into an approval of the application, which may or may not include requested exceptions or modifications from this title;
2. Board Of Trustees Action: Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the planning and zoning commission recommendation, the board of
trustees shall either approve, approve with conditions, disapprove or send the application back to the developer and the planning and
zoning commission for modification and review in accordance with the following: (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
a. An approval with conditions shall state what additions or deletions from the application as submitted shall be made in the application as
approved; and
b. Any exceptions or modifications from this title or the village subdivision control ordinance that are granted by the village board of
trustees must be clearly stated and identified as part of the approval.
E. Preparation Of Development Ordinance:
1. Upon review and approval of the concept plans by the village board, the village attorney shall prepare a development ordinance granting
the business park district planned unit development for seventy five (75) to two hundred fifty (250) acres classification to the property for
adoption by the village board. Said development ordinance and the business park ordinance (unless specific provision[s] thereof have
been modified in the development ordinance) shall control development of the property. This ordinance shall contain:
a. A list of exhibits which document the approved development plan; and
b. A list of exceptions or modifications from the business park ordinance and any restrictions and conditions imposed by the Board of
Trustees;
2. After adoption of the development ordinance by the Board of Trustees, said ordinance shall not take effect unless the development
ordinance shall be signed by the owners of the property in a district within sixty (60) days thereafter, assuring the Village that the
development will be carried out in full compliance with the concept plans and within the time frame established by the development plan or
as otherwise agreed to by the owners and the Village.
F. Final Plat Of Subdivision: Based upon the approved plan, the developer shall submit a final plat of subdivision in accordance with the process
set forth in the Village subdivision regulations.
G. Final Site Plan Approval For Individual Lots:
1. All lots within the district shall be developed according to the approved concept plans, development ordinance, and all regulations and
restrictions contained in the business park ordinance.
2. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the owner of a particular lot or tract within the district shall submit six (6) copies of the final site
plan, at a scale not less than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50'), to Village staff for review and approval. The following information shall be
submitted in association with the site plan:
a. Site information, including:
(1) Name and address of the owner, applicant, planner, architect, engineer and landscape architect;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 422/548
(2) Date, scale, and north arrow;
(3) Total acreage;
(4) Title by which the property or project is to be referred; and
(5) Proof of ownership.
b. A plat of survey of the lot for which approval is being sought, including a legal description of the subject lot or tract or, where a
subdivision is being sought, a plat of the subdivision.
c. Overall development plan showing the relation of the particular site to the approved concept plans and existing developed lots.
d. Location and size of all structures, both existing and proposed.
e. Ground elevations of the parcel.
f. Location of floodplain areas, wetlands and existing vegetation. (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987)
g. Soil analysis, if required by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
h. Dimensions of all minimum yards and spaces between structures.
i. Location and dimensions of all fences and walls.
j. A landscape plan, prepared by a landscape architect.
k. Vehicular, pedestrian and service access, including:
(1) The width of the access drive.
(2) Identification and location of existing and proposed curb lines, property lines, sidewalks, and streets or drives.
(3) Identification and location of existing and proposed parking regulations and signs, traffic signals, utility poles, light standards and fire
hydrants.
l. Off street parking and loading facilities, including numbers of spaces, dimensions of stalls and berths, and provision for screening such
facilities, if required.
m. Architectural elevations, including final architectural and building plans, depicting the buildings for which final approval is being sought.
n. Details on signage, including location, height, width, area, colors, and method of illumination.
o. Details on proposed lighting, including locations, size, height and method of illumination, including a point by point illumination plan,
showing foot-candle intensities.
p. Outdoor storage areas, if any.
q. Waste disposal facilities, trash bins, and provision for screening such facilities and trash bins.
r. Preliminary engineering, drainage and grading plans. (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987)
Final engineering plans shall be submitted and approved by the Village Engineer prior to the issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 87-29,
6-22-1987; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
3. During final plan review of any plans which do not require site plan review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Village Board,
Village staff shall report to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Village Board on a regular and continuing basis, at public meetings,
concerning proposed projects and buildings and the progress of development.
H. Site Plan Review By Planning And Zoning Commission And Village Board: If, during final plan review, or review of plans which are submitted
in accordance with requirements of other sections of this title, Village staff determines that plans submitted for a particular lot are
inconsistent with the development ordinance (including conditions contained therein, if any), the approved concept plans, or the
requirements of this title, then plans shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Village Board in
accordance with the following procedures:
1. The applicant shall submit to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Village Board all plans and information listed in subsection G2 of
this section;
2. a. The request for final approval shall be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission at a regular or special meeting; no public
hearing shall be required; (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
b. However, any requested exception to, or modification from, bulk regulations for a perimeter lot which abuts the boundary line of a
district, or changes to the approved buffer yard, shall require written notification by the owner or contract purchaser of all property
owners within five hundred feet (500') of said perimeter lot;
c. Said notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of such meeting; shall be sent by certified mail with return receipt requested, not
less than fifteen (15) days in advance of the public meeting; and shall be properly addressed as shown on the Tax Assessor's rolls; and
(Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 423/548
d. The owner or contract purchaser shall file with the Village Engineer a sworn affidavit, which shall include a copy of the notice and
names and addresses of all persons to which said notice was sent; said affidavit shall be accepted as verification of required notification
of the public meeting; (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
3. a. After reviewing the plans, materials and testimony presented during the public meeting, the Planning and Zoning Commission may
recommend: (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
(1) Approval of the application;
(2) Approval of the application with conditions; or
(3) Disapproval of the application; (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987)
b. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend, or the Village Board may require, changes or revisions to the plans as are
deemed necessary in the interest and needs of the community, provided they are in keeping with the intent of this title, and in
accordance with good planning standards;
c. (1) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall set forth the reasons for its recommendation in the statement of findings of fact and
recommendations which shall be forwarded to the Village Board within forty five (45) days, or as otherwise agreed to by the Planning
and Zoning Commission and the applicant; (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
(2) Any requested exceptions or modifications from this title or from the Village subdivision control ordinance shall be clearly
documented in the statement of findings of fact and recommendations; (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987)
(3) In the event of a favorable recommendation, the planning and zoning commission shall specify particular conditions to be
incorporated into an approval of the application, which may or may not include requested exceptions or modifications from this title;
4. At its next regularly scheduled meeting following receipt of the planning and zoning commission's recommendations, or such longer period
as might be agreed to by the applicant, the corporate authorities shall consider such ordinances and adopt such resolutions as required to
grant final approval of the proposed development;
5. The planning and zoning commission and the board of trustees need not approve any final plan which deviates from the concept plans
where such deviation results in a change which would: (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
a. Alter the concept, character or intent of the overall development as set forth in the concept plan;
b. Negatively affect the public health, welfare and safety;
c. Substantially decrease the value of surrounding property;
d. Decrease the aesthetics and functions of the natural environment, which shall include, but not be limited to, conditions pertaining to
floodplains, soil and geologic characteristics and preservation of vegetation;
e. Significantly reduce (by more than 50 percent) or eliminate the fifty foot (50') perimeter buffer yards which abut, or are across the street
from, a residential district;
f. Adversely affect the capacity of the public utilities to be constructed by or for the village, unless the developer agrees to eliminate any
such adverse effect without cost to the village over and above the cost to have been incurred by the village, if any, prior to such change;
g. Must be in accordance with good planning standards; and
6. The corporate authorities shall not unreasonably withhold approval, nor impose any unreasonable restrictions or conditions thereon, with
respect to any proposed development that is in substantial conformity with the approved concept plans and development ordinance for the
district.
I. Issuance Of Permits:
1. Building and occupancy permits shall be required for each structure in a district.
2. No building permit relating to any part of a district shall be issued prior to the approval of a final plan for such part of the district, in
accordance with the provisions of subsection G of this section; provided, however, that:
a. Construction of sewer, water and other utility improvements as well as street and roadway improvements may proceed at any time
following adoption of the development ordinance by the board of trustees and execution of the ordinance by the property owners in
accordance with subsection E of this section; and
b. All construction shall be in accordance with the approved set of plans, requirements of this title and other applicable village ordinances,
and any conditions for development that may have been imposed upon the subject property by the village board. (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-
1987)
3. The building and zoning official shall issue all necessary permits for all or part of the project once the applicant has demonstrated full
compliance with all restrictions and/or conditions referenced in the development ordinance. (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. 2012 Code)
11-10A-12: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this article shall control in the event of any conflict between a section of this article and other provision(s) of this title;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 424/548
otherwise, any applicable provision(s) of this title shall apply to a business park district. (Ord. 87-29, 6-22-1987; amd. 2012 Code)
ARTICLE B. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT OF 250 ACRES OR
MORE
11-10B-1: GENERAL NATURE AND PURPOSE:
A planned unit development district of 250 acres or more (hereinafter in this article sometimes referred to as "district") is of such a substantially
different character from planned developments of smaller size that the public welfare requires that they be treated in a manner different from
such smaller planned developments. The purpose of this article is to set forth specific additional standards and exceptions to govern the
recommendations of the planning and zoning commission and the action of the board of trustees with respect to granting approvals for such
districts. These regulations are designed to provide for an integrated development considering all the elements of good land planning so as to
provide an adequate relationship between structures and land uses, while at the same time providing for adequate space, light, air, use and bulk
limitations, to promote the health, safety and welfare of the village and its residents. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
11-10B-2: DEFINITION AND SIZE LIMITATION:
A "planned unit development district of 250 acres or more" is a tract of land which includes two (2) or more principal uses that would require
classification of the tract into two (2) or more standard zoning districts and which is developed as a unit. A district must include at least two
hundred fifty (250) acres of contiguous property; provided, that after establishment of a district in accordance with the procedures set forth in
section 11-10B-15 of this article, contiguous property of any size, whether or not under the same ownership, may be added to such district; and
provided further, that properties separated by highways, streets, public ways or railroad or other public utility rights of way may be deemed
contiguous for the purpose of qualifying as a district. If any area once having been zoned a planned unit development district of 250 acres or
more should be reduced in size below two hundred fifty (250) acres as a result of disconnection, rezoning, or for any other reason, such lands
as shall remain within the village shall, after a public hearing before the planning and zoning commission, be rezoned by the board of trustees to
the zone in which such land could be most appropriately developed, unless otherwise provided in any annexation agreement pursuant to which
such zoning as a planned unit development district of 250 acres or more was granted. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48,
10-27-2014)
11-10B-3: PERMITTED USES:
A. Residence Districts: All permitted uses in the residence districts established by chapter 7 of this title are permitted uses in a zoning district
established pursuant to section 11-10B-15 of this article within a residential use area established by this article; all special uses in the
residence districts established by chapter 7 of this title are special uses in a zoning district established pursuant to section 11-10B-15 of this
article within a residential use area established by this article. (Ord. 2007-20, 5-24-2007)
B. Business Districts: All permitted uses in the business districts established by chapter 8 of this title are permitted uses in a zoning district
established pursuant to section 11-10B-15 of this article within a commercial use area; all special uses in the business districts created by
chapter 8 of this title are special uses in a zoning district established pursuant to section 11-10B-15 of this article within a commercial use
area, with the addition of the following use:
Brewpubs, as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title, are special uses in a zoning district established pursuant to section 11-10B-15 of this
article within the Stratford Square Mall Shopping Center property only. The Stratford Square property shall be inclusive of any internal or
external physical spaces, as well as all parking surfaces adjacent to and owned by the same. (Ord. 2017-09, 3-13-2017)
C. Manufacturing District: All permitted uses in the manufacturing district established by chapter 9 of this title are permitted uses in a zoning
district established pursuant to section 11-10B-15 of this article within an industrial use area; all special uses in the manufacturing district
established by chapter 9 of this title are special uses in an industrial use area. (Ord. 2007-20, 5-24-2007)
11-10B-4: LAND USE REGION; PERCENTAGE LIMITATIONS:
A. Classification Of Regions:
1. In preparing the tentative development plan, preliminary plans and final plans required by section 11-10B-15 of this article, the developer
of the district may divide the district into separate land use regions, which land use regions may be designated into all or any of the
following classifications:
a. Residential land use region;
b. Business land use region; and
c. Manufacturing land use region.
2. The developer may classify a portion of a district as a business land use region if the tentative development plan submitted by the
developer provides for not less than one hundred (100) acres of land in said land use region to be devoted to commercial uses. The
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 425/548
developer may classify a portion of a district as a manufacturing land use region if the tentative development plan submitted by the
developer provides for not less than one hundred (100) acres of land in said land use region to be devoted to industrial uses; provided,
that no land in such land use region may be devoted to residential uses.
B. Percentage Limitations Of Use Within Each Region: In the event the developer of a district elects to divide the district into any or all of the
land use regions provided in subsection A of this section, then the developer shall allocate, in the tentative development plan submitted in
accordance with subsection 11-10B-15A of this article, the portion of the total acreage of each such land use region devoted to residential,
commercial and industrial uses, respectively; provided, that such allocation may take the form of a range of maximum and minimum
percentage limitations for each such use.
C. Computation Of Percentage Limitations: The percentage limitations provided in subsection B of this section and in the tentative development
plan shall be applied to the land area of a land use region after deducting from such land area all land devoted to or reserved or dedicated
for: 1) aboveground public utility buildings and structures required to service the land use region; and 2) rights of way for public streets,
highways and alleys and easements for utilities adjacent thereto. Land devoted to or reserved or dedicated for school and other public
parkways, walkways and drainage courses shall be included in the land area to which such percentage limitations shall be applied. In
determining the percentage of land devoted to each land use region, land devoted to parking and private open space and park and
recreational facilities shall be included.
D. Recreation Area:
1. The tentative development plan shall also provide for recreation areas within a residential land use region equivalent to at least thirty
percent (30%) of the total area in a single-family residential use area and thirty five percent (35%) of the total area in a multiple-family use
area. In a multiple-family use area within a business land use region, the tentative development plan shall provide for recreation area
equivalent to at least thirty five percent (35%) of such use area if the average density for such area shall be below twenty five (25) dwelling
units per acre, and thirty percent (30%) of such use area if the average density for such area shall be twenty five (25) dwelling units per
acre or above.
2. For purposes of this subsection, "recreation area" shall be defined as land specifically designed and intended for the active or passive
recreational use of the residents of the district and shall include, but not be limited to, public or private play lots and parks, school sites,
stormwater detention or retention areas, if such areas are capable of being utilized for such recreational purposes, pedestrian corridors,
bicycle and equestrian trails and greenbelt open space networks.
3. The board of trustees shall determine, in its reasonable discretion, whether land is designated and intended for the recreational use of
residents of the district and, in so doing, shall consider the following factors:
a. The relationship of the location of the land being considered to the residential use area which it is intended to serve.
b. The size and usability of the land being considered.
c. Other existing or proposed recreational facilities capable of fulfilling recreational needs of the residents.
d. Any particular variances required by the development of an unusual housing type.
4. Within the percentage limitations set forth in subsection D1 of this section, the developer shall, to the extent that good planning allows,
provide such recreational space in the nature of play lots and neighborhood parks generally in accordance with the following standards:
(Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973)
Classification Approximate Size
Acres Per
1,000 People
Play lots 4,000 square feet minimum See note 1
Neighborhood parks 5 acres minimum 6.0
Note:
1. The number of play lots shall be governed by the availability of other recreational areas within and for the benefit of the neighborhood
as approved by the planning and zoning commission and the board of trustees.
5. "Play lots" are small areas intended for children up to six (6) or seven (7) years of age and shall be not less than four thousand (4,000)
square feet unless otherwise approved by the planning and zoning commission and the board of trustees. Play lots range in size and may
feature play apparatus, paved areas for wheeled toys, benches, sand areas, small wading or spray pools and landscaping treatment. Play
lots should be located within a housing group so that children need not cross major arterial streets to reach the play lots. (Ord. 73-69, 12-
20-1973; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
6. "Neighborhood parks" are defined as active and passive recreational areas which usually serve children and adults in an urban area
within a radius of approximately one-half (1/2) mile. Neighborhood parks generally adjoin public elementary schools and may include such
features as ball diamonds and play areas toward the interior of the site so the perimeter can be landscaped to buffer sound and to provide
a measure of safety to the public.
7. In fulfilling the recreational space standards as established herein, the developer may vary the location and configuration of neighborhood
parks. The intent of this subsection D7 is to provide the developer with adequate flexibility to create recreational space which fulfills the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 426/548
recreational needs of residential residents. Neighborhood parks may be located individually throughout a neighborhood, may be adjacent
to one another and may be of a linear configuration in part, so as to interconnect recreational areas. The intent of the recreational space is
to provide continuity of an open space network. Plans shall provide for and ensure the distribution of adequate recreational space of
sufficient size and configuration to meet the recreational needs of the residents. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973)
11-10B-5: ZONING STANDARDS:
A. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, the standards set forth in this article shall be applicable to all buildings and structures and
the use of all land in a district in lieu of comparable or similar standards or requirements set forth elsewhere in this title. All provisions and
requirements set forth elsewhere in this title inconsistent with the standards set forth in this article shall be inapplicable. Any uncertainty
between the applicability of a standard or requirement set forth elsewhere in this title and the applicability of a standard set forth in this article
shall be resolved in favor of the standard set forth in this article.
B. Since the establishment of the planned unit development district of 250 acres or more in 1973, the village has more than doubled in size and
has been transformed from an outlying community with an almost rural character to a centrally located community that is nearly built out. As
a result, the need to preserve open space and buffers is even more important than when the district was first established. Furthermore, as
the size and number of motor vehicles has increased, it is in the interest of the village to update the zoning standards that guide
development within the district to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to establish certain bulk standards and regulations for
development within the district to be consistent with similar standards that are applicable elsewhere within the village. Accordingly, any
application submitted on or after March 24, 2008, for development, redevelopment or modification of any land, or improvements existing
thereon, within the planned unit development district of 250 acres or more, shall conform to the following zoning standards:
1. Nonresidential Buildings And Structures: All nonresidential buildings and structures shall conform to the bulk regulations of the B-3
general service business district. To the extent that the separation requirements for buildings and structures set forth in this article are
inconsistent with the requirements of the B-3 general service business district, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. (Ord. 2008-
14, 3-24-2008)
2. Residential Buildings And Structures: All residential buildings and structures shall conform to the requirements of the respective
residential zoning district (i.e., R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, R-2C, R-3, R-4, and R-5) with which the modification to the current development or
newly proposed development or redevelopment is most similar. To the extent that the separation requirements for buildings and structures
set forth in this article are inconsistent with the requirements of the respective R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, R-2C, R-3, R-4, and R-5 districts with
which the current or proposed development or redevelopment is most similar, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. (Ord. 2008-14,
3-24-2008; amd. Ord. 2014-46, 10-27-2014)
11-10B-6: DWELLING STANDARDS:
A. Single-Family Dwellings: Each detached single-family one-story dwelling shall have a total ground floor area of not less than one thousand
one hundred (1,100) square feet; provided, however, that not more than thirty percent (30%) of such single-family dwelling may have a total
ground floor area of less than one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet, but not less than nine hundred (900) square feet; and
provided further, that no such unit of less than one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet shall have more than three (3) bedrooms.
Each detached single-family dwelling of more than one story shall have a total floor area of not less than one thousand one hundred (1,100)
square feet.
B. Two-Family Dwellings: Each detached one-story two-family dwelling shall have a total floor area per dwelling unit of not less than one
thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet; provided, however, that not more than thirty percent (30%) of such two-family dwelling may have
a total ground floor area of less than one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet, but not less than nine hundred (900) square feet; and
provided further, that no such unit of less than one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet shall have more than three (3) bedrooms.
Each detached two-family dwelling of more than one story shall have a total floor area per dwelling unit of not less than one thousand one
hundred (1,100) square feet.
C. One-Family Attached Dwellings, Multiplex Units And Town Row Houses: Each attached single-family dwelling, multiplex unit and town row
houses of one story shall have a total floor area of not less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. Each such dwelling of more than one
story shall have a total floor area of not less than nine hundred fifty (950) square feet.
D. Multiple-Family Dwellings And Apartments: Multiple-family dwellings and apartments shall have a minimum total floor area per dwelling unit
as follows:
1. Efficiency apartments: Four hundred fifty (450) square feet.
2. Apartments with one bedroom: Six hundred fifty (650) square feet.
3. Apartments with two (2) bedrooms: Eight hundred fifty (850) square feet.
4. Apartments with three (3) bedrooms: One thousand (1,000) square feet.
5. Apartments with four (4) or more bedrooms: One thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 427/548
E. Determining Ground Floor Area Or Floor Area In All Dwellings: In all cases, ground floor area or floor area shall be measured from the
outside of the exterior walls, shall include utility rooms, but shall not include cellars, basements, open porches, balconies, breezeways,
garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods of time for living, eating or sleeping purposes. Neither a
cellar nor a basement shall be considered as a story for purposes of this section. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973)
11-10B-7: LOCATION OF BUILDINGS:
A. Residential Use Area: In residential use areas of the district, the minimum distance between the exterior wall of any building and a boundary
line of the district or a boundary line of the residential use area shall be twenty feet (20') or one-half (1/2) the height of the building, whichever
is greater.
B. Commercial Use Areas: In commercial use areas of the district, the minimum distance between the exterior wall of any building and a
boundary line of the district or a boundary line of the commercial use area, if the property abutting such boundary line is in a residential use
area of the district, or in an area outside the district zoned for residential use, or if such building includes dwelling units, shall be thirty five
feet (35') or one-half (1/2) the height of the building, whichever is greater.
C. Industrial Use: In industrial use areas of the district, the minimum distance between the exterior wall of any building and a boundary line of
the district or a boundary line of the industrial use area, if the property abutting such boundary line is in a residential use area of the district
or in an area outside the district zoned for residential use, shall be three feet (3') or one-half (1/2) the height of the building, whichever is
greater.
D. Regulations In All Use Regions: The following provisions governing the location of buildings in relation to boundary lines of the district and in
relation to boundary lines of the use areas within the district shall apply in all land use regions in the district:
1. Where a boundary line of the district or of a use area in the district is in a public street, alley, railroad, or similar right of way, the minimum
distance provided herein shall be measured from the nearest right of way line of such street, alley, railroad or similar right of way. (Ord. 73-
69, 12-20-1973)
2. The area between a boundary line of the district or of a use area in the district and the minimum distance at which the exterior wall of any
building may be located may contain the following permitted encroachments:
a. Fences subject to compliance with the limitations contained in chapter 19, "Fencing And Screening", of this title;
b. Open terraces not over four feet (4') above the average level of the adjoining ground, but not including a permanently roofed over
terrace or porch; awnings and canopies;
c. Steps, four feet (4') or less above the average level of the adjoining ground, which are necessary for access to a building or building
site; chimneys projecting eighteen inches (18") or less;
d. Recreational and laundry drying equipment;
e. Arbors and trellises;
f. Flagpoles;
g. Walls not exceeding six feet (6') in height above the average level of the adjoining ground;
h. Balconies, breezeways and open porches;
i. One-story bay windows projecting three feet (3') or less; and
j. Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three feet (3') or less; and air conditioning pads. (Ord. 2012-27, 6-11-2012)
11-10B-8: ZONING LOT:
Within the district, any parcel of land may be shown as a zoning lot on any preliminary or final plan covering all or any part of the district,
provided such parcel of land meets the zoning lot requirements set forth in this article. Subject to the modifications and exceptions provided in
this article, all provisions set forth elsewhere in this title which refer or apply to a zoning lot shall refer or apply to the zoning lots so shown on
any such preliminary or final plan; provided, that: a) a parcel of land shown as a zoning lot on any preliminary plan may be divided into two (2)
or more zoning lots on a final plan for all or a part of the property covered by such preliminary plan if such zoning lots on the final plan comply
with all applicable minimum requirements elsewhere provided for herein; and b) a zoning lot may not be intersected by a public highway, public
street or railroad right of way. Except as otherwise limited by this article, one or more principal buildings and one or more accessory buildings
may be located on a zoning lot. A zoning lot may be used for any one or more of the uses permitted in the land use area or areas in which the
zoning lot is located. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973)
11-10B-9: SEPARATION REQUIREMENTS:
The separation requirements in the district shall be as follows; except, that any separation requirements not specified herein shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 428/548
determined with regard to reasonable minimum planning standards: (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973)
A. Residential Use Areas:
1. The minimum distance between the exterior wall of any building and the right of way line of a primary arterial road shall be sixty feet (60');
provided, however, the planning and zoning commission may recommend, and the board of trustees may approve, a minimum distance of
not less than thirty feet (30') if proper separation exists between the closest right of way line and such exterior wall of any building. Such
separation must provide for limiting the potential problems associated with the sound and sight of vehicular traffic and may include
landscaping, berming, variable separation of distances along the right of way line and between exterior walls of buildings, fences, walls or
any other suitable treatment. The minimum distance between the closest right of way line of any other public street and the exterior wall of
any building shall be thirty feet (30') or one-half (1/2) the height of the building, whichever is greater. No building shall be constructed on
any easement granted in lieu of a right of way adjacent and along a private street. The minimum distance between the closest edge of
pavement of any private street and the exterior wall of dwelling structures shall be thirty feet (30') or one-half (1/2) the height of the
building, whichever is greater; provided, however, that the planning and zoning commission may recommend, and the board of trustees
may approve, a minimum distance not less than the following, if the planning and zoning commission and board of trustees find that such
reduction will encourage good site design: (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
a. Single-family cluster dwellings: Five feet (5');
b. Other single-family detached, two-family townhouse and multiplex dwellings: Twenty feet (20'); and
c. Apartments: Thirty feet (30') or one-half (1/2) the height of the building, whichever is greater.
2. The minimum distance between adjacent single-family dwellings shall be twenty feet (20'); provided, however, that no such minimum
distance shall apply to single-family cluster housing. For purposes of this subsection A2, the term "single-family cluster housing" shall
mean a group of single-family housing units around a common courtyard or other type of common open space area, which units may or
may not be attached to each other.
3. The minimum distance between a detached single-family dwelling and an adjacent town row house or multiplex unit shall be forty feet
(40').
4. The minimum distance between detached single-family dwellings and an adjacent apartment building shall be sixty feet (60') or one-half
(1/2) the height of the apartment building, whichever is greater.
5. The minimum distance between adjacent town row houses or multiplex houses and adjacent apartment buildings shall be forty feet (40')
or one-half (1/2) the height of the apartment building, whichever is greater.
6. The minimum distance between a dwelling or apartment building and the district boundary line or the boundary line of a land use region
covered by any final plan shall be twenty five feet (25') or one-half (1/2) the height of the dwelling or building, whichever is greater.
7. The minimum distance between adjacent town row houses and adjacent multiplex units shall be twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-
1973)
B. Commercial Use Areas:
1. The minimum distance between the exterior wall of any building and the right of way line of a primary arterial road shall be sixty feet (60');
provided, however, the planning and zoning commission may recommend, and the board of trustees may approve, a minimum distance of
not less than thirty feet (30') if proper separation exists between the closest right of way line and the exterior wall of any building. Such
separation must provide for good planning associated with commercial development. Such separation treatment may include landscaping,
variable separation or distances along the right of way line and between exterior walls of buildings or any other suitable treatment. If a
building located in a commercial use area of the district contains dwelling units, the minimum distance between the exterior wall of that
portion of such building which contains the dwelling units and the closest right of way line of any public street or the closest easement line
of any private street shall be thirty feet (30') or one-half (1/2) the height of the building, whichever is greater. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973; amd.
Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
2. If a building located in a commercial use area of the district contains dwelling units, the minimum distance between any boundary of the
zoning lot on which the building is located and the exterior wall of that portion of the building which contains the dwelling units shall be
thirty feet (30') or one-half (1/2) the height of the building, whichever is greater. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973)
C. Industrial Use Areas:
1. The minimum distance between the exterior wall of any building and the right of way line of a primary arterial road shall be sixty feet (60');
provided, however, the planning and zoning commission may recommend, and the board of trustees may approve, a minimum distance of
not less than thirty feet (30') if proper separation exists between the closest right of way line and the exterior wall of any building. Such
separation must provide for good planning associated with industrial development. Such separation treatment may include landscaping,
variable separation or distances along the right of way line and between exterior walls of buildings or any other suitable treatment. In
industrial use areas of the district, the minimum distance between the closest right of way line of any public street or closest easement line
of any private street and the exterior wall of any building shall be thirty feet (30') or one-half (1/2) the height of the building, whichever is
greater. In such yard areas, no storage of material or equipment or parking of motor vehicles shall take place, and such yard areas shall
be landscaped. Such landscaping requirement shall not prevent the location within such yard areas of driveways, pathways, utility
easements and structures and similar appurtenances. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 429/548
2. In industrial use areas of the district, the minimum distance between adjacent principal buildings shall be thirty feet (30'), and the minimum
distance between a principal building and an accessory building shall be twenty feet (20'). The required area between adjacent detached
dwellings and apartment buildings, between a dwelling or apartment building and the boundary of the use area covered by any final plan,
between adjacent buildings containing town row houses or multiplex units or between buildings and the closest right of way line of public
streets or closest easement line of private streets or the boundary of a zoning lot may contain the permitted encroachments listed in
subsection 11-10B-7D2 of this article. Neither a cellar nor a basement shall be considered a story for the purpose of this subsection C2.
(Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973)
11-10B-10: LAND AREA PER DWELLING UNIT:
A. Single-Family Detached Dwellings On Individual Zoning Lots: Each zoning lot which contains not more than one single-family dwelling shall
have a minimum land area of nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
B. Two-Family Dwellings On Individual Zoning Lots: Each zoning lot which contains not more than one 2-family dwelling shall have a minimum
land area of nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
C. Zoning Lots With Multiple-Family Dwellings And/Or Two Or More Single-Family Or Two-Family Dwellings On Individual Zoning Lots: Each
zoning lot which contains two (2) or more single-family detached dwellings, two (2) or more two-family dwellings, one or more town row
houses, one or more multiplex units, one or more multiple-family dwellings or apartment buildings, or any combination of the foregoing, shall
have a minimum land area per dwelling unit in accordance with the following:
For each single-family detached dwelling 7,700 square feet
For each two-family dwelling 9,000 square feet
For each town row house 4,350 square feet per dwelling unit
For each multiplex dwelling unit 3,110 square feet per dwelling unit
For multiple-family dwellings and apartment buildings 850 square feet per dwelling unit
D. Buildings Containing Dwelling Units Located In Commercial Use Areas: In commercial use areas of the district, each zoning lot on which a
building containing dwelling units is located shall have a minimum land area per dwelling unit in accordance with the requirements set forth
in the last entry of the table found in subsection C of this section. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973)
11-10B-11: APPROVAL OF BULK REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN USES AND TEMPORARY USES:
The bulk requirements to be complied with in connection with any use permitted by section 11-10B-3 of this article and any temporary use of a
building or land provided herein shall be subject to the approval of the board or trustees, which approval may be given as part of the approval of
a tentative development plan, a preliminary plan or a final plan. Separate application for such an approval may be submitted to the board of
trustees by the developer, in writing. The board of trustees shall promptly refer such application to the planning and zoning commission, and the
planning and zoning commission shall, within thirty (30) days from the date of referral, submit to the board of trustees its written
recommendations with respect to such application. The planning and zoning commission may recommend that the board of trustees approve or
disapprove the application and may, in the event of a favorable recommendation, specify particular conditions which should be incorporated in
the approval. Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the planning and zoning commission recommendation, the board of trustees shall either
approve or disapprove the application. An approval may be conditional and, if so, shall state what additions or deletions from the application as
submitted shall be made in the application as approved. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
11-10B-12: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Application Of Provisions: In accordance with subsection 11-10B-5B of this article, any application submitted on or after March 24, 2008, for
development, redevelopment or modification of any land or improvements existing thereon within the planned unit development district of
250 acres or more shall conform with the off street loading and off street parking regulations of chapter 13 of this title. Any such existing
improvements for which modification, removal or redevelopment is not sought on or after March 24, 2008, shall conform to the requirements
of this section. (Ord. 2008-14, 3-24-2008)
B. Definition: Unless otherwise stated, the term "floor area", as used in this section shall mean the gross floor area of a building or structure
used or intended to be used for service to the public as customers, patrons, clients, patients or tenants, including areas occupied by fixtures
and equipment used for display or sale of merchandise. The term "floor area", for the purposes of this section, shall not include any area
used for:
1. Storage accessory to the principal use or uses of a building.
2. Incidental repairs.
3. Processing or packaging of merchandise.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 430/548
4. Show windows or offices incidental to the management or maintenance of a store or a building.
5. Restrooms.
6. Utilities.
7. Dressing, fitting or alteration rooms.
8. Malls or service corridors.
9. Parking facilities.
10. Heating, ventilating and air conditioning plants and similar areas.
C. Description:
1. Parking Space: A "required off street parking space" shall be an area of not less than one hundred sixty one and one-half (1611/2) square
feet nor less than eight and one-half feet (81/2') wide by nineteen feet (19') long (exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns, or
office and work areas) accessible from streets or alleys, or from private driveways or aisles leading to streets or alleys, to be used for the
storage or parking of passenger automobiles and commercial vehicles under one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity where permitted under
this title. Aisles between vehicular parking spaces shall not be less than twelve feet (12') in width when serving vehicles parked at an
angle of forty five degrees (45°) to the axis of an aisle accommodating one-way traffic, nor less than twenty feet (20') in width when
serving vehicles parked perpendicular to the axis of an aisle accommodating two-way traffic, nor less than seventeen feet (17') in width
when serving vehicles parked at an angle of sixty degrees (60°) to the axis of an aisle accommodating two-way traffic.
2. Loading Berth: A required off street loading berth shall be at least ten feet (10') in width by at least forty five feet (45') in length, exclusive
of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen feet (14').
D. Location:
1. Parking Spaces: Parking spaces required under this article shall be located as follows:
a. For single-family detached or two-family dwellings located on individual zoning lots, the required off street parking facilities shall be
provided on the same zoning lot with the dwelling they are required to serve.
b. For single-family detached or two-family dwellings not located on individual zoning lots and for multiple-family dwellings, apartments,
multiplex units or town rowhouses, the required off street parking facilities shall be provided on the same zoning lot where the building
they are required to serve is located or on a separate zoning lot or parcel of land, in either case, not more than two hundred feet (200')
from the nearest entrance to the building being served, measured from the nearest point of the parking facility.
c. For uses other than those specified above, off street parking facilities shall be provided on the same zoning lot as the building being
served or on a separate zoning lot or parcel of land, in either case, not over one thousand feet (1,000') from the nearest entrance to the
building being served, measured from the nearest point of the parking facility; provided, that the zoning lot or parcel of land intended for
the parking facility is located in the same use area as is the building which the parking facility is intended to serve. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-
1973)
2. Loading Spaces: All required loading berths shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use to be served, and no portion of vehicles
shall project into a street or alley. No loading berth for vehicles of a capacity of more than two (2) tons shall be located less than thirty feet
(30') from the boundary of a residential use area or area outside the district zoned for residential use. The entrance to a loading berth shall
not be located within thirty feet (30') of the nearest point of right-of-way of the intersection of any two (2) public streets. Each required off
street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere
with traffic movement and shall be subject to approval of the Village Engineer. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42,
11-13-2017)
E. Number Of Spaces:
1. Parking Spaces: The number of required off street parking spaces shall be as follows:
Type Of Use Parking Space(s) Required
Appliance stores, wholesale stores or household equipment shops 41/2 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area
Banks 1 for each 350 square feet of usable floor area
Bowling alleys 7 for each lane
Buildings containing 3 or more dwelling units 13/4 per dwelling unit; except, that 11/2 spaces per dwelling unit
shall be required for each efficiency dwelling unit located
therein, plus a reasonable amount of guest parking area which
may be provided on the same basis as is set forth for singleand
two-family dwellings in this subsection E1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 431/548
Business or professional offices, or public administration building 1 for each 250 square feet of usable floor area
Churches and synagogues 1 for each 4 seats provided in said buildings or structures
Convention halls, dance halls, skating rinks, assembly halls, exhibition
halls, or other places of assembly
1 for each 100 square feet of floor area used for assembly
Establishments handling the sale and consumption on the premises of
alcoholic beverages, food or refreshments
10 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area devoted to
consumption
Furniture stores and furniture repair shops 3 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area
Hospitals 3 for each 100 square feet of floor area
Hotels and clubs 1 for each guestroom or sleeping room, plus 8 for each 1,000
square feet of floor area devoted to ballrooms and dining rooms
Machinery sales and service establishments 1 for each employee
Manufacturing and industrial uses; research and testing laboratories;
laundry and dry cleaning plants; printing, binding, publishing and
issuing of newspapers, periodicals, books, and other reading matter;
telephone exchanges; warehouses and storage buildings; engraving
shops; assembly of materials and products; and other similar uses
1 for each 2 employees, based upon the maximum number of
persons to be employed at any 1 work period during the day or
night, plus such additional parking facilities as shall be required
for all vehicles used in the conduct of the enterprise
Medical or dental clinics 1 for each 200 square feet of floor area
Mixed uses The sum of the requirements for the various individual uses,
computed separately in accordance with this subsection E1, and
parking facilities for 1 use may be considered as providing the
required parking facilities for any other use if a time diversity
factor is shown
Mortuaries or funeral parlors 1 for each 100 square feet of floor area used as a chapel or
parlor
Motor vehicle sales 5 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area
Private clubs or lodges (without sleeping rooms) 4 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area
Retail stores and service shops (individual or in groups) under 1 roof 41/2 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area devoted to retail
sales
Sanatoriums, convalescent homes, nursing homes, or homes for the
aged
1 for each 1,000 square feet of floor area
Schools:
Elementary and junior high 1 for each faculty member and other full time employees
High 1 for each 6 students
Single- and two-family dwellings 2 for each family dwelling unit, plus a reasonable amount of
guest parking area which may be provided on public streets as
well as private streets in reasonable proximity to the dwelling
units being served, if such private streets are wide enough to
accommodate such parking and still allow reasonable traffic flow
Stadia, sports arenas, auditoriums and gymnasiums (other than
incidental to a school)
1 for each 4 seats
Theaters:
Indoor 1 for each 3 seats
Outdoor Reservoir space equal to 10 percent of the capacity
Tourist homes, cabins or motels 1 for each guestroom, sleeping room or suite, plus 1 additional
space for the owner or manager on the premises
2. Loading Berths: In all use areas where property uses include the loading and unloading of materials or merchandise from vehicles, off
street loading and unloading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements:
Type Of Use
Number Of Loading And
Unloading Berth(s) Required
Banks, business or professional offices or public administration buildings containing 40,000 to 1, plus 1 additional for each
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 432/548
100,000 square feet of gross floor space additional 100,000 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof
in excess of 100,000 square feet
Buildings containing bowling alleys, taverns, restaurants, or any retail shops and having 10,000 to
100,000 square feet of gross floor area
1, plus 1 additional for each
additional 100,000 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof
in excess of 100,000 square feet
Buildings containing furniture and appliance stores, motor vehicle sales, wholesale stores,
household equipment or machinery sales and having 8,000 to 25,000 square feet of gross floor
area
1, plus 1 additional for each
additional 25,000 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof
in excess of 25,000 square feet
Buildings containing manufacturing uses; research and testing laboratories; laundry and dry
cleaning establishments; printing, binding, publishing and issuing of newspapers, periodicals, books
and other reading matter; warehouse and storage facilities; engraving shops; assembly of materials
and products; and other similar uses having more than 6,000 square feet of gross floor area,
exclusive of basement area, and less than 40,000 square feet of gross floor area
1, plus 1 additional for each
additional 60,000 square feet of
gross floor area in excess of
40,000 square feet
Hospitals or sanatoriums containing 40,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross floor area 1, plus 1 additional for each
additional 100,000 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof
in excess of 100,000 square feet
Hotels or apartment hotel buildings wherein there are contained exhibition halls, convention halls,
auditoriums, office facilities or retail shops
1 for the first 40,000 square feet of
gross floor area, plus 1 additional
for each 150,000 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof
in excess of 40,000 square feet
F. Additional Parking Regulations:
1. Computation Of Number Of Spaces: When determination of the number of off street parking spaces required by this section results in a
requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of one-half (1/2) or less may be disregarded, while a fraction in excess of one-half (1/2) shall
be counted as one parking space.
2. Surface Of Parking Areas: All open off street parking areas, except those accessory to single-family dwellings, shall be improved with a
compacted macadam base not less than four inches (4") thick, surfaced with asphaltic concrete, or approved equal comparable hard
surfaced, all weather, dustless materials.
3. Off Street Loading Berths: All open off street loading berths shall be improved with concrete pavement not less than six inches (6") thick,
or approved equal comparative all weather, dustless material.
4. Access: All off street parking facilities shall be provided with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street, alley, or driveway in a
manner which will least interfere with traffic movements. A parking area containing four (4) or more parking spaces shall have vehicular
access thereto over a street, alley, or driveway containing all weather, hard surfaced pavement, and the location and route of access to
such a parking area shall be identified. No driveway across public property in a residential use area shall have a width exceeding thirty six
feet (36'), exclusive of curb returns.
5. Lighting: Illumination of off street parking areas shall be arranged so as not to adversely affect adjacent residential use areas and public
streets.
6. Use Restrictions: Off street parking facilities accessory to dwellings located in residential use areas shall be used solely for the parking of
passenger automobiles owned by occupants of dwellings to which such facilities are accessory or by employees or guests of said
occupants. Under no circumstances shall parking facilities accessory to such dwellings be used for the storage of commercial vehicles or
the parking of automobiles belonging to the owners of buildings, tenants or customers of business establishments except as modified by
subsection F7 of this section.
7. Nonresidential Parking In Residential Use Areas: Accessory off street parking facilities serving nonresidential uses of property may be
permitted in any residential use area when authorized by the board of trustees, which authorization may be given as part of the approval
of a preliminary or final plan and, in any case, shall be subject to the following requirements in addition to all other relevant requirements
of this section:
a. The parking facility shall be accessory to and for use in connection with one or more nonresidential establishments located in adjoining
use areas.
b. The parking facility shall be used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles.
c. No commercial repair work or service of any kind shall be conducted on the parking facility.
d. No sign of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits, and conditions of use, shall be maintained on the parking facility, and
no sign shall exceed twenty (20) square feet in area.
e. Each entrance to and exit from the parking facility shall be at least five feet (5') distant from any adjacent property located in any
residential use area, except where ingress and egress to the parking facility is provided from a public alley or public way separating the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 433/548
residential use area from the parking facility.
8. Joint Parking Facilities: Off street facilities for different buildings, structures or uses or for mixed uses may be provided collectively in any
use area in which separate parking facilities for each constituent use would be permitted, and the total number of spaces so located
together may be less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use if a time diversity factor between each use is shown.
9. Off Site Facilities: When required accessory off street parking facilities are provided elsewhere than on the property on which the use
served is located, they shall be in the same possession, either by deed, long term lease or other arrangement, as the property occupied
by such use, and the owner shall be bound by covenants filed of record in the office of the county recorder of deeds requiring the owner
and his or her heirs and assigns to maintain the required number of parking spaces during the existence of said use. If, for any reason, the
number of off street parking spaces available should be permanently reduced below the minimum number required by this article, the
owner and/or occupant shall be required, within a period of one year from the date such diminution in spaces shall occur, to provide
alternative parking facilities or to reduce the size, type or intensity of use of the property to comply with the provisions of this article.
10. Signs: No sign shall be displayed in any parking area within residential use areas except such as may be necessary for the orderly use
of the parking facilities.
11. Landscaping: In a residential use area or on any institutional premises, the perimeters of all open automobile parking lots containing
more than four (4) parking spaces shall be effectively landscaped.
12. Wheel Guards: All parking lots shall be provided with an acceptable device so located so that no part of parked vehicles will extend
beyond the property line of the parking lot. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973)
11-10B-13: CONVEYANCE OF PROPERTY NOT INCLUDED IN APPROVED FINAL PLAN:
When, and if, any property in the district not included in a final plan approved by the board of trustees pursuant to section 11-10B-15 of this
article shall be conveyed to a person other than one of the developers of the district on the date the district is classified as such pursuant to an
ordinance adopted by the board of trustees, the deed of conveyance or another appropriate document which will bind such party and any
subsequent owner of the property shall contain provisions specifying the land use regions in which such property may be developed, the
residential density which will be permitted in the development of such property, the open space, park, recreation land and school site land
reservation and dedication or sale obligations which will apply to such property and such other restrictions and limitations as shall be deemed
necessary and relevant. A copy of such deed or other document shall be deposited with the village clerk. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973)
11-10B-14: INAPPLICABLE PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE:
In accordance with subsection 11-10B-5B of this article, any application submitted on or after March 24, 2008, for development, redevelopment
or modification of any land or improvements existing thereon within the planned unit development district of 250 acres or more shall conform
with the general provisions of chapter 5 of this title and the off street loading and off street parking regulations of chapter 13 of this title. Any
such existing improvements for which modification, removal or redevelopment is not sought on or after March 24, 2008, need not conform with
sections 11-5-9, 11-5-11 and 11-5-12 and chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 2008-14, 3-24-2008)
11-10B-15: PROCEDURE FOR ESTABLISHING DISTRICT:
A. General Requirements:
1. Application For PUD; Tentative Plan: Application for the establishment of a planned unit development district of 250 acres or more
(hereinafter in this section called the "district") may be made by the developer by filing with the village clerk an application for a zoning
amendment establishing a planned unit development district of 250 acres or more. Said application shall be accompanied by a tentative
development plan, which application and tentative development plan shall be deemed to comply with subsection 11-3-5B of this title for a
zoning amendment application and the plans, data and other information and evidence that must accompany such application. Said
tentative development plan shall include the following:
a. A land use plan for the district which shows the boundaries of the proposed district, sets forth the present plans of the developers of the
district with respect to the future development of the district into the types of land use regions described in this article and the location of
such land use regions in the district, and shows the portions of each land use region in which certain uses are contemplated and those
portions in which certain uses are not contemplated. Any residential use area shown on a land use plan shall also show neighborhood
areas (hereinafter called "neighborhood[s]") with the proposed number of dwelling units by type of residential unit proposed to be
constructed in said neighborhood, general alignment of collector roads and a schematic representation of recreation areas as defined in
subsection 11-10B-4D of this article.
b. A legal description of the property proposed to be included in the district and as shown on the land use plan.
c. A written explanation of the general character of the proposed district including:
(1) A description of all land uses to be included in the district with maximum and minimum percentage limitations for each use as well as
the proposed number of acres to be devoted to recreational areas and school and municipal purposes;
(2) The projected maximum number of dwelling units to be constructed in the district;
(3) A description of each type of residential unit proposed to be constructed in the neighborhoods (i.e., single-family, town row house,
low rise multi-family, high rise multi-family, etc.);
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 434/548
(4) The estimated population of the district broken down by school district and into preschool children, children in grades kindergarten
through fifth, sixth through eighth, ninth through twelfth, and adults; and
(5) The estimated total assessed valuation of all real estate in the district, broken down by school district, as may be anticipated upon
completion of development of the district.
d. A preliminary engineering study providing a general description of existing sanitary and stormwater facilities and service water facilities
on and adjacent to the proposed district and the proposed improvements necessary to handle properly the sanitary and stormwater and
service water needs upon development of the district.
e. A preliminary traffic study providing a general description of existing roads on and adjacent to the proposed district and the proposed
road improvements necessary to handle properly the traffic anticipated to be generated upon development of the district.
f. A proposed construction schedule showing the anticipated number of dwelling units to be constructed during the anticipated term of
development of the district, which anticipated number may be shown in the form of minimum and maximum percentages based upon
the percentage of residential development of the district, together with a proposed construction schedule, showing the anticipated
amount of square feet of commercial property to be constructed and ready for occupancy during the anticipated term of the
development of the district.
g. A description of the modifications, exceptions, and variations from this title or the village subdivision control ordinance which are being
requested as part of the application for establishment of the district.
h. The proposed period of time within which the developer, in accordance with subsections B5 and C5 of this section, shall be required to
submit to the board of trustees preliminary plans and final plans covering all of the proposed district. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973)
2. Planning And Zoning Commission Action: After the close of the public hearing provided in subsection 11-3-5D of this title, and within the
time period provided in subsection 11-3-5E2 of this title but in no event later than ninety (90) days after the date on which the application
was forwarded by the board of trustees, unless the developer and the planning and zoning commission have agreed to an extension of
such time period, the planning and zoning commission shall submit to the board of trustees its recommendation with respect to the
application. The planning and zoning commission may recommend that the board of trustees approve or disapprove the application. In
either case, the planning and zoning commission shall set forth the reasons for its recommendation and may, in the event of a favorable
recommendation, specify particular conditions which should be incorporated in an approval of the application.
3. Board Of Trustees Action: Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the planning and zoning commission's recommendation, the board of
trustees shall either approve or disapprove the application. An approval may be conditional and, if so, shall specifically state what
additions or deletions from the tentative development plan as submitted shall be made in the application as approved.
4. Zoning Amendment: Upon approval of the application for establishment of a district by the board of trustees and acceptance by the
developer of any conditions incorporated in such approval, the board of trustees shall proceed to amend the zoning map by rezoning the
property as a planned development district of 250 acres or more. The public hearing on the application previously held by the planning
and zoning commission pursuant to the amendment procedure provided in section 11-3-5 of this title shall satisfy all hearing requirements
for the rezoning action. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
B. Preliminary Plans:
1. Within such time periods as are prescribed in subsection B5 of this section, preliminary plans for all or specified development phases of
the district shall be submitted for approval by the board of trustees in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection E of this
section. There shall be no minimum acreage requirement with respect to preliminary plans except for the first preliminary plan, which shall
contain at least fifteen (15) acres. Approval of preliminary plans may not be withheld for reasons that would be inconsistent with the
approved tentative development plan. In considering the approval of a preliminary plan, no further public hearing shall be required to
approve changes from the tentative development plan which are not "major changes" as defined in subsection B2 of this section. (Ord. 73-
69, 12-20-1973)
2. Major changes from the tentative development plan shall not be made without consideration of such changes at a public hearing held in
accordance with the provisions of subsections 11-3-5C, D, E and F of this title. The planning and zoning commission, after holding such a
hearing, shall make its recommendations to the board of trustees. A "major change" shall be a change which substantially alters the
proposed uses (including open space) or the percentages or the maximum or minimum percentage limitations for each use, projected
densities for residential uses or the maximum or minimum limitations for such densities, or the intent and purpose of the tentative
development plan. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
3. The increase or decrease by ten percent (10%) of the number of residential units proposed to be constructed in the neighborhood, either
in total or by type, shall not require the approval of the board of trustees; provided, however, that the total number of residential units in a
land use region shall not exceed the maximum number provided in the tentative development plan.
4. A preliminary plan shall include or be accompanied by the following and shall be generally in the form and contain the substance set forth
in exhibit 1 in subsection C4j of this section:
a. A boundary survey and legal description of the area covered by such preliminary plan, prepared and certified by a registered Illinois
land surveyor, including the total acreage therein certified to the nearest one hundredth of an acre, a north point (designated as true
north), and the date of preparation.
b. A topographical survey of the area covered by such preliminary plan at two foot (2') contour intervals as such area exists at that time.
c. A map showing the existing zoning of property covered by the preliminary plan and the area within one hundred feet (100') thereof as
well as of the boundaries of a land use region, if said boundaries fall within the property covered by the preliminary plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 435/548
d. A plan of the area covered by such preliminary plan indicating categories of land uses including the approximate number of dwelling
units and the approximate number of square feet of other uses.
e. A plan of the neighborhood and the area within the neighborhood covered by such preliminary plan, drawn at an appropriate scale,
indicating the following:
(1) Existing and proposed public roads, streets and recreation areas.
(2) Existing easements and proposed easements to be granted in lieu of rights of way.
(3) General areas of location and number of residential units proposed to be constructed in the neighborhood by type of unit, including
the approximate heights thereof.
f. A schematic public utilities plan of existing and proposed utilities, drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals two hundred feet
(1" = 200'), for the area covered by such preliminary plan and the area within one hundred feet (100') thereof indicating the following:
(1) Schematic sanitary and storm sewer systems.
(2) Schematic water supply systems.
(3) Schematic street lighting and public area lighting systems.
g. A time schedule of the proposed development of the area covered by such preliminary plan.
h. With respect to residential use areas within a residential land use region, all of the requirements set forth in subsections B4a through
B4g of this section, plus the following:
(1) General location of proposed public and private collector and secondary roadway system within the neighborhood and within the
area of the neighborhood which is the subject of the preliminary plan.
(2) The number, type, height and general location of all buildings and structures within only the area which is the subject of the
preliminary plan.
(3) Architectural renderings of the proposed structures within only the area which is the subject of the preliminary plan.
(4) The general size and location of all parking facilities within only the area which is the subject of the preliminary plan.
5. The first preliminary plan of the proposed district ("first preliminary plan") shall be submitted for approval within twelve (12) months after
adoption by the board of trustees of the amendment establishing the district; provided, that upon request in writing of the developer, the
board of trustees may, at any time or from time to time, by resolution duly adopted at any meeting of the board of trustees, extend the
period of time for the submission of a first preliminary plan. If the first preliminary plan shall cover less than all of the district, preliminary
plans for additional areas of the district may be submitted to the board of trustees from time to time after submission of such first
preliminary plan; provided, that preliminary plans covering all of the district shall be submitted to the board of trustees within such period of
time as shall have been prescribed in the approval of the application for establishment of the district, which shall be not more than
seventeen (17) years after the adoption by the board of trustees of the amendment establishing the district; and provided further, that upon
request in writing of the developer, the board of trustees may, at any time and from time to time, by resolution duly adopted at any meeting
of the board of trustees, extend the period of time for submission of preliminary plans covering all of the district. A preliminary plan for all
or part of a district may be submitted for approval with the application for establishment of the district, and such preliminary plan may be
approved by the board of trustees at the time such application is approved.
C. Final Plans:
1. Within such time periods as are prescribed in subsection C5 of this section, final plans for specified development phases, or portions of
specified development phases upon which a preliminary plan has previously been submitted, of the district shall be submitted for approval
by the board of trustees in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection E of this section. Approval of a final plan may not be
withheld for reasons that would be inconsistent with the tentative development plan or the approved preliminary plan for the area covered
by such final plan. In considering the approval of a final plan, no further public hearing shall be required to approve changes from the
approved preliminary plan for the area covered by such final plan which are not "major changes" as defined in subsection C2 of this
section. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973)
2. Major changes from the approved preliminary plan shall not be made without consideration of such changes at a public hearing which
shall be held by the planning and zoning commission in accordance with the provisions of subsections 11-5-3C, D, E and F of this title.
The planning and zoning commission, after holding such a hearing, shall make its recommendations to the board of trustees. A "major
change" shall be a change which substantially alters the proposed uses (including open space) or the percentages or the maximum or
minimum percentage limitations for each use, projected densities for residential uses or the maximum or minimum limitations for such
densities, or the intent and purpose of the tentative development plan or the approved preliminary plan for the area covered by such final
plan. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
3. The board of trustees shall approve any final plan submitted thereto which is in substantial conformance with an approved preliminary
plan.
4. A final plan shall include or be accompanied by the following:
a. A calculated and dimensioned development plan for the area covered by such final plan, drawn at an appropriate scale, indicating the
following:
(1) All public and private street rights of way and easements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 436/548
(2) Dimensioned building sites, dimensioned setback lines and the proposed use of each building site.
(3) Off street parking and service areas not incidental to building sites.
(4) Recreation areas.
(5) Sites for schools and other public facilities.
b. Development plans and specifications for the following improvements:
(1) Roads, streets and alleys, including classifications, width of rights of way, width of paved surfaces and construction details.
(2) Sidewalks, including width of paved surfaces and construction details.
c. Engineering drawings and specifications for:
(1) Sanitary and storm sewer systems.
(2) Water supply system.
(3) Street lighting and public area lighting systems.
Such engineering drawings and any other engineering drawings required by any other ordinance of the village shall be prepared in
such detail as may be required by good engineering practices.
d. Estimates of the cost of installation of all proposed public improvements, confirmed by a registered Illinois engineer.
e. Provisions which will govern the use, maintenance and protection of access easements, off street parking spaces and common open
space within the area covered by such final plan unless such provisions have been included in the tentative development plan or in an
approved preliminary plan for the area covered by such final plan.
f. A rendered outline plan of the area covered by such final plan showing the boundaries of the land use areas, if such boundaries are
within the property covered by such final plan. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973)
g. A preliminary landscaping drawing of sufficient detail with respect to proposed landscaping, screening, fencing, pathways, lighting,
where necessary, and buffering, if any, so as to generally inform the planning and zoning commission and the board of trustees as to the
intentions of the developer in these matters. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
h. At the developer's option, a recordable plat of subdivision.
i. Architectural renderings of the proposed structures.
j. Exhibit 1, as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 437/548
5. Final plans for all of the area covered by the first preliminary plan required by subsection B5 of this section shall be submitted to the board
of trustees for approval within three (3) years after approval of such first preliminary plan by the board of trustees; provided, that upon
request in writing of the developer, the board of trustees may, at any time or from time to time, by resolution duly adopted at any meeting
of the board of trustees, extend the period of time for the submission of such final plans. Final plans covering all of the district shall be
submitted to the board of trustees for approval within such period of time as shall have been prescribed in the approval of the application
for establishment of the district, which shall be not more than twenty (20) years after adoption by the board of trustees of the amendment
establishing the district; provided, that upon request in writing of the developer, the board of trustees may, at any time and from time to
time, by resolution duly adopted at any meeting of the board of trustees, extend the period of time for submission of final plans covering all
of the district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 438/548
D. Standards:
1. Except for modifications and exceptions granted pursuant to subsection D2 of this section, a district shall be subject to all of the
regulations provided in this article. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973)
2. As part of the approval of the tentative development plan for a district or of a preliminary plan or a final plan for all or a part of a district, the
planning and zoning commission may recommend and the board of trustees may grant, for all or specified areas of the district,
modifications and exceptions from any provisions of this title or the village subdivision control ordinance and any other ordinances of the
village. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
3. A district shall be developed only in accordance with approved final plans. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973)
4. In granting or withholding approval of the tentative development plan, preliminary plans and final plans, the planning and zoning
commission and the board of trustees shall be guided in the reasonable exercise of their discretion by the following standards: (Ord. 73-
69, 12-20-1973; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
a. All plans shall be so designed that the public health, welfare and safety will be protected.
b. The proposed development of the district shall be such that it does not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the
neighborhood.
c. All plans shall provide for protection of both aesthetics and function of the natural environment, which shall include, but not be limited to,
conditions pertaining to floodplains, soil and geologic characteristics and preservation of vegetation.
d. All plans shall provide for and ensure the preservation of adequate and permanent open space.
e. Residential use areas shall have a variety of housing types and densities necessary to achieve a balanced neighborhood.
f. The district shall include land area necessary to accommodate cultural, educational, recreational and other public and quasi-public
activities necessary to serve the needs of the residents thereof.
g. The proposed development of the district shall provide for the orderly and creative arrangement of all land uses with respect to each
other and to the entire village.
h. The proposed development of the district shall provide for developed recreational activity areas necessary to serve the needs of the
residential portion of the district. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973)
i. The planning and zoning commission and the board of trustees need not approve any preliminary plan or final plan which deviates from
the tentative development plan where such deviation results in: (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
(1) A change which alters the concept, character or intent of the overall development as set forth in the tentative development plan or
any preliminary plan; or
(2) A change which would ultimately adversely affect the capacity of the public utilities then presently intended to be constructed by or
for the village, unless the developer agrees to eliminate any such adverse effect without cost to the village over and above the cost to
have been incurred by the village, if any, prior to such change. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973)
5. In addition to the standards provided in subsections D1 through D4 of this section, in considering a preliminary plan or final plan, the
planning and zoning commission and the board of trustees may disapprove such preliminary plan or final plan if, in their reasonable
discretion, such preliminary plan or final plan fails to provide a satisfactory relationship between different types of residential units within
the area covered by such preliminary plan or final plan as well as those existing or proposed in any adjacent area of the neighborhood in
which the land which is the subject of said preliminary plan or final plan is located; fails to reasonably provide and locate recreational
areas within the preliminary plan or final plan; fails to provide a usable and safe network of public and private roads for the neighborhood;
or otherwise fails, in accordance with good planning principles recognized by professional planners, to design a livable and healthful
modern environment within the standards set forth in this article; provided, however, that the village disapproval of any preliminary plan or
final plan or plans may not be for reasons which are inconsistent with the standards provided in this article. If a preliminary plan or final
plan is in conformity with good planning standards as aforesaid, it shall be approved. If such preliminary plan or final plan is not approved,
the developer shall be notified in writing of the basis for such disapproval and the manner in which such preliminary plan or final plan is not
in conformity with good planning standards as aforesaid. Where disagreement arises, such disagreement may, at the option of the
developer, be submitted to a nationally recognized professional land planner of the village's choice, excepting therefrom any planner then
engaged by the village, who shall mediate the matters in disagreement. The developer shall bear the entire reasonable cost of such
planner's study and opinion. The decision of such planner shall be advisory only and not binding upon the parties. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-
1973; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
E. Procedure For Approval Of Preliminary And Final Plans Or Developer's Requested Amendments:
1. Preliminary plans and final plans, or any requested amendments thereto, for all or specified phases of a district shall be submitted by the
developer to the village clerk with written application for approval. (Ord. 96-40, 9-9-1996)
2. The board of trustees shall refer each such preliminary or final plan, or any requested amendments thereto, to the planning and zoning
commission and to such village officers as it deems appropriate. (Ord. 96-40, 9-9-1996; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
3. The planning and zoning commission and the village officers to whom such plan is referred shall review the preliminary plan or final plan,
or requested amendments thereto, and if so directed by the board of trustees pursuant to subsection B2 or C2 of this section, the planning
and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing on a preliminary or final plan, or any requested amendments thereto, in accordance
with the provisions of subsections 11-5-3C, D, E and F of this title. The planning and zoning commission shall, within sixty (60) days from
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 439/548
the date of referral, after considering the preliminary or final plan at a public meeting noticed in the manner provided in subsections 11-3-
4C2a, C2b and C2d of this title, submit to the board of trustees its written recommendations with respect to the preliminary or final plan or
any requested amendments thereto, which recommendations shall include the recommendations of the village officers to whom such
plans are referred. The planning and zoning commission shall review the preliminary or final plan or any requested amendments thereto
and, subject to the provisions of subsections B and C of this section, may recommend, within the exercise of its reasonable discretion, that
the board of trustees approve or disapprove of such preliminary plan or final plan or any requested amendments thereto. In either case,
the planning and zoning commission shall set forth in writing the reasons for its recommendation, and may, in the event of a favorable
recommendation, specify particular conditions which should be incorporated in the approval of the preliminary or final plan or any
requested amendments thereto. (Ord. 96-40, 9-9-1996; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
4. Within forty five (45) days after receipt of the planning and zoning commission's recommendation, the board of trustees, within the
exercise of its reasonable discretion, shall either approve or disapprove the preliminary plan or final plan, or any requested amendments
thereto. An approval may be conditional and, if so, shall specifically state what additions or deletions from the preliminary plan or final
plan, or any requested amendments thereto, as submitted, shall be made in the preliminary plan or final plan or any requested
amendments thereto as approved. Such additions or deletions shall be shown on or attached to such approved preliminary plan or final
plan, or any requested amendments thereto.
5. A developer may request the planning and zoning commission to waive preliminary plan approval procedures for any area in a district,
and if such request is granted, the developer may, without having obtained approval of a preliminary plan covering the area, submit for
approval, in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this subsection and within the time period prescribed for submission of a
preliminary plan for the area, one or more final plans for the area. (Ord. 96-40, 9-9-1996; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
6. Promptly after approval of each final plan, or any requested amendments thereto, six (6) complete copies of such approved final plan, or
any requested amendments thereto, with all accompanying materials and data, shall be prepared at the developer's expense and
deposited with the Village Clerk. (Ord. 96-40, 9-9-1996)
F. Subdivision:
1. At the time of submission of any preliminary plan for all or part of a district, the developer may request that all or part of such preliminary
plan be considered and approved as a "preliminary plan" under the Village subdivision control ordinance, and at the time of submission of
a final plan for all or part of a district, the developer may request that all or part of such final plan be considered and approved as a "final
plan" under the Village subdivision control ordinance.
2. Approval of all or part of any preliminary plan also submitted for consideration and approval as a "preliminary plan" under the Village
subdivision control ordinance shall not be withheld for reasons that would be inconsistent with the tentative development plan theretofore
approved by the Board of Trustees in accordance with the provisions of this section. Any approval of such preliminary plan shall be
deemed an approval of a "preliminary plan" under the Village subdivision control ordinance, and in case of conflict between the
requirements for approval of a preliminary plan under this section and the requirements for approval of a "preliminary plan" under the
Village subdivision control ordinance, the requirements of this section shall control.
3. Approval of all or part of any final plan also submitted for consideration and approval as a "final plan" under the Village subdivision control
ordinance shall not be withheld for reasons that would be inconsistent with the tentative development plan or preliminary plans theretofore
approved by the Board of Trustees in accordance with the provisions of this section. However, any approval of such final plan shall be
deemed an approval of a "final plan" under the Village subdivision control ordinance only if the requirements of said subdivision control
ordinance are met.
4. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to require the subdivision of any part of a district.
G. Submission Of Updated Land Use Plans:
1. Submission With Preliminary Plans: At any time and from time to time, when a preliminary plan for a portion of the district is submitted for
approval, it shall be an obligation of the developer of such portion to cause the developer of the district to prepare and submit to the
Village with such preliminary plan an updated Land Use Plan for those areas in the district for which preliminary plans shall not then have
been submitted for approval.
2. Submission By Developer: At any time and from time to time, the developer of the district may submit to the Village an updated Land Use
Plan for any area in the district for which preliminary plans shall not then have been submitted for approval.
3. Annual Submissions: When no updated Land Use Plan for the district shall have been prepared for one year, the developer of the district
shall, unless the Village waives such obligation, prepare and submit to the Village a Land Use Plan for those areas in the district for which
preliminary plans shall not then have been submitted for approval.
H. Land Use Plans To Reflect Developer's Best Intentions: The Land Use Plan included as part of the tentative development plan, and each
updated Land Use Plan subsequently prepared and submitted in accordance with subsection G of this section shall, as of its date, reflect the
best intentions of the developer of the district with respect to the future development of the district into land use areas and the location of
such land use areas in the district. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973)
I. Permits: Building, zoning and occupancy permits shall be required for each structure in a district. No building permit relating to any part of a
district shall be issued prior to the approval of a final plan for such part of the district in accordance with the provisions of subsection E of this
section; provided, however, that subject to the approval of the Village Engineer, excavation operations may proceed at any time following
approval of the tentative development plan and without approval of a preliminary plan; and provided further, that construction of sewer, water
and other utility improvements as well as street and roadway improvements may proceed at any time following approval of the tentative
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 440/548
development plan and without approval of a preliminary plan upon compliance with the provisions of the Village subdivision control
ordinance. (Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
J. Changes In Land Use Plans Requiring Board Of Trustees Approval:
1. Changes in the land use plan included in the tentative development plan or in any updated land use plan prepared and submitted in
accordance with subsection G of this section which involve the relocation of a land use region in the district or the establishment of a new
land use region in the district shall require the approval, in the exercise of its reasonable discretion, of the board of trustees, which
approval may be obtained in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsections B2 and C2 of this section; provided, that except as
hereinafter set forth in this subsection, all other changes in any such land use plan including, but not limited to, the following, shall not
require a public hearing but shall require the approval, in the exercise of its reasonable discretion, of the board of trustees:
a. The relocation of one or more business use areas in a residential land use region, each of which contains no more than twenty five (25)
acres; and
b. The enlargement of a land use region into property contiguous to such land use region prior to such enlargement, the contraction of a
land use region or the elimination of a land use region, or the enlargement of a commercial area established or relocated pursuant to
subsection J1a of this section to a size greater than twenty five (25) acres; provided, that properties separated by highways, streets,
public ways or railroad or public utility rights of way shall be deemed contiguous for the purpose of this subsection J1b; and
c. Any changes in such land use plan which are deemed necessary or desirable by the developer of the district for which preliminary plans
shall not have been submitted for approval because of any of the following events and which are reasonably attributable to such event
or events:
(1) A change in the zoning classification of property adjacent to but outside the boundaries of the district; or
(2) The future location or elimination of major public transportation facilities or routes designed, in whole or in part, to serve the district;
or
(3) The enactment of any municipal, state or federal ordinance or law or the issuance of any executive or judicial ordinance or decree.
2. In a business land use region, the enlargement of a commercial use area into property contiguous to such use area prior to such
enlargement, and the enlargement of a residential use area within the boundaries of the same neighborhood at the same density as the
area being enlarged prior to such enlargement, shall be permitted without requiring the approval of the board of trustees; provided, that
such enlargement does not result in a percentage of use of land in such region in excess of the percentage permitted in the tentative
development plan; and provided further, that such enlargement does not result in a use of land in an area designated on the tentative
development plan as an area not contemplated for such use; provided, however, that the reduction of a commercial use area shall not be
allowed where the remaining commercial use area could be reasonably characterized as susceptible to strip commercial development.
(Ord. 73-69, 12-20-1973)
Chapter 11
OTP OLD TOWN PRESERVATION DISTRICT
11-11-1: BOUNDARIES:
A. All parcels of land within the corporate limits of the village with frontage on the following streets or portions thereof shall be included in the old
town district: (Ord. 2006-03, 1-23-2006; amd. 2012 Code)
Lake Street (U.S. 20) from Rosedale Avenue on the west to a point 75 feet more or less west of the west line of Ridge Avenue; the west side
of Ridge Avenue, from Schick Road to a point 403.24 feet more or less north of the north line of Schick Road; the north side of Schick Road
from a point 224.4 feet more or less west of Day Street extended to the west line of Ridge Avenue; Day Street from Schick Road to the north
terminus; Third Street from Schick Road to Lake Street (U.S. 20); the west side of Bloomingdale Road from Schick Road to the south line of
the Meacham Grove Forest Preserve; the east side of Bloomingdale Road from Schick Road to a point 267 feet more or less south of Log
Lodge Drive; Walter Court from Park Avenue to the south terminus; Franklin Street from Third Street to First Street; and Washington Street
from Day Street to First Street; including all parcels existing or created within the boundary lines described.
B. The boundaries of the old town district shall remain unchanged. There shall, however, be created a core area and a transition area, the
boundaries of which are depicted on the old town plan attached as exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein which exhibit is made a part
hereof. (Ord. 2006-03, 1-23-2006)
11-11-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
A. The old town preservation district is an overlay district intended to provide a mechanism whereby those structures, sites, and neighborhoods
in the village, which are determined to have historic, architectural, aesthetic, or cultural significance, may be preserved and enjoyed in a
suitable harmonious environment. (Ord. 2006-03, 1-23-2006; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Furthermore, it is the purpose of the old town preservation district to strengthen the economy of the village by stabilizing and enhancing
property values in historic areas, and to encourage new construction and restoration of, renovation of, and rehabilitation of existing buildings
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 441/548
that will be harmonious with historic sites and structures.
C. Such preservation, restoration, and rehabilitation of existing structures, as well as new construction, shall comply with the old town plan
attached as exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 2006-03, 1-23-2006)
11-11-3: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ALTERATION: Any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior architectural features of a structure.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE: The architectural style, design, general arrangement and components of all of the outer surfaces of
an improvement, as distinguished from the interior surfaces enclosed by said exterior surfaces, including, but not limited to, the kind of building
material and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs and other fixtures appurtenant to such improvement, visible from public
streets and thoroughfares.
IMPROVEMENT: Any building, structure, place, parking facility, fence, gate, wall, work of art or other object constituting a physical betterment of
real property, or any part of such betterment.
INTERIOR: The visible surfaces of the interior of an improvement.
ORDINARY REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE: Any work done on or replacement of any part of a property or an improvement for which the
purpose or effect of such work or replacement is:
A. To correct any deterioration or decay of or damage to such improvement, or any part thereof, and to restore the same, as nearly as may
be practicable, to its condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration, decay or damage; or
B. To improve the condition of an existing use or structure on the property to a level that would be allowed if it were located elsewhere in the
village.
OWNER: Any person, group of persons, partnership, corporation or other legal entity holding legal or equitable title to real estate located within
the village of Bloomingdale including, but not limited to, contract purchasers and all of the beneficiaries under a land trust.
PLAN: The proposal for development of a special use, including a plat of survey, architectural or equivalent drawings and renderings, all
covenants, grants of easement and other conditions relating to use, location and bulk of buildings, density of development and nature and
purpose of the business or service to be conducted upon the property. The plan shall include all information required by this chapter. The phrase
"provisions of the plan", where used in this chapter, shall mean those documents, verbal or graphic, referred to in this definition.
SPECIAL USE: A use that, because of its unique characteristics, may be allowed only after special consideration of its impact upon neighboring
land and of public need for the use at the particular location. Such uses may include, but are not limited to, public and quasi-public uses affected
with the public interest, uses which may have a unique, special or unusual impact upon the use or enjoyment of neighboring property, and
planned developments. (Ord. 2006-03, 1-23-2006; amd. Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
11-11-4: USES:
A. With the exception of uses described in subsection B of this section, all uses in the old town preservation district shall be special uses, and
shall be allowed in the manner for special uses and in keeping with the terms and conditions of this title. Unless otherwise specified under
the terms of a special use permit, the building height and bulk regulations of the underlying zoning classification shall remain in effect. Said
uses shall be consistent with the land use recommendations contained in the old town plan attached as exhibit A to ordinance 2006-03.
(Ord. 2011-10, 2-28-2011)
B. The following uses and plans do not require a special use permit:
1. Alterations, additions, renovation, and restoration of single-family residential structures built after 1933 and existing at the effective date
hereof. (Ord. 2006-03, 1-23-2006)
2. Construction of new single-family residential structures; provided, that the property is properly zoned. Plans for said structures shall be
reviewed by the building and zoning official for compatibility with the old town environment and plan. Should the building and zoning official
determine that the structure is not compatible with the old town environment or plan, the owner may request a special use permit,
requiring planning and zoning commission review and village board approval. (Ord. 2006-03, 1-23-2006; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48,
10-27-2014)
C. 1. Unless otherwise authorized to the contrary by a development ordinance granting a special use permit, planned development or site plan
approval, or in accordance with the provisions of subsection B of this section, changes of use shall be made as in the manner prescribed for
special uses.
2. For purposes of this chapter, a new occupant or tenant shall be considered a change in use when at least one of the following two (2)
circumstances applies:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 442/548
a. There is a change in use within a building entirety or tenant space between a retail business and either a personal service
establishment, business service establishment, professional office establishment, or special use as defined in sections 11-8C-2 and 11-
8C-4 of this title.
b. There is a change in use within a building entirety or tenant space whereby the new use has a higher parking space requirement than
the previous use, or the new use is a higher intensity use by virtue of having a greater number of employees, customers, or vehicular
traffic than the previous use in such location. (Ord. 2011-10, 2-28-2011)
D. Only the following special uses may be permitted, subject to review and approval as detailed in subsection 11-11-5C of this chapter:
1. All of the permitted and special uses in the B-1 neighborhood business district are permitted as special uses, excluding the following
permitted and special uses:
Dry cleaning and laundry receiving establishment.
Nursery school, children's day school, day nursery, childcare center, and daycare center, unless operated on the premises of a church.
(Ord. 2006-03, 1-23-2006)
2. All of the permitted and special uses in the B-2 community business district are permitted as special uses. (Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
3. Only the following uses in the B-3 general service business district are permitted as special uses in old town:
Drive-through restaurants located in the northeast quadrant of Bloomingdale Road and Lake Street, as defined by the old town plan;
provided, however, that:
a. The restaurant is located on a parcel of adequate size to be able to accommodate required building setbacks from abutting arterials.
b. Access does not conflict with turn lanes associated with the planned widening of Lake Street and Bloomingdale Road.
c. The architectural design, materials, scale, and color styling of the restaurant is consistent with the turn of the century theme established
for the old town district.
d. Landscaping is provided consistent with requirements of this chapter and chapter 4 of this title.
e. The site is illuminated by the Sternberg light standards and luminaries adopted for the old town district, or approved equivalent.
f. Signs are externally illuminated.
g. The village board finds, upon recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, that the drive-through restaurant is necessary
and desirable, and is not inconsistent with the standards, conditions and criteria set forth in this chapter.
Museum. (Ord. 2006-03, 1-23-2006; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
4. The additional following use(s) shall be permitted as special uses:
Microbreweries, as defined by section 11-2-2 of this title. (Ord. 2017-09, 3-13-2017)
5. All of the permitted uses in R-1, R-2, R-2B, R-2C, R-3, and R-4 districts are allowed as special uses in addition to the following special
uses:
Art galleries and museums.
Churches.
Libraries.
Parks and playgrounds.
Planned developments.
Utility and public service uses.
However, consistent with subsection B2 of this section, new single-family residential structures do not require a special use permit if
consistent with the underlying zoning, and the village building and zoning official determines the structure is compatible with the character
of old town. (Ord. 2006-03, 1-23-2006; amd. Ord. 2014-46, 10-27-2014; Ord. 2017-09, 3-13-2017)
6. Uses similar to and compatible with the specifically listed permitted special uses in subsections D1, D2, D3 and D5 of this section, as
determined through the special use permit process established in section 11-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 2006-03, 1-23-2006; amd. 2012 Code;
Ord. 2017-09, 3-13-2017)
11-11-5: APPROVAL OF SPECIAL USE:
A. Criteria: The proposed plan shall be consistent with the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 443/548
1. The land use, design, and signage recommendations contained in the old town plan attached as exhibit A to the ordinance codified
herein.
2. This title, including chapter 4, "Site Development And Plan Review", of this title.
3. The land use limitations contained in subsection 11-11-4C of this chapter.
4. The special use criteria contained in section 11-3-4 of this title.
B. Submittals:
1. The owner shall submit documentation in compliance with chapter 4 of this title.
2. The owner shall submit a written statement describing the proposed plan, provide a basis for any requested exceptions to this title, and
set forth the reasons, in his opinion, the special use permit would be consistent with the village objectives for the old town preservation
district.
3. The owner shall submit a written statement explaining why the proposed use satisfies the special use criteria contained in section 11-3-4
of this title.
C. Procedure: Plans shall be reviewed in the manner of a special use permit as described in section 11-3-4 of this title, applying the criteria
outlined in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 2006-03, 1-23-2006)
11-11-6: SIGNAGE:
All signage shall be consistent with the sign guidelines contained in the old town plan attached as exhibit A to ordinance 2006-03 as determined
by the building and zoning official through the issuance of a sign permit. Signage proposed that is not consistent with these guidelines shall be
reviewed as an exception to the sign ordinance, requiring a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission at a public meeting and
approval by the village board. (Ord. 2006-03, 1-23-2006; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
11-11-7: EXTERIOR PAINTING:
A. Exterior painting of walls and trim shall require a permit to be issued by the building and zoning official that shall be granted so long as the
colors used shall comply with the appropriate color palette outlined in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2006-03, 1-23-2006; amd. 2012
Code)
B. Approved exterior colors include the Benjamin Moore historical color selection, or approved equivalent, or such other appropriate color
approved by the building and zoning official, with recommendation from the planning and zoning commission and approval of the village
board. (Ord. 2006-03, 1-23-2006; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
11-11-8: FENCING:
All new fencing shall obtain a building permit prior to installation, and shall conform to the requirements of chapter 19, "Fencing And Screening",
of this title. In addition to the requirements established in chapter 19, "Fencing And Screening", of this title, all fencing shall conform to the
supplemental requirements of this section, as follows:
A. For properties where the fencing is proposed to be adjacent to Third Street, Day Street, Franklin Street, Washington Street, and First Street,
fencing shall be limited to picket style, and constructed of wood, or equivalent material approved by the building commissioner.
B. For properties where the fencing is proposed to be adjacent to Lake Street (U.S. 20), Bloomingdale Road, or Schick Road, fencing shall be
limited to: 1) picket style with wood construction or equivalent material approved by the building commissioner, or 2) black wrought iron, or
black powder coated aluminum to resemble wrought iron.
C. Fences that exist on properties prior to the effective date hereof that do not comply with subsections A and B of this section shall be deemed
nonconforming. Continued use of said existing fences shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 12, "Nonconforming Buildings, Structures
And Uses", of this title.
Unless superseded by specific provisions for fencing in ordinances approved for individual properties within the district, the requirements of
this section are applicable to all property within the old town preservation district, regardless of the zoning designation of each such property
located in the district or the use(s) established on each such property. (Ord. 2012-27, 6-11-2012)
11-11-9: APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 444/548
A. The specific terms and conditions of this chapter shall prevail against other existing ordinances of the village to the extent that there may be
any conflict, and apply to those properties designated with the "old town special use" as of the date of the adoption of this code amendment
and those properties obtaining such designation after the date of the adoption of this code amendment. (Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
B. All special use permits or conditional use ordinances heretofore granted or approved for particular sites shall remain in full force and effect.
Provided, however, if any special use or conditional use previously established pursuant to a prior ordinance has been discontinued for a
continuous period of eighteen (18) months, it shall be deemed abandoned, and the use of the property must be in compliance with the terms
of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-03, 1-23-2006; amd. Ord. 2012-27, 6-11-2012)
Chapter 12
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
11-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming uses, buildings, and structures, and to specify those circumstances
and conditions under which those nonconforming buildings, structures, and uses may be continued. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-12-2: AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES:
A. Any nonconforming building, structure, or use which existed lawfully at the effective date hereof, and which remains nonconforming, and any
such building, structure or use which shall become nonconforming upon the effective date hereof, or of any subsequent amendment hereto,
may be continued in accordance with the applicable regulations of this chapter.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, a building or structure lawfully constructed or established on the effective date hereof shall be deemed to
include any building or structure for which a building permit has been issued prior to such date and on which construction is begun within the
required period of time as set forth in this title. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-12-3: EXEMPT BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES:
A. No building, structure, or use lawfully established on the effective date hereof shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter solely by
reason of being nonconforming with respect to the applicable standards prescribed in this title for any of the following:
1. Floor area ratio.
2. Yards - front, side, rear, or transitional.
3. Lot area per dwelling unit.
4. Lot width.
5. Ground floor area per dwelling.
6. Gross floor area.
7. Performance standards.
8. Off street parking or loading spaces.
B. No building, or part thereof, lawfully existing on the effective date hereof, which is designed and used or intended for use as a dwelling, shall
be subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-12-4: RESTRICTIONS ON NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES:
Any lawfully existing building or structure which does not conform with the regulations of the district in which it is located shall be subject to the
provisions of this section. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
A. Repairs And Alterations: Ordinary repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming building or structure; provided, that no structural
alterations shall be made in or to such building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in
the district in which it is located, except those required by law, or except to make the building or structure, and use thereof, conform to the
regulations of the district in which it is located. Ordinary repairs and alterations shall be determined by the building and zoning official and
shall include, among other things, the replacement of storage tanks where the safety of the operation of the installation requires such
replacement. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 445/548
B. Additions And Enlargements: A nonconforming building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not
permitted in the district in which it is located, shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such nonconforming building or
structure, and use thereof, including all additions and enlargements thereto, is made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which it
is located.
C. Moving: No building or structure, which does not conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located, shall be moved, in whole
or in part, to any other location unless every portion of such building or structure is moved and is made to conform to all regulations of the
district into which it is moved.
D. Restoration Of Damaged Nonconforming Building: A building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use
which is not permitted in the district in which it is located, and which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God, may be
restored to its original bulk and used for the use existing at the time of damage; provided, that restoration is started within eighteen (18)
months after the damage occurred. However, in the event the restoration of a building or structure which is destroyed or damaged by fire or
other casualty or act of God, to the extent that the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was before the occurrence will exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the cost of the restoration of the entire building or structure new, is not started within eighteen (18) months after the
damage occurred, said building or structure, and the use thereof, shall thereafter be made to conform to all regulations of the district in which
it is located.
E. Discontinuance Of Use Of Nonconforming Building Or Structure: A building or structure, or portion thereof, all or substantially all of which is
designed or intended for a use which is not permitted in the district in which it is located, and which is vacant on the effective date hereof or
hereafter becomes vacant and remains unoccupied, or is not used for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) days, shall not
thereafter be occupied or used except by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
F. Expansion Of Use In Nonconforming Building Or Structure: The nonconforming use of a part of a building or structure may be expanded
within the building or structure in which said use is presently located, but no changes or structural alterations shall be made unless such
changes or structural alterations, and the use thereof, conform to all the regulations of the district in which the building or structure is located.
G. Change Of Use In Nonconforming Building Or Structure: A nonconforming use of a nonconforming building or structure may be changed to a
use permitted in the district in which the building or structure is located; or in residence districts, a building designed or intended for business
use, which lawfully exists within the village limits on the effective date hereof, may be changed to a use permitted in a B-1 neighborhood
business district; but no change shall extend or modify any other applicable provisions of this chapter.
H. Elimination Of Nonconforming Buildings And Structures:
1. Any building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located,
shall be removed and its use thereafter shall cease, or shall be converted to a building or structure designed or intended for a use
permitted in the district in which it is located in accordance with the following conditions and amortization schedules:
a. In all residence districts, any building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use permitted only in a
business or manufacturing district, shall be removed, or it shall be altered and converted to a building or structure designed for a use
permitted in the district in which it is located within six (6) months after the termination of the respective period of time as set forth below.
b. Any building or structure which is located in a B-1 or B-2 district and which is designed or intended for a use permitted only in M districts
shall be removed, or shall be altered, remodeled, or converted for a permitted use within six (6) months after the termination of the life of
such building or structure which is hereby established in accordance with the following respective amortization period:
(1) Assessed valuation more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00): In accordance with the types of construction classifications set forth
in the building code of the village.
(A) Fireproof construction and noncombustible construction: Forty (40) years from the date of the building permit, or twenty five (25)
years from the effective date hereof, whichever last occurs.
(B) Exterior masonry wall construction: Thirty (30) years from the date of the building permit, or twenty (20) years from the effective
date hereof, whichever last occurs.
(C) Frame construction: Twenty (20) years from the date of the building permit, or ten (10) years from the effective date hereof,
whichever last occurs.
(2) Assessed valuation at least two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) but not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00): Eight (8) years
from the date of the building permit or four (4) years from the effective date hereof, whichever last occurs.
(3) Assessed valuation under two thousand dollars ($2,000.00): Four (4) years from the date of the building permit or two (2) years from
the effective date hereof, whichever last occurs.
2. The nonconforming use of a building or structure shall be terminated at the end of the amortization period of said building or structure as
set forth in subsection H1 of this section and shall not thereafter be operated on the premises. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-12-5: NONCONFORMING USE OF CONFORMING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 446/548
The lawfully existing nonconforming use of a part or all of a building or structure, all or substantially all of which building or structure is designed
or intended for a use permitted in the district in which it is located, may be continued subject to the following provisions:
A. Expansion Of Nonconforming Use: The nonconforming use of a part of a building or structure, all or substantially all of which building or
structure is designed or intended for a use permitted in the district in which it is located, shall not be expanded or extended into any other
portion of such building or structure, nor changed to any other nonconforming use.
B. Discontinuance: If a nonconforming use of a building or structure, all or substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended
for a use permitted in the district in which it is located, is discontinued for a period of ten (10) days, it shall not be renewed; and any
subsequent use of the building or structure shall conform to the use regulations of the district in which the premises is located.
C. Change Of A Nonconforming Use: No nonconforming use shall be changed to another nonconforming use when such nonconforming use is
located in a building or structure, all or substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended for a permitted use.
D. Elimination Of Nonconforming Uses: In all residence districts, any use which lawfully exists at the effective date hereof, but is permitted only
in a business or manufacturing district, and which is located in a building, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a
residential purpose, shall be entirely discontinued and shall thereafter cease operation within five (5) years from the effective date hereof.
(Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-12-6: NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND:
The nonconforming use of land not involving a building or structure, or in connection with which any building or structure thereon is incidental or
accessory to the principal use of land, may be continued subject to the following provisions:
A. Expansion: A nonconforming use of land shall not be expanded or extended beyond the area it occupies.
B. Discontinuance: If a nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive months, it shall not thereafter be renewed,
and any subsequent use of land shall conform to the regulations of the district in which the land is located.
C. Change Of Use: A nonconforming use of land shall not be changed to any other use except to a use permitted in the district in which the land
is located.
D. Elimination Of Use: The nonconforming use of land shall be discontinued and cease in accordance with the following; except, that in R-1 and
R-2 districts, the allowable term shall be reduced by fifty percent (50%):
1. Where no buildings or structures are employed in connection with such use: Discontinued within one year.
2. Where the only buildings or structures or other physical improvements employed are accessory or incidental to such use and have an
assessed valuation not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00): Discontinued within two (2) years.
3. Where the improvements, underground or substantially at ground level, which comprise all or substantially all of the improvements
employed in a nonconforming use of land and which have an assessed value of more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00): Discontinued
within five (5) years.
4. Where such use is maintained in connection with a conforming building or structure; except, that inadequate off street parking facilities
used in connection with a building, the use of which complies with the requirements of the district in which it is located, may be continued
for so long as the premises is so used.
5. Where a nonconforming use of land is accessory to the nonconforming use of a building or structure: Discontinued on the same date on
which the nonconforming use of the building or structure is discontinued. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
Chapter 13
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
11-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is for the public health, safety, general welfare and best interest of the residents of the village by provisions
designed:
A. To increase safety and lessen congestion in public streets;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 447/548
B. To meet the need for loading and parking facilities generated by the development of land and the associated increase of automobile and
truck usage;
C. To minimize the on street parking of vehicles;
D. To set standards for the requirements of off street loading and parking facilities according to the amount of estimated traffic generated by a
particular use;
E. To require adequate protection for contiguous property against undesirable effects from the creation and operation of loading and parking
areas; and
F. To protect and preserve the appearance and character of neighborhoods within and adjacent to the village through screening and
landscaping of off street loading and parking facilities. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
11-13-2: SCOPE:
The scope of this chapter is as follows:
A. General Conditions:
1. Accessory off street loading and off street parking facilities for all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established in each
district as of the effective date hereof shall be subject to the regulations of this chapter.
2. Where a building permit has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date hereof, and construction of said use is
completed within eighteen (18) months of said effective date, off street loading and parking facilities requirements as were provided by law
at the time of the issuance of said building permit may be provided in lieu of any different requirements provided by this chapter, and upon
completion, said use be occupied under the use for which it was originally designated.
B. Existing Loading And Parking Facilities: Accessory off street loading and parking facilities in existence as of the effective date hereof and
which serve an existing building, structure, or use of land shall not, hereafter, be reduced below the requirements of this chapter for a similar
new building, structure, or use of land.
C. Change Of Existing Use:
1. Whenever the existing use of a building, structure or land shall hereafter be changed to a new use, off street loading and parking facilities
shall conform to the requirements as provided by this chapter.
2. The provisions specified in subsection C1 of this section shall apply to uses of buildings, structures, or land which are established as of or
after the effective date hereof, or which uses are noncomplying as to off street loading and parking requirements under the provisions of
this chapter or any previous zoning ordinances of the village.
D. Increase In Intensity Of Use:
1. Whenever the intensity of use of any building, structure, or land shall be increased through addition of dwelling units, gross floor area,
design capacity, seating capacity, employees, or other units of measurement specified in this chapter for required off street loading or
parking facilities, off street loading and parking facilities, as required herein, shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use, and
said loading and parking requirements shall be applied to the entire building, structure, or land as modified.
2. The provisions specified in subsection D1 of this section shall apply to uses of buildings, structures, or land which are established as of or
after the effective date hereof, or which are noncomplying as to off street loading and parking requirements under the provisions of this
chapter or any previous zoning ordinances of the village.
E. Permissive Loading And Parking Facilities: No provisions in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment or increase
of off street loading or parking facilities to serve an existing use of a building, structure, or land; provided, that there is adherence to all
regulations contained in this chapter governing the location, design, improvement, operation and control of such facilities.
F. Damage Or Destruction:
1. For any conforming or nonconforming building or use which is in existence on the effective date hereof, and which is subsequently
damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or other cause, said building or use may be reconstructed, reestablished or repaired;
provided, that off street loading and parking facilities, in an amount equivalent to that maintained at the time of such damage or
destruction, shall be restored or continued in operation.
2. In no case shall it be necessary to restore or maintain loading or parking facilities in excess of those required by this chapter for equivalent
new uses or construction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 448/548
G. Timing Of Construction Of Facilities: Off street loading and parking facilities, as required by this chapter, shall be constructed at the time of
erection, establishment, alteration, or enlargement of the building, structure, or use of land for which they are required to serve. (Ord. 90-59,
10-8-1990)
H. Use Of Parking Facilities:
1. Required off street parking lots shall be used solely for the parking of fully and independently operable, mobile motorized vehicles
weighing eight thousand (8,000) pounds or less and bearing a class designation of "A" or "B"; and used by patrons, occupants (or their
guests) or employees of those uses served by such off street parking facilities, and for the conduct of such uses served by such off street
parking facilities, parked solely in designated parking spaces and not in or on fire lanes, drive aisles, driveways, or median strips. Those
vehicles greater than eight thousand (8,000) pounds bearing a class designation of "D" or greater shall be parked or stored in a village
approved loading area, in accordance with the applicable off street parking and loading requirements for the zoning district in which such
vehicles are located, except as otherwise permitted in approved development ordinances or as described in subsection H2 of this section.
The vehicle classifications mentioned in this subsection H1 are references to those established by the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 2012-27,
6-11-2012)
2. Notwithstanding subsection H1 of this section, the following vehicles may be parked in an off street parking facility:
a. Vans or small buses not in excess of twenty feet (20') in length used in the transportation of children to and from daycare centers, and
residents of assisted living or residential care facilities.
b. Passenger vehicles and vans not in excess of twenty feet (20') in length used to provide delivery or repair service to customers so long
as the number of vehicles so parked does not exceed the lesser of ten (10) vehicles or five percent (5%) of the total number of off street
parking spaces in the parking lot of the principal use in which such vehicles are parked.
c. Delivery and service vehicles parked in off street parking facilities and in excess of the lesser of ten (10) vehicles or five percent (5%) of
the total number of off street parking spaces in said parking facility of the principal use in which such vehicles are parked prior to
February 28, 2011, shall be deemed legally nonconforming.
d. Recreational vehicles, semitractor trailers, school buses, or other similar vehicles, the size of which requires more than one parking
space, may park in a parking lot that serves the principal use to which the operator and/or passengers of each such vehicle are patrons
during the period for which the business is open to customers for the period necessary to patronize such principal use, but, in any event,
not to exceed two (2) hours. In no instance shall any vehicle block any drive aisle within a parking facility.
e. Recreational vehicles, semitractor trailers, or other similar vehicles requiring more than one parking space may park in commercial
parking facilities if they are required to provide services for special events for which a temporary land use permit has been issued by the
Village to the shopping center or business located on said commercial lot for a period not to exceed twelve (12) hours.
3. Each required parking space shall be kept available at all times for parking of one passenger motor vehicle, subject to the exceptions of
subsection H2 of this section.
4. No required parking space shall be rented, leased or used for any purpose other than to park a fully and independently operable, mobile
vehicle in connection with the principal use for which said parking space and the parking lot of which it is a part is required.
5. For applications requiring site plan review or zoning relief received subsequent to February 28, 2011, loading docks, nonpassenger
service or delivery vehicle parking shall be incorporated into the overall design of the site plan and building; and masonry building
elements, which coordinate with the principal building, fencing, landscaping, or some combination thereof, shall screen the visual and
acoustic impacts of these functions from adjacent properties and public streets.
6. The requirements of this chapter are applicable to all property within the Village, regardless of the zoning district in which each such
property is located or the use(s) established on each such property, unless superseded by specific provisions regarding the amount,
timing, placement, and duration of nonpassenger delivery, service or recreational vehicle parking contained within parcel specific
development ordinances approving relief from such requirements. In the event of any violation of the requirements of this chapter, both the
building and zoning official and the Police Department shall be, and are hereby, authorized to issue citations therefor and perform any
lawful action to enforce conformance with this chapter. Such enforcement action may be taken against the offending vehicle operator or
owner and the owner of the property on which such violation occurs. (Ord. 2011-10, 2-28-2011)
11-13-3: SUBMISSION OF SITE PLAN AND LAND USE DATA:
A. All applications for a building permit shall include a site plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing all off street loading and parking
facilities to be provided as required by this chapter. Data shall be provided specifying:
1. The use of the building, structure or land; and
2. The number of dwelling units, gross floor area, design capacity, seating capacity, number of employees, or other units of measurement
specified in this chapter for determining the amount of off street loading and parking facilities to be provided as required by this chapter.
B. All parking areas, including entrances and exits, shall be designed in accordance with the off street parking chart in section 11-13-4-1 of this
chapter.
C. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all parking facilities shall be considered in relation to the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 449/548
1. Existing and planned streets;
2. Reasonable circulation for traffic within and adjacent to parking areas;
3. Topographical conditions and runoff of stormwater; and
4. Public convenience and safety. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
D. No site development permit, building permit or occupancy certificate shall be issued until the site plan, showing all required off street loading
and parking facilities, has been reviewed and approved by the Village Planner and Village Engineer. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. 2012
Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
11-13-4: OFF STREET PARKING REGULATIONS:
A. Definitions: The following words and phrases, when used in this section, shall, for the purpose of this section, have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in this subsection, except when the context otherwise requires:
ANTIQUE VEHICLE: A motor vehicle that is more than twenty five (25) years of age, or a bona fide replica thereof, and which is driven on
the highways only going to and returning from an antique auto show or an exhibition, or for servicing or demonstration, or a firefighting
vehicle more than twenty (20) years old which is not used as firefighting equipment but is used only for the purpose of exhibition or
demonstration.
BUS: Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten (10) passengers and used for the transportation of persons; and every
motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
CAMPER: A recreational motor vehicle of the second division converted or equipped and primarily used for living quarters or for human
habitation rather than for the transportation of freight, goods, wares and merchandise and not used as a commercial vehicle.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A motor vehicle licensed by the state as a "commercial vehicle", or any vehicle used in a commercial enterprise
and/or containing lettering on the vehicle body advertising a commercial enterprise.
COMMUTER VAN: A motor vehicle having a capacity of twelve (12) to fifteen (15) persons, owned or leased by a company or an
employee organization, and operated on a nonprofit basis with the primary purpose of transporting employees of the company between
the employees' homes and the company's place of business or a public transportation station, and in which the operating, administrative,
maintenance and reasonable depreciation costs are paid principally by the persons utilizing the van.
EXPLOSIVES: Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an
explosion and which contains any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or packing that an
ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden
generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects
or of destroying life or limb.
FLAMMABLE LIQUID: Any liquid which has a flashpoint of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) or less, as determined by a Tagliabue or
equivalent closed cup test device.
FLOOR AREA: When applied as the basis of measurement for off street parking spaces for any use, shall be the sum of the gross
horizontal area of the several floors of the building or buildings, excluding:
1. Areas used for off street parking and off street loading facilities;
2. The horizontal areas of the basement and cellar floors that are devoted exclusively to uses accessory to the operation of the entire
building; and
3. The horizontal areas of boiler and mechanical rooms used for heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment, whether located on
the roof or within the building.
HOUSE CAR: A recreational motor vehicle of the first division converted or equipped and primarily used for living quarters or for human
habitation rather than as a passenger car, and not used as a commercial vehicle.
HOUSE TRAILER: 1. A recreational trailer or semitrailer equipped and used for living quarters or for human habitation (temporarily or
permanently) rather than for the transportation of freight, goods, wares and merchandise; or
2. A house trailer or a semitrailer which is used commercially (temporarily or permanently), that is, for the advertising, sales, display or
promotion of merchandise or services, or for any other commercial purpose except the transportation of property for hire or the
transportation of property for distribution by a private carrier.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 450/548
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead
trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. For this definition, "motor vehicles" are divided into two (2) divisions:
First Division: Those motor vehicles which are designed for the carrying of not more than ten (10) persons.
Second Division: Those motor vehicles which are designed for carrying more than ten (10) persons, those designed or used for living
quarters and those motor vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying freight or cargo, and those motor vehicles of the first
division remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of the second division.
OWNER: A person who holds legal title of a motor vehicle, or in the event a motor vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the
conditional sale or lease thereof, with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an
immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of such motor vehicle is entitled to
possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the "owner" for the purpose of this definition.
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
PARKING FACILITY: A building, structure, area, lot or part of a lot where off street parking is provided or permitted.
PARKING LOT: A parking facility where four (4) or more motor vehicles, in operable condition, are parked, whether or not a fee is charged;
where no equipment or parts are sold and motor vehicles are not processed, rebuilt, serviced, repaired, hired or sold; and where fuel,
grease, oil or other similar commodities are not dispensed.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE: A suitably surfaced and permanently maintained area on publicly or privately owned property or lot,
either within or outside of a building, of sufficient size to store one standard automobile, in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter, exclusive of passageways, driveways, or other means of circulation or access.
PASSENGER CAR: A motor vehicle of the first division, including a multipurpose passenger vehicle, that is designed for carrying not more
than ten (10) persons.
POLE TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by
means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or
irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the
supporting connections.
PRIVATE LIVING COACH: A recreational motor vehicle of the second division equipped and primarily used for living quarters, for human
habitation or for mobile living, rather than for the transportation of persons, with direct access to the living quarters from the driver's seat
and not used as a commercial vehicle.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Every vehicle originally designed or permanently converted and primarily used for living quarters or for
human habitation, or for sporting or entertainment purposes, and not used as a commercial vehicle. Such "recreational vehicles" do not
have a private passenger auto license plate and include, but are not necessarily limited to, house cars, house trailers, campers, private
living coaches, trailers, motorboats, mobile homes, off road motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), snowmobiles, jet skis, and wave
runners, with or without trailers, and any other vehicle stored on trailers. Off street parking for "recreational vehicles" shall be consistent
with the provisions contained in this chapter.
SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being
drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
TOW TRUCK: Every truck designed or altered and equipped for and used to push, tow or draw disabled vehicles by means of a crane,
hoist, towbar, towline or auxiliary axle, and to render assistance to disabled vehicles.
TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for
being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
TRUCK-TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load
other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. (Ord. 78-39, 10-9-1978; amd. Ord. 90-57, 10-8-1990; Ord. 90-58, 10-8-
1990; Ord. 2003-41, 11-17-2003; Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
B. Location:
1. All required off street parking facilities, which serve a building, structure, or land use, which are erected, established, altered, enlarged, or
intensified after the effective date hereof, and all such parking facilities which are established or increased voluntarily pursuant to this
chapter, shall be located on the same lot as the building, structure, or use of land to be served. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
2. If it is determined by the Village Planner and the Village Engineer that there are particular difficulties in locating off street parking facilities
on the same lot, and the use would be better served by providing parking on a different lot, the following provisions shall be met: (Ord. 90-
59, 10-8-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
a. The parking facility shall begin within three hundred feet (300'), including streets, of the building, structure, or land to be served; and
b. The parking facility shall be located in the same zoning district as that of the use to be served.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 451/548
3. Under no circumstances shall off street parking required to serve single-family and two-family residences be located on other than the
same lot as the residence to be served.
C. Collective Parking Facilities:
1. In any zoning district, where compatible, collective off street parking facilities for different buildings, structures, uses, or mixed uses may
be permitted by the Village as a special use.
2. The total number of spaces to be provided may be less than the sum of the separate parking requirements specified in section 11-13-4-2
of this chapter, for each building or use; provided, that:
a. The parking to be provided for individual land uses shall reflect the actual peak demand for parking as defined by ordinance;
b. The land uses and the shared parking facility shall be owned by the same developer, owner, public agency or the Village;
c. The land uses and the shared parking facility shall be located close enough to one another so that individuals would be willing to walk to
each use from most points in the parking facility;
d. Parking spaces to be shared shall not be reserved for certain individuals or groups on a twenty four (24) hour basis;
e. Any subsequent change in land uses within the mixed development shall require a new occupancy permit and proof that sufficient
parking shall be available; and (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
f. Parking spaces to be shared through the use of a collective parking facility, as provided by this subsection, may provide for the sharing
of a maximum of sixty percent (60%) of the total parking spaces to be provided for all buildings, structures, or land uses being served by
said collective parking facility. (Ord. 2007-20, 5-24-2007)
3. The parking facility shall be subject to the procedures and requirements for the grant of a special use permit as specified in section 11-3-4
of this title. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
D. Land Banking: The Village Board may approve land banking of some off street parking spaces; provided, that:
1. Sufficient evidence is presented that the spaces to be constructed sufficiently accommodate the parking needs for the project; and
2. The area of the subject property where the parking spaces are to be land banked shall be illustrated on all site plans depicting the
improvement of the subject property in the manner proposed; and
3. The ordinance approving the project shall be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder. (Ord. 2007-20, 5-24-2007)
E. Control Of Parking Facilities:
1. Whenever off street parking facilities are permitted on a parcel of land other than the lot on which the building, structure, or use of land to
be served is located, such facilities shall be in and shall remain in the same possession as that of the lot occupied by the building,
structure, or use of land to which said parking facilities are an accessory. Such possession shall be shown by deed or lease, a copy of
which shall be filed with the Village Engineer. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
2. Covenants running with the land shall be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds, as follows:
a. For the lot upon which the accessory off street parking is located, a covenant shall provide for the required number of off street parking
spaces to be provided and maintained during the existence of the building, structure, or use of land for which such parking is provided,
or until another lot of the required size within the required distance is properly developed and used for the required accessory off street
parking in place of and in lieu of the initial lot with the same requirements, covenants and conditions attaching to said substitute
accessory use lot;
b. For the lot upon which the building, structure, or use of land is located, the covenants shall provide for the building or structure to be
used or the use of land maintained only for as long as the required number of off street parking spaces are provided and maintained in
accordance with this chapter; and (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
c. Such covenants are subject to review by the Village Engineer and the Village Attorney, and approval by the Village Board of Trustees as
to content and form. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
F. Yards: In addition to the regulations set forth in this subsection, off street parking shall comply with sections 11-5-11 and 11-5-12 of this title.
1. Single-Family Residential Districts: Parking facilities shall comply with the following:
a. Driveways may be located in any yard except the required front yard or corner side yard; provided, however, that for single-family
detached and attached dwellings and duplexes, if one of the required parking spaces is provided within a garage, the other required
parking space may be located in the garage driveway, which may protrude into a required front or corner side yard; and (Ord. 90-59, 10-
8-1990)
b. Driveways shall not be located within eight feet (8') of any property line except when they serve detached garages as permitted in
subsection 11-5-9B1 of this title; provided, that paved access drives to permitted paved surfaces for storing recreational vehicles shall
not be located within three feet (3') of any property line; and provided, that there is no adverse effect to existing grading and drainage
conditions. (Ord. 2003-41, 11-17-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 452/548
2. All Other Districts (Including Multi-Family Residential): Parking may be located in any yard; provided, however, that no parking facilities or
roads shall be located in the following setbacks:
a. The first thirty feet (30') of a required front yard;
b. A thirty foot (30') setback along a side lot line which is adjacent to a public roadway;
c. A ten foot (10') setback along interior sides of property lines;
d. Minimum rear yards; and
e. Twenty feet (20') along interior side lot lines that separate different districts or land uses.
3. Accessory Building Or Structure:
a. If an off street parking facility has a parking attendant shelter building or structure, said building or structure shall conform to all yard
requirements for the zoning district in which it is located; and (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
b. A building or structure that is accessory to a parking facility shall also comply with the provisions of section 11-5-9 of this title regulating
accessory structures and uses. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
G. Access And Driveway Requirements:
1. Access: Access to off street parking facilities along streets or improved alleys shall be located in such a manner as to least interfere with
traffic movement and shall be subject to the review and approval of the Village Planner and the Village Engineer. (Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-
2013; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
2. Driveway Requirements In Single-Family Residential Districts:
a. The maximum widths for driveways for single-family residences shall be based on the following:
(1) Driveways leading to one or two (2) spaces or a one or two (2) car garage, the maximum width may not exceed the width of the
garage doors, plus three feet (3') on each side of the garage door opening. In lieu of three feet (3') on each side of the garage door
opening, the pavement may be located to one side of the existing driveway, subject to applicable setback requirements.
(2) Driveways leading to three (3) spaces or a three (3) car garage, the maximum width may not exceed width of the garage doors, with
three feet (3') on each side of the garage doors. Further, at a point fifteen feet (15') from the front of the garage, this width must taper
to twenty two feet (22') at the property line.
(3) Driveways leading to four (4) spaces or a four (4) car garage, the maximum width shall not exceed the width of the garage doors,
plus three feet (3') on each side of the outermost garage door opening. Further, at a point fifteen feet (15') from the front of the garage
door opening, this width must taper to no more than thirty feet (30') at the property line. The taper may be placed on either or both
sides of the outer edges of the driveway.
(4) In addition to subsections G2a(1), G2a(2) and G2a(3) of this section, where the property owner desires to provide a paved parking
surface for a "recreational vehicle", as defined in subsection A of this section, in the permitted side or rear yard locations, as
described in subsection P of this section, a paved access drive will be permitted to this location no greater than ten feet (10') in width.
Notwithstanding this subsection, the width of driveway at the property line shall remain as provided in subsections G2a(1), G2a(2)
and G2a(3) of this section.
(5) Driveway width for side loaded garages shall be a maximum of twenty two feet (22'), and there shall be a minimum eight feet (8')
from the side lot line.
(6) Driveway aprons may have a maximum flare three feet (3') wide on each side at the curb. (Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
b. (1) No driveway may have more than one street entrance or curb cut, except in the ER-1 and the R-1 Single-Family Residence Districts,
or on other single-family residence lots with a minimum lot width of one hundred feet (100'), where up to two (2) entrances or curb cuts
are permitted for a circular drive. The width of said circular drive shall be no greater than twelve feet (12') for the curved portion of the
drive that is not in a direct line from the garage opening to the curb. (Ord. 2003-41, 11-17-2003)
(2) Requests for exceptions to this requirement shall be made in writing to the Village Building Department. Such request shall explain
the need and provide a justification for such an exception. The Village Building Department may grant such an exception if it finds that
the justification addresses legitimate traffic safety concerns or personal hardship involving health and safety on the part of the
occupants of the household applying for such an exception. The decision of the Village Building Department may be appealed to the
Planning and Zoning Commission as provided in section 11-3-7 of this title. (Ord. 2003-41, 11-17-2003; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-
2014; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
c. On roads with high traffic volumes, including Bloomingdale Road, Schick Road, Lake Street, Glen Ellyn Road, and Army Trail Road, the
Village Building Department may permit the construction of a turnaround space in the front yard.
d. The Village Building Department is hereby authorized to prepare, and amend from time to time, such guidance documents as are
necessary to facilitate the orderly enforcement of this subsection G2. (Ord. 2003-41, 11-17-2003; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
H. Computation Of Number Of Spaces:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 453/548
1. The total number of off street parking spaces required for any building, structure or use of land shall be based upon specifications
contained in section 11-13-4-2 of this chapter.
2. For purposes of this calculation, the following shall apply:
a. If, in determining the number of off street parking spaces required by section 11-13-4-2 of this chapter, the computation results in a
required fractional parking space, any fraction of less than one-half (1/2) may be disregarded, while a fraction of one-half (1/2) or more
shall be counted as one additional parking space;
b. Off street parking spaces required on an employee basis shall be determined based upon the maximum number of employees on duty
and/or residing on the premises at any one time;
c. For calculations based upon the number of seats or seating space, the following shall apply:
(1) A seat shall be the space intended for one individual; and
(2) In places where patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, or other seating facilities, each eighteen (18) linear inches of such
seating facility shall be counted as one seat; (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
d. When a particular use is not listed in section 11-13-4-2 of this chapter, the Village Engineer shall determine the parking requirements of
said use by assigning the same parking facility requirements as another use which is deemed to be similar in nature to, and compatible
with, said unlisted use; and (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
e. Parking spaces for accessory uses not specifically enumerated in section 11-13-4-2 of this chapter shall be included with the principal
use requirement. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
f. (1) For commercial office developments under five thousand (5,000) gross square feet in area, the required amount of parking shall be
the greater of:
(A) Fifteen (15) spaces; or
(B) The amount of spaces provided by section 11-13-4-2 of this chapter.
(2) For commercial retail developments, where the parking requirement is five (5) spaces per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet of
area, the required amount of parking shall be the greater of:
(A) Fifteen (15) spaces; or
(B) The amount of spaces indicated by section 11-13-4-2 of this chapter.
(3) For medical office developments, where the parking requirement is five (5) spaces per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet of
area, the required amount of parking shall be the greater of:
(A) Twenty (20) spaces; or
(B) The amount of spaces indicated by section 11-13-4-2 of this chapter.
(4) For stand alone restaurant related developments, where the parking requirement is thirteen (13) spaces per one thousand (1,000)
gross square feet of area, the required amount of parking shall be the greater of:
(A) Twenty (20) spaces; or
(B) The amount of spaces indicated by section 11-13-4-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-20, 5-24-2007)
I. Utilization Of Off Street Parking Facilities:
1. Space Not To Satisfy Off Street Loading: Space allocated to any off street parking facility shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy
any off street loading facilities requirements.
2. Permitted Parking Of Commercial Vehicles In Residential Zoning Districts: Notwithstanding provisions contained elsewhere in this
subsection for parking of private passenger vehicles and recreational vehicles in residential zoning districts, no more than one commercial
vehicle, subject to the limitations provided in subsection I3 of this section, may be parked on an unenclosed residential driveway or
parking lot if in a multi-family residence district subject to the limitations in subsection I5 of this section. The commercial vehicle shall not
encroach into the public right of way or otherwise block the sidewalk.
3. Commercial Vehicle Used For Employment: The commercial vehicle shall be required for the employment of at least one of the occupants
of the residence which the unenclosed driveway is designed to serve.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 454/548
4. Prohibited Commercial Vehicles In Residential Zoning Districts: The following vehicles, along with any equipment trailers that may be
attached to them, shall be prohibited: semitrucks, tractor trailers, step vans, box trucks, ambulances, tow trucks, car carriers, medivans,
buses, commuter vans (unless used as part of a government sponsored ridesharing program), or pole trailers, as depicted below:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 455/548
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 456/548
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 457/548
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 458/548
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 459/548
5. Permitted Commercial Vehicles In Residential Zoning Districts: The following commercial vehicles are permitted: passenger vehicles,
vans and pickup trucks, which may include racks for storing ladders and other equipment, utility cabinets, and apparatus used to cover
pickup truck beds for purposes of conveying equipment or merchandise, as depicted below:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 460/548
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 461/548
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 462/548
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 463/548
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 464/548
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 465/548
6. Parking Location Of Commercial Vehicle; Prohibited Parking: A permitted commercial vehicle must be parked on a paved surface at least
eight feet (8') from the side, corner side, or rear property line of the lot; however, it may be located closer than eight feet (8') if parked on a
driveway leading to a detached garage in the R-2 single-family residential zoning district. Notwithstanding the foregoing restrictions,
homeowners' associations as defined in 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 160/1-5 in residential planned developments, townhomes, and
condominiums, may prohibit the parking of a commercial vehicle through legally binding covenants.
7. Cover Required For Items In Bed Of Truck: The equipment and material stored in the bed of a pickup or flatbed truck must be covered by
a commercially manufactured cover (e.g., tonneau cover) or tarp if it extends above the side walls of the vehicle.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 466/548
8. Guidance Documents: The building and zoning official is authorized to prepare such guidance documents as are necessary to facilitate
enforcement of these regulations. (Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
J. Size And Configuration:
1. Single-Family Residence: A required off street parking space for all single-family attached or detached dwellings shall be at least nine feet
(9') in width and at least twenty one feet (21') in length; except, however, where an attached garage faces the side lot line and access to
the garage is provided from a drive which begins at the front property line, the width of the drive shall not be less than twenty four feet
(24').
2. Other Uses: For all other uses, required off street parking spaces shall be at least nine feet (9') in width and at least eighteen feet (18') in
length, exclusive of access drives, aisles, ramps, columns, office or work areas. An automobile may or may not overhang a curb; provided,
that landscaping, sidewalks and light standards are not impaired. The defined parking space shall be eighteen feet (18') in length as
measured from the outside edge of the curb. Enclosed parking spaces shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet (7'). (Ord. 90-
59, 10-8-1990)
3. Parking Spaces For Persons With Disabilities:
a. Parking spaces for persons with disabilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the Illinois capital development
board, effective July 1, 1988 (and as may be amended from time to time), such spaces being at least sixteen feet (16') wide, and as
recommended by the planning and zoning commission and approved by the village board of trustees. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd.
2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
b. The village may, upon review of a specific request, require additional accessible off street parking spaces for disabled persons as
deemed necessary by the village, in its sole discretion. Such additional off street parking spaces, along with their appurtenant ramps
and building accessways, may be required for such uses as medical offices, senior citizen housing and services, and places of
assembly; provided, however, the village may require no more additional accessible off street parking spaces than fifty percent (50%)
more than that required by federal and state accessibility codes or a maximum of four (4) additional accessible spaces, whichever is the
lesser. (Ord. 2007-20, 5-24-2007; amd. 2012 Code)
4. Off Street Parking Chart: All other requirements as to parking stalls and aisle widths shall be as set forth or interpolated from the off street
parking chart in section 11-13-4-1 of this chapter.
K. Design And Maintenance: In addition to the requirements set forth in section 11-13-4-1 of this chapter, the following criteria shall apply to the
design of all off street parking facilities:
1. General On Site Circulation Design Standards:
a. Parking facilities shall be designed with careful regard to orderly arrangement, topography, landscaping, and ease of access and shall
be developed as an integral part of an overall site design; and
b. There shall be adequate, safe, and convenient arrangement of pedestrian circulation between roadways, driveways and off street
parking and loading spaces.
2. Open And Enclosed Parking Spaces:
a. Accessory parking spaces, located on the same lot as the use to be served, may be open to the sky, enclosed, or semienclosed in a
building or structure;
b. Accessory parking spaces located on other than the same lot as the use to be served, shall be open to the sky; and
c. Enclosed or semienclosed buildings containing off street parking spaces shall comply with the yard requirements for the district in which
they are located, and with the provisions of subsection F of this section.
3. Surfacing:
a. All open off street parking areas shall be improved with a compacted crushed aggregate base not less than six inches (6") thick, and
shall be surfaced with asphaltic concrete not less than two inches (2") thick;
b. All single-family detached and attached dwellings, duplexes and garage driveways serving as parking areas shall be improved with
portland cement concrete (3,500 psi) not less than six inches (6") in thickness; and (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
c. Alternative materials which provide equivalent strength may be used subject to approval by the Village Engineer.
4. Curbing: All off street parking facilities consisting of four (4) or more spaces shall be improved with concrete curbing as approved by the
Village Engineer. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
5. Screening And Landscaping:
a. All open off street automobile parking areas containing four (4) or more spaces and which are located adjacent to or across the street
from a residential or an institutional use must be effectively screened in order to eliminate unsightliness and the monotony of large
concentrations of parked cars and to prevent the direct light from automobile headlights from being cast upon adjacent residential or
institutional properties.
(1) Such screening may be accomplished through the use of landscaped berms, plant materials, decorative wall or fence, or a
combination of such methods, around the perimeter of that portion of the parking lot which is exposed to the view of the residential or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 467/548
institutional property;
(2) A decorative wall or fence shall not be less than five feet (5') nor more than six feet (6') in height;
(3) If plant materials are used, a continuous dense planting, not less than five feet (5') in height, shall be provided; and
(4) All such screening of off street loading and parking facilities shall maintain a minimum of seventy five percent (75%) opacity year
round.
b. A planting strip, not less than ten feet (10') wide, shall be provided along that portion of an off street parking facility adjacent to any
public or private street to separate and screen off street parking areas from adjacent streets. Landscaping shall include, at a minimum,
deciduous street trees, as approved by the Village Planner, not less than forty feet (40') on center.
c. A landscaped buffer strip shall be provided and maintained at a width of not less than ten feet (10') between a parking lot and the
property line of adjoining property. Landscaping of said buffer strip shall include, at a minimum, trees spaced not less than forty feet (40')
on center. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
d. In addition to any landscaped front, back or side yard areas required by this chapter or any other provision of this title, a minimum of ten
percent (10%) of any open off street parking facility containing twenty (20) or more spaces shall be provided with interior landscaping to
create visual relief and break (soften) the expanse of paving. (Note: Foundation planting areas which abut the parking lot, or are
separated from the lot by a public walkway, may be included in the calculation.) (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. 2012 Code)
(1) All interior landscaped areas shall be curbed to prevent the destruction of such areas by vehicles;
(2) An area between two feet (2') and five feet (5') aboveground shall be kept clear of plant growth, except for tree trunks, in order to
assure that pedestrians and automobiles will be visible to a motorist at all times; and (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
(3) Interior landscaping shall include, at a minimum, one deciduous street tree, as approved by the Village Planner, for each ten (10)
parking spaces. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. Ord. 2007-20, 5-24-2007)
(4) The minimum area of an interior landscaped parking island shall be three hundred twenty four (324) square feet. (Ord. 2007-20, 5-
24-2007)
e. Trees installed in perimeter yards and parking lot islands shall comply with minimum sizes set forth below, notwithstanding that tree
replacement installed as part of an approved plan may need to be larger in size: (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. 2012 Code)
(1) Deciduous canopy trees: Three inches (3") in caliper minimum, as measured six inches (6") from grade when installed;
(2) Evergreen trees: Six feet (6') to eight feet (8') in height; and
(3) Ornamental trees: Six feet (6') to eight feet (8') in height.
f. All landscaping shall be permanently maintained in good condition with at least the same quality of landscaping as initially installed.
(Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
g. Proposed landscaping of off street parking facilities shall be subject to review and approval of the Village Planner and the Village
Engineer. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
6. Lighting: Plans for parking lot, security, and walkway lighting shall comply with the provisions of chapter 20, "Exterior Lighting", of this title.
(Ord. 2013-19, 4-22-2013)
7. Striping:
a. All off street parking spaces located in areas which provide for the parking of four (4) or more vehicles shall be properly marked by
durable painted lines at least four inches (4") wide.
b. Such striping shall extend the full length of the parking space in order to identify individual spaces. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
8. Access Control And Signage:
a. Access Control:
(1) There shall be no more than one entrance and one exit, or one combined entrance and exit, along any street unless an additional
entrance/exit is recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the Village Board for the alleviation of traffic
congestion and interference of traffic movement along such street. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
(2) One-way driveways shall be clearly marked with appropriate entrance and exit signs; and (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
(3) If, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, traffic in the vicinity of the site warrants the restriction of turning movement or access to and
from a parking facility, signs or driveway modifications necessary to accomplish said restriction shall be provided. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-
1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
b. Signage: Accessory signs for off street parking facilities shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions specified in subsection 11-
14-9B of this title.
9. Drainage:
a. Off street parking spaces, aisles or access driveways shall not be drained onto or across public rights-of-way, sidewalks or walkways, or
onto any adjacent property, except into a natural watercourse or drainage easement. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 468/548
b. All off street parking facility plans for more than four (4) vehicles shall be reviewed and approved by the Village Engineer for adequate
stormwater drainage. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
10. Turning Radii And Turnaround Requirements: All parking areas, except for detached and semidetached single-family and townhouse
dwellings, shall have a circular traffic pattern and adequate maneuvering space to allow safe vehicular entrance and exit.
L. Repair And Service:
1. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted within any off street parking facility four (4) or more spaces in size.
2. No gasoline or motor oil shall be sold in any accessory off street parking facility. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
M. Old Town Parking Requirements: Because of the unique characteristics and special needs of the Old Town District, the regulations set forth
in this chapter may be modified after review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval by the Village Board of Trustees of an
individual petition for development within the Old Town District. Said petition shall be treated as an application for a special use permit and
shall be subject to the procedures and requirements for the grant of a special use permit set forth in chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-
1990; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
N. Special Uses, Including Planned Unit Developments: For special uses, including planned unit development districts, other than those listed in
section 11-13-4-2 of this chapter, off street parking facilities adequate in size to serve such uses shall be provided as recommended by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the Village Board of Trustees. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48,
10-27-2014)
O. Guest Parking: Additional guest parking supplemental to the standards contained in section 11-13-4-2 of this chapter may be required upon
recommendation by the Village Engineer and approval by the Village Board of Trustees. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord.
2017-42, 11-13-2017)
P. Parking Recreational Vehicles: Off street parking of recreational vehicles (RVs), as defined in subsection A of this section, in open air,
unenclosed, or locations otherwise not contained in a garage, is permitted only under the following limitations and conditions:
1. Number: One unoccupied recreational vehicle may be parked in an unenclosed location, as permitted in this subsection. In lieu of a single
unoccupied recreational vehicle, there may be a maximum of four (4) of any combination of the following vehicles: snowmobiles, wave
runners, jet skis, off road motorcycles, and all-terrain vehicles, either parked on a single trailer or directly on a paved or grassy surface,
which shall be located on the residential lot in a manner consistent with this chapter.
2. Size/Length Limitations: For all single-family lots less than eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet, recreational vehicles shall not exceed
thirty six feet (36') in length. "Length" is defined as the entire distance of the vehicle from the front to the rear, including any trailer hitches
and any other protrusions. There are no length limitations for lots that are eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet and over. (Ord. 2003-
41, 11-17-2003)
3. Parking Surface:
a. Unenclosed recreational vehicles shall be parked on a graded paved surface or a graded unpaved grassy surface appropriate to their
weight and dimension so as to minimize damage to residential yards. Where required, paved surfaces shall consist of concrete, asphalt,
paver blocks, or other surface driveway types as approved by the building and zoning official. Where required, the pavement shall
consist of a single paved area, the minimum dimension of which shall include the outer perimeter measurement of the wheelbase and
an additional foot in both length and width. (Ord. 2003-41, 11-17-2003; amd. 2012 Code)
b. Any damage incurred to the yard by the transporting of RVs from the designated storage location to the street shall be corrected
according to the village property maintenance codes.
c. The following schedule indicates the type of surface required by specific RV and trailer categories:
Type Surface
Boats Graded, unpaved
Motorized coaches, any length Paved
Personal RVs, including jet skis, wave runners, all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles, and off road motorcycles Graded, unpaved
Pop-up campers Graded, unpaved
Trailers, box type, loaded or empty, platform type, or travel trailers, under 18 feet in length Graded, unpaved
Trailers, box type, loaded or empty, platform type, or travel trailers, 18 feet in length and over Paved
4. Permitted Zoning Districts:
a. Outside storage of RVs and/or trailers is permitted in single-family residential districts of ER-1, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, the single-family
residential portions of R-3, and the single-family residential portions of planned developments, unless specifically prohibited by the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 469/548
ordinance or covenants attached to said planned development.
b. Parking of RVs and/or trailers is also permitted in R-4 zones where there is a designated parking area for such vehicles approved by the
apartment complex management or condominium homeowners' association, and said parking area is not visible from any street;
provided, that parking in said complex is sufficient to meet the needs of residents and guests and that such vehicles can be
accommodated in a standard parking space that is nine feet (9') in width and eighteen feet (18') in length.
5. Location: Recreational vehicle and trailer parking is permitted in the following locations and under the following conditions:
a. Side Yard:
(1) Side yard, as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title, on interior lot: Permitted not less than three feet (3') from the side lot line,
provided there is no adverse impact to existing grading and drainage, and provided the RV and/or trailer is not parked in a side yard
on the side of the house with windows which serve as light, ventilation and means of egress in case of fire, as required by the building
code.
(2) Side yard on a corner lot: Prohibited on that side yard which abuts the street. For that side yard which abuts an interior lot, parking is
permitted under the conditions contained in subsection P4a of this section.
b. Front Yard: Front yard, as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title: Parking in the front yard shall be prohibited except as otherwise
permitted for temporary parking pursuant to subsection P7 of this section.
c. Rear Yard:
(1) Rear yard, as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title, on an interior lot: Permitted not less than three feet (3') from a side lot line and
eight feet (8') from the rear lot line, provided there is no adverse impact to existing drainage and grading. Distance from the main
structure shall be a minimum of ten feet (10').
(2) If a corner lot, not within or projecting into that portion of the rear yard formed by the side lot line adjoining the street and a line
extending from the side of the main building parallel to the lot line adjoining the street. (Ord. 2003-41, 11-17-2003)
d. Through Lot:
(1) Through lot on an interior lot, as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title: In the side or rear yard as permitted in subsections P5a, P5b
and P5c of this section, but if in the rear yard, no closer than the minimum front yard depth for the zoning district from the rear lot line.
(2) On a through lot on a corner lot, not within or projecting into that portion of the rear yard formed by the side lot line adjoining the
street and a line extending from the side of the main building parallel to the lot line adjoining the street. (Ord. 2003-41, 11-17-2003;
amd. 2012 Code)
6. Screening Requirements: Notwithstanding the regulations for fencing contained in chapter 19, "Fencing And Screening", of this title,
landscaping or fencing appropriate to screen or buffer the appearance of recreational vehicles from the side or rear yards shall be
provided. Landscaped screening or buffering shall consist of species which retain their foliage year round. Where space is limited,
screening or buffering shall be accomplished with a semiopen, board on board wood fence with a maximum height of six feet (6'). Existing
perimeter yard landscaping or fencing, either opaque or semiopen (board on board), may suffice for some or all of the screening
requirement. Such landscaping or fencing may or may not be located on the lot where the RV is to be located. The building and zoning
official is authorized to prepare such guidance documents as are necessary to facilitate enforcement of this requirement. (Ord. 2012-27, 6-
11-2012)
7. Temporary Provisions:
a. For loading or unloading purposes or for minor vehicle servicing, the building and zoning official may, upon written notification prior to
the parking of a recreational vehicle, provide permission to allow an RV to be parked in the front yard, on a paved surface, for a forty
eight (48) hour period within any period of seven (7) consecutive days, not to exceed a total of sixteen (16) days in a calendar year. Said
forty eight (48) hour period cannot be back to back.
b. For short term visitor parking, the building and zoning official may, upon written notification prior to the parking of a recreational vehicle,
provide permission to allow an RV belonging to a visitor from outside of the Village to be parked on a paved surface in the front yard in a
residence district for a period not to exceed seven (7) days for any one visit or fifteen (15) days in a calendar year.
c. For temporary parking of boats covering the period of time of transfer from water to off season storage, or vice versa, the building and
zoning official, upon written notification, may permit parking in the front yard, in an approved manner, for up to a three (3) week period,
no more than two (2) times per year. (Ord. 2003-41, 11-17-2003; amd. 2012 Code)
d. For temporary storage in the front yard, at no time shall the RV extend closer than fifteen feet (15') from the nearest edge of the
pavement of any street or three feet (3') from the edge of any public sidewalk.
e. If the RV is used for trips to work, said RV may be parked in the front driveway, provided it shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in length.
(Ord. 2003-41, 11-17-2003)
8. Additional Requirements:
a. The Village Building Department is hereby authorized to prepare necessary guidance documents and make such interpretations as are
necessary in the interest of public health, safety and welfare as well as in the interest of the orderly and efficient administration of this
subsection. (Ord. 2003-41, 11-17-2003; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
b. At no time shall a parked or stored RV be used for living, sleeping, or other purposes. No RV shall be connected to gas, water, or
sanitary sewer service, although temporary hookups to residential water connections for purposes of preparing vehicles for road
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 470/548
excursions are permitted.
c. The owner of an RV shall not park or store the RV in a manner so as to create a dangerous or unsafe condition on the lot where parked
or stored or to adjacent property. Parking or storage in such a fashion that the RV may readily tip or roll shall be considered a dangerous
or unsafe condition.
d. RVs shall not have their wheels removed or be affixed to the ground so as to prevent ready removal of the vehicle; except, that
nonmotorized RVs and trailers may be stored with the wheels removed.
e. RVs shall not be used as accessory structures.
f. The RV and its storage area on the lot shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner.
g. No major repairs shall be performed on any RV except within an enclosed garage.
h. The storage of explosives within or upon any recreational vehicle is prohibited. This prohibition does not include safety flares required
by State law for watercraft. (Ord. 2003-41, 11-17-2003)
11-13-4-1: CHART OF PARKING STALL SPECIFICATIONS:
Parking Aisle
(Degrees)
P
Curb Length
(Feet)
C
Stall Depth
(Feet)
S
Stall Width
(Feet)
W
Aisle Width
(Feet)
A
Bay Width
(Feet)
B
90 9.0 18.0 9.0 24.0 60.0
60 10.4 20.0 9.0 16.0 56.0
45 12.7 19.1 9.0 12.0 50.2
01 24.0 24.0 9.0 24.0 n/a
Note: These standards are for a 9 foot by 18 foot parking stall. Drawing is not to scale.
1. Parallel parking.
(Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
11-13-4-2: NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 471/548
Parking Category
Number
And Type Of Use
Number Of Required
Parking Spaces
1 - Residential Uses:
Dwelling, singlefamily
attached
Dwelling, 2 units
Dwelling, 3 units
Mobile home parks
Quadraplexes
2, to be located on the lot, plus 2.5 per each dwelling unit for guest parking
Multiple-family
dwellings, 2 or more
stories
2 per dwelling unit for all units with less than 3 bedrooms, with 1 to be located indoors; 2.5 per dwelling unit for
all units with 3 or more bedrooms, with 1 to be located indoors. Additionally, guest parking spaces shall be
provided for all multiple-family dwellings at a ratio of not less than 1 space for every 4 units. The location of
said guest parking spaces shall be convenient to major ingress and egress points of the building(s) in which
the multiple-family dwellings to be served by the guest parking are located. Said guest spaces shall be
available for guest use at all times and shall not be sold or leased to individual unit owners or occupants
Dormitories
Fraternities/sororities
Lodging houses
5 per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Childcare centers 1 per each employee, plus 1 per each 15 children based on rated design capacity
2 - Schools:
Business schools 1 per each 5 students, plus 1 per each 2 employees
Dancing schools or
studios
Music schools with
sales of instruments
5 per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Nursery schools 1 per each employee, plus 1 per each 800 square feet of gross floor area
Children's day
schools
1 per each employee, plus 1 per each 15 children based on rated design capacity
Elementary schools,
public or private
Junior high schools,
public or private
1 per each faculty member and other full time employee, plus 1 per each 2 classrooms for visitors
Senior high schools,
public or private
1 per each full time employee, plus 1 per each 7 students based on design capacity
Colleges or
universities
Junior colleges
1 per each employee, plus 1 per each 4 students
Trade schools
Vocational
1 per each 2 employees, plus 1 per each 5 students
3 - Religious/Institutional:
Convents
Monasteries
Religious retreats
Seminaries
1 per 5 residents, plus 1 per each nonresident employee, plus visitor parking as per village board
recommendation
Cemeteries The initial design of cemeteries should include streets that allow for adequate parallel parking, plus a minimum
of 7 spaces for customer parking near the cemetery office, if there is one
Mausoleums 2 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 0.75 per each employee, plus 1 for each vehicle owned,
leased or rented
Churches and
assembly uses
1 per 3 seats, with every 18 inches of a pew or bench style seat equating to 1 seat
4 - Recreational/Civic/Social:
Dance halls Spaces equal to 30 percent of capacity, plus 1 per each employee
Gymnasiums 3.3 per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 472/548
Indoor skating rink 10 per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Auditoriums
Meeting halls
Spaces equal to 30 percent of capacity, plus 1 per each 2 employees
Outdoor amusement
establishments such
as trampoline center,
miniature golf
course, kiddy park
3 per 1,000 square feet of gross land area, plus additional spaces for accessory uses in accordance with the
provisions of this section 11-13-4
Billiard/pool halls
Physical culture and
health services,
tanning salons
Reducing salons,
masseurs
5 per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Libraries
Religious reading
rooms
1.25 per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Art galleries and
museums
Social service and
fraternal
associations
3 per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Swimming clubs and
pools
1 per each 75 square feet of water surface, plus 1 per each 2 employees, plus additional spaces as required
for accessory uses in accordance with the provisions of this section 11-13-4
Athletic fields and
playgrounds
As per village board recommendation based on type of use
Golf courses but not
including
commercially
operated driving
range
65 per 18 holes, 45 per 9 holes, plus 1 per each employee, plus additional spaces as required for accessory
retail in accordance with the provisions of this section 11-13-4
Riding academies
and stables
2 per each stall
Theaters, indoor
only
1 per each 3 seats, plus additional spaces as required for accessory uses in accordance with the provisions of
this section 11-13-4
Recreational
buildings and
community centers,
noncommercial
1 per each 3 employees, plus additional spaces as required by the village board for each specific use
Stadiums and
grandstands in
athletic fields
1 per 4 seats, plus 1 per each 2 employees
Driving ranges
Handball clubs and
courts
Racquetball clubs
and courts
Tennis clubs and
courts
2 per court or tee, plus 1 per employee and additional spaces for accessory uses as required by this section
11-13-4
Bowling alleys 5 per lane, plus additional spaces for accessory uses as required by this section 11-13-4
Clubs, lodges with
live entertainment
and dancing
Spaces equal to 30 percent of capacity but not less than 10 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1
per each 2 employees
Clubs, clubhouses
and lodges
Convention halls and
centers
Spaces equal to 30 percent of capacity but not less than 5 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per
each 2 employees
Drive-in theaters Spaces equal to capacity, plus 1 per each 2 employees
Amusement arcades
employing coin
operated games of
skill
10 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 473/548
5 - Health/Medical:
Convalescent
centers, nursing
homes
1 per 4 beds, plus 1 per employee
Healthcare
institutions for adults
and/or children
1 per 2 beds, plus 1 per each 2 employees
Hospitals or clinics 1 per each 2 beds, plus 1 per each 2 employees, plus 1 per each 2 doctors on staff
Chiropodist offices
Chiropractor offices
Dentist offices
Optometrist offices
Optician offices
Osteopath offices
Surgeon and/or
physician offices
5 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
6 - Retail:
Casket and casket
supplies
Frozen food locker
establishments
Furniture stores
including
upholstering
conducted as part of
the retail operation
Hay, grain and seed
stores
Lumberyards
Machinery sales
establishments
Mail order sales and
warehousing
Milk machine sales
Monument sales and
production
Orthopedic and
medical appliance,
not including
assembly or
manufacturing
Photographic studios
including developing
and printing as part
of the retail business
3 per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Commercial,
agricultural
implement and
machinery sales,
service
1 per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per each 3,000 square feet of outdoor sales area
Farm and garden
supply stores
Greenhouses, retail
and wholesale
5 per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per each 1,000 square feet of outdoor sales area, plus
1 per each 2 employees
Drapery stores
Fertilizer sales, bulk
storage and mixing,
anhydrous ammonia
equipment
Furrier shops
including the
incidental storage
and conditioning of
furs
Tack shops
Trading stamp stores
3.3 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 474/548
Mobile home dealers
5 per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per each 2,000 square feet of outdoor sales area
Motor vehicle
dealers
Motorcycle sales
2.5 per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 0.33 per each 1,000 square feet of outdoor sales area
Open sales lots 3 per 1,000 square feet of outdoor sales area
Laundries
Packaging and
crating
establishments
Restricted
production and
repair
Printing and
publishing
establishments
Stone or gravel
quarries when
crushing, grading,
washing
Storage yards for
material or
equipment sales
0.75 per each employee, plus 1 per each vehicle owned, leased or rented
Boat dealers
Camper sales
Nursery retail sales
Sales yards,
wholesale/retail for
agricultural products
Snowmobile sales
and service
Trailer sales or
rentals
5 per 1,000 square feet per gross floor area, plus 1 per 3,000 square feet of outdoor sales area
Tombstone and
monument sales
Used car lots
2.5 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 0.33 per 1,000 square feet of outdoor display area
Appliance stores
Art and school
supplies
Automobile
accessory stores
Bakeries in which
the manufacture of
goods is limited to
goods sold
Bicycle stores -
sales, retail/repair
Book and stationery
stores
Butchers
Candy and
confectionery stores
Catalog stores
China and glassware
stores
Coin and stamp
stores
Dairy product stores
Department stores
Direct selling
establishments
where products are
stored
Drugstores,
pharmacies
Electrical shops and
supply stores
Floor covering,
including rugs,
linoleum and carpet
stores
5 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 475/548
Flower shops
Gift shops
Groceries, food
stores, supermarkets
Hearing aid stores
Hobby shops
Ice cream stores
Leather goods and
luggage shops
Millinery
Music stores
Office supply stores
Package liquor
stores
Paint, hardware,
wallpaper stores
Pet stores
Picture framing
conducted for retail
trade
Roadside stands
Sewing machine
sales and service
Shoe stores
Sporting goods
stores
Swimming pool
sales and service
Tile stores (wall and
floor)
Tire, battery and
accessory dealer
Toy stores
Variety and notion
stores
Video stores
Automobile service
stations, full or selfserve
with repair
garages
2 per each service bay, plus 1 per each employee, plus 1 per each vehicle
Automobile service
stations, self-serve
with food mart
1 per each service bay, plus 1 per each employee, plus 5 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area if retail only,
or 6 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area if food is prepared on the premises
Auction rooms 1 per each 5 seats but not less than 10 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Bottled gas dealers 2 per each 3 employees
Building machine
stores
Building material
sales
Building services
and supplies not
including outside
storage
Catering
establishments
Clothing and
costume rental
stores
4 per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Animal feed,
storage, preparation,
grinding and mixing,
wholesale
1 per each 2 employees, plus 1 per 80 square feet of gross floor area for inside sales and 1 per 1,000 square
feet of outdoor sales area
7 - Service:
Animal kennels and
pounds
3.3 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Hotels
Motels
1 per room, plus 1 per each 2 employees, plus additional spaces as required for accessory uses in accordance
with the provisions of this section 11-13-4
Radio and television 4 per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 476/548
broadcasting studios
Shoe repair shops
Transit and
transportation
facilities
Radio and television
towers, commercial
As per village board recommendation
Public utility and
public service uses
1 per each 3 employees, plus additional spaces as required by the village board
Undertaking
establishments and
funeral parlors
10 per parlor, plus 1 per each employee, plus 1 per each vehicle owned, leased or rented
Recreational vehicle
sales or rentals
5 per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per each 3,000 square feet of outdoor sales area
Veterinary clinics,
animal hospitals
4 per each doctor, based on the maximum number on duty, plus 1 per other employees but not less than 1 per
250 square feet of gross floor area
Barbershops
Salons
2 per each chair, plus 1 per each employee
Accounting, auditing,
bookkeeping
Art and industrial
designers
Attorney and law
offices
Engineering and
architectural firms
Laboratories,
medical and dental
Land surveyors
Landscape
architectural
services
Political organization
offices
Professional
consultants
Scientific research
agencies
3 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area unless the building or use is 5,000 square feet or less in area, then
5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area shall apply
Better business
bureau
Blueprint and
photocopy
Business and
management
consultant
Chamber of
commerce
Charitable and civic
organizations
Commercial
blacksmith or
welding
Credit agencies
Detective agencies
Exterminating
services
Furniture repair and
upholstery stores
General minor repair
or fix it shops
Insurance agencies
Investment
companies
Labor unions and
organizations
Loan companies
Locksmiths
Mail order service
shops
3 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 477/548
Merchant
associations
News syndicates
Newspaper offices,
not including printing
Offices, business
and professional
Professional
membership
associations
Real estate boards
Real estate offices
Refrigeration shops
Secretarial services
Security and
commodity brokers
Sign contractors, no
outside storage
Tailors, hat and
clothes repair or
dressmaker shops
Taxidermists
Trade associations
Automobile car
washes, automatic
1 per each 2 employees, plus stacking spaces equal to 5 times the capacity of the washing bays
Automobile car
washes, manual
1 per each 2 employees, plus 1 per each manager, plus 2 per each washing bay, 1 of which shall be located
directly in front of and 1 directly in back of each car wash bay
Automobile repair
garages
1 per each employee, plus 2 per each service bay
Cartage and express
establishments, not
including motor
freight
0.75 per employee, plus 1 per vehicle owned, rented or leased
Currency exchanges
Dry cleaning,
employing not more
than 5 persons and
where equipment
does not exceed
units of 30 pounds'
capacity
Employment
agencies
Equipment and
appliance repair
Equipment rental
and leasing services
Interior decorating
studios
Lawn mower repair
shops
Recording studios
Ticket agencies
(amusement)
Travel bureaus and
transportation ticket
offices
5 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Financial institutions
3.3 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 6 stacking spaces per teller per drive-in, plus 1 per each 2
employees
Ambulance service
Contractor and
construction offices
Furnace supply and
service stores
Sewer cleaning and
rodding service
Testing laboratories
Water softener
services
0.5 per each employee, plus 1 per each vehicle owned, leased or rented
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 478/548
Window cleaning
firms
Commercial grain
elevators and
storage
1 per each 2 employees
8 - Restaurant/Tavern:
Carry out
restaurants
6 per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area. The space may not contain more than 1 bench, 48 inches in
length, or seats for 2 people to wait
Dine in/carry out
restaurants, without
waitstaff
13 per 1,000 gross square feet for all establishments up to 2,000 square feet in area, plus 15 per 1,000 square
feet of area above 2,000 square feet
Sit down
restaurants, with
waitstaff
13 per 1,000 gross square feet, inclusive, of all outdoor space devoted to outdoor dining, plus 1 for each of the
persons equating to 30 percent of the rated capacity of any lounge area, sports bar area, dancing area, or
other entertainment area included in the establishment
9 - Public:
Airports
Police stations
Water filtration
plants, sewage
treatment plants,
pumping stations
As per village board recommendation
Fire stations 1 per each 2 employees
Post offices and post
office substations
4 per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 per each 3 employees
10 - Manufacturing And Assembly:
Light industrial 1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, or 1 per 1.25 employees (whichever is greater)
Contractor shops
and storage
Warehouse
1 per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area, or 1 per 1.25 employees (whichever is greater)
11 - Other Uses:
Parking requirement
for uses not listed
As per the village board based upon recommendations of the planning and zoning commission
(Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. Ord. 2007-20, 5-24-2007; 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
11-13-5: OFF STREET LOADING REGULATIONS:
A. Definitions: The following terms, when used in this section, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
LOADING BERTH OR SPACE: A space, accessible from a street, alley or way, in a building or on a lot, for the use of vehicles while loading
or unloading merchandise or materials.
LOADING FACILITY: An area, accessible from a street, alley or way, in a building or on a lot, which contains loading berths or spaces, for
the use of vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. (Ord. 90-57, 10-8-1990)
B. Berths Required: Every building which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, and which
has a gross floor area of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more, shall be required to have off street loading berths as provided by this
chapter.
C. Location: All required off street loading facilities which serve a building, structure, or use of land erected, established, altered, enlarged or
intensified after the effective date hereof shall be located on the same lot as the building, structure or use of land to be served unless
established in accordance with the following provisions:
1. Central Loading Facilities: Central loading facilities which serve more than one lot may be established in accordance with the following
requirements:
a. Each lot to be served shall have direct access to the central loading facility without crossing streets or alleys;
b. The total number of off street loading berths provided is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each such use as
specified in section 11-13-5-1 of this chapter; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 479/548
c. Each lot to be served shall be no more than three hundred feet (300'), including streets, from the central loading facility. (Ord. 90-59, 10-
8-1990)
2. Control Of Central Loading Facilities: Whenever the required off street loading facilities are collectively provided in central loading
facilities, written covenants and easements running with the land assuring the retention, maintenance, and use of said central loading
facilities shall be executed by the parties concerned. Such covenants and easements shall be reviewed by the Village Engineer and the
Village Attorney, approved as to content and form by the Village Board of Trustees and filed in the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds.
(Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
D. Yards:
1. Compliance Required: Off street loading facilities located in a building or structure shall comply with the yard requirements of the zoning
district in which said facilities are located or the requirements set forth in subsection D2 of this section, whichever is more restrictive.
2. Unenclosed Loading Facilities: Unenclosed off street loading facilities may be located in any yard; provided, however, that no loading
facilities shall be permitted in the following setbacks:
a. A required front yard;
b. A thirty foot (30') setback along a side lot line that is adjacent to a roadway;
c. A ten foot (10') setback along interior sides of a property line;
d. Minimum rear yards; and
e. Twenty feet (20') along interior side lot lines that separate different districts or land uses.
3. Accessory Building Or Structure:
a. If an off street loading facility has an attendant shelter building or structure, said building or structure shall conform with all yard
requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
b. An accessory building to a loading facility shall comply with the provisions contained in section 11-5-9 of this title regulating accessory
structures and uses. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
E. Access:
1. All off street loading facilities shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway not less than twelve feet (12') wide.
2. No loading facility shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of the point of intersection of any two (2) streets. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
3. Proposed access to a loading berth from a street, alley, or service drive shall be subject to the review and approval of the Village Planner
and the Village Engineer. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
F. Computation Of Number Of Spaces:
1. The total number of off street loading spaces required for any building, structure or use shall be based upon specifications contained in
section 11-13-5-1 of this chapter.
2. If, in determining the number of off street loading berths required, the computation results in a requirement of a fractional berth, any
fraction of less than one-half (1/2) may be disregarded, while a fraction of one-half (1/2) or more shall be counted as one loading berth.
(Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
3. If a particular use is not listed in section 11-13-5-1 of this chapter, the Village Engineer shall determine the loading berth requirements of
said use by assigning the same loading facility requirements as another use which is deemed to be similar in nature to, and compatible
with, said unlisted use. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
G. Utilization Of Facilities: Space allocated to any off street loading facility shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy any off street parking
requirements.
H. Size And Configuration:
1. A required off street loading berth shall be at least ten feet (10') in width by at least fifty feet (50') in length, exclusive of aisle and
maneuvering space.
2. All off street loading berths shall have a vertical clearance of at least fifteen feet (15').
I. Design And Maintenance: The following shall apply to the design and maintenance of all off street loading facilities:
1. Surfacing:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 480/548
a. All open off street loading berths shall be improved with a compacted, crushed aggregate base not less than eight inches (8") thick and
shall be surfaced with asphaltic concrete not less than two inches (2") thick. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
b. Alternative materials which provide equivalent strength may be used subject to approval by the Village Engineer.
2. Curbing: All loading facilities shall be improved with concrete curbing, as approved by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd.
2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
3. Screening And Landscaping:
a. All unenclosed off street loading berths which are located adjacent to or across the street from a residential or an institutional use shall
be effectively screened from view of adjacent residential or institutional properties.
b. Required screening may be accomplished in accordance with criteria set forth in subsection 11-13-4K5a of this chapter.
c. A planting strip, not less than ten feet (10') wide, shall be provided along that portion of an off street loading facility that is adjacent to
any public or private street to separate and screen the loading areas from the adjacent streets.
d. A landscaped buffer strip shall be provided and maintained at a width of not less than ten feet (10') between an off street loading facility
and the property line of adjoining property.
e. Landscaping in perimeter and buffer yards shall include, at a minimum, deciduous street trees approved by the Village Planner, spaced
not less than forty feet (40') on center, and shall comply with minimum sizes specified under subsection 11-13-4K5e of this chapter.
f. All landscaping shall be permanently maintained in good condition with at least the same quality of landscaping as initially installed.
(Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
g. Proposed landscaping of off street loading facilities shall be subject to the review and approval of the Village Planner and the Village
Engineer. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
4. Lighting:
a. Lighting shall be provided to illuminate any off street loading facility to be used at night.
b. Lighting provided shall be maintained, arranged and installed to deflect, shade and focus lights away from adjacent properties. (Ord. 90-
59, 10-8-1990)
c. Lighting plans shall be subject to the review and approval of the Village Planner, the Village Engineer and the Chief of Police. (Ord. 90-
59, 10-8-1990; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
5. Accessory Signs: Accessory signs for loading facilities shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions specified in subsection 11-14-
9B of this title. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
J. Minimum Loading Facilities:
1. Buildings, structures, or parcels of land which require off street loading facilities, but which have less area than the minimum prescribed
for such required facilities, shall be provided with adequate loading facilities, accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent alley or service
drive on the same lot, if recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the Village Board of Trustees. (Ord. 90-
59, 10-8-1990; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
2. The loading zone shall be not less than nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18') in size, and shall be exclusive of required parking spaces or
drive aisles. The loading zone shall be signed and striped to discourage automobile parking.
K. Repair And Storage: Storage of any kind or motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall not be permitted within any required loading
berth. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
11-13-5-1: NUMBER OF LOADING SPACES REQUIRED:
Loading Category Number
And Type Of Use
Number Of Loading
Spaces Required
1 - Residential:
Multiple-family dwellings 1 per each 30,000 to 200,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 200,000 square feet or fraction
thereof
2 - Schools:
Business schools
Colleges
Trade schools
Universities
Vocational schools
1 per each 10,000 to 100,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet or fraction
thereof
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 481/548
3 - Recreational/Civic/Institutional:
Auditoriums
Bowling alleys
Civic buildings
Private clubs and lodges
Public administration
buildings
1 per each 10,000 to 100,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet or fraction
thereof
Theaters 1 per each 8,000 to 25,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 50,000 square feet or fraction
thereof, plus additional berths for accessory uses as required by the provisions of this section 11-13-5
4 - Health/Medical:
Convalescent homes
Nursing homes
1 per each 30,000 to 200,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 200,000 square feet or fraction
thereof
Hospitals
Sanatoriums and other
similar institutional uses
1 per each 10,000 to 100,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet or fraction
thereof
5 - Retail:
All retail stores
Wholesale stores
1 per each 5,000 to 10,000 square feet; 2 per each 10,000 to 25,000 square feet; 3 per each 25,000 to
40,000 square feet; 4 per each 40,000 to 100,000 square feet or fraction thereof
6 - Service:
Cartage and express
facilities
Radio stations or studios
Recording or sound studios
Television stations or studios
1 per each 7,000 to 40,000 square feet; 2 per each 40,000 to 100,000 square feet, plus 1 per
additional 100,000 square feet
Animal hospitals
Banks
Blueprinting establishments
Dry cleaning establishments
Financial institutions
Motels
Kennels
1 per each 10,000 to 100,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 100,000 square feet or fraction
thereof
All other service uses 1 per each 5,000 to 10,000 square feet; 2 per each 10,000 to 25,000 square feet; 3 per each 25,000 to
40,000 square feet; 4 per each 40,000 to 100,000 square feet
7 - Restaurant/Tavern:
Establishments handling the
consumption of food on the
premises
1 per each 5,000 to 10,000 square feet; 2 per each 10,000 to 25,000 square feet; 3 per each 25,000 to
40,000 square feet; 4 per each 40,000 to 100,000 square feet, plus 1 additional per each 100,000
square feet or fraction thereof
8 - Public:
Railroad passenger
terminals
Utility facilities, public or
private
1 per each 7,000 to 40,000 square feet, plus 1 per additional 100,000 square feet for buildings over
40,000 square feet
Airports 1 per each 7,000 to 40,000 square feet; 2 per each 40,000 to 100,000 square feet, plus 1 per each
additional 100,000 square feet for buildings over 40,000 square feet
9 - Manufacturing:
Assembly establishments
Disassembly establishments
Fabricating establishments
Manufacturing
establishments
Warehousing establishments
1 per each 5,000 to 40,000 square feet; 2 per each 40,000 to 100,000 square feet, plus 1 additional
per each 100,000 square feet for buildings over 40,000 square feet
Cleaning establishments
Repair establishments
Servicing establishments
Testing establishments
1 per each 5,000 to 40,000 square feet, plus 1 per each additional 40,000 square feet or fraction
thereof
10 - Other Uses:
Other uses As per village board based on requirements for most similar use
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 482/548
(Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. 2012 Code)
11-13-6: AUTHORIZED VARIATIONS:
A. The planning and zoning commission shall decide upon authorized variations of the provisions of this chapter and shall grant them only in the
specific instances where there are demonstrated practical difficulties or particular hardships in implementing the regulations of this chapter.
(Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
B. Any individual, firm, or corporation applying for a variation shall be subject to the procedures contained in section 11-3-6 of this title. (Ord. 90-
59, 10-8-1990)
11-13-7: EFFECT ON EXISTING DEVELOPMENTS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not supersede those requirements established by development ordinances approved for specific projects or
planned developments during site plan review, zoning or annexation procedures. (Ord. 90-59, 10-8-1990)
Chapter 14
SIGNS
11-14-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of this chapter to prohibit all off site advertising of any kind whatsoever except where such off site advertising is specifically
permitted under the terms of the Highway Advertising Control Act of 19711. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
11-14-2: APPLICATION, INTERPRETATION AND COMPLIANCE:
A. The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to and govern signs in all zoning districts in the Village. No sign shall be erected, repaired,
altered, changed, relocated or maintained except in conformance with the regulations for the district in which it is located, unless the sign is
otherwise specifically regulated by special use provision or other provisions set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992)
B. When there is any ambiguity or dispute concerning the interpretation of this chapter, the interpretation of the Building Commissioner shall
prevail, subject to appeal as provided in the ordinances of the Village. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
11-14-3: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which no longer directs attention to or advertises any person, business, lessor, owner, product, idea, place, activity,
institution or service which is conducted or available on the premises.
ADVERTISING MESSAGE: That copy on a sign describing products or services being offered or available to the public.
AREA OF SIGN: The gross surface area within a single continuous perimeter composed of a single rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of
characters, lettering, illustrations, ornamentations, or other figures, together with any material, or color forming an integral part of the display or
to differentiate the sign from the background to which it is placed. Structural supports bearing no sign copy shall not be included in gross surface
area; however, if any portion of the required support becomes enclosed for decorative or architectural purposes, that portion will be included in
the total gross surface area of the sign. For computing the area of any sign which consists of individual letters or separate graphic elements, the
area shall be deemed to be the area of the smallest rectangular figure which can encompass all of the letters or elements.
BANNER: A sign made of paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind which is intended to be hung either with or without a frame, or with or without
applied characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations, excluding national, State or governmental subdivision flags.
BEACON: A stationary or revolving light (also known as "searchlight") which flashes or projects illumination, single color or multicolored, in any
manner which is intended to attract or divert attention. The term is not intended, however, to include any kind of lighting device which is required
or necessary under the safety regulations described by the Federal Aviation Agency or similar agencies.
BILLBOARD: A nonpoint of sale sign which advertises a business service, organization, event, person, place, or thing, unless such sign is more
specifically defined herein.
BOX SIGN: A type of wall sign in which copy and/or graphics are either painted, routed, or embossed on an acrylic or other translucent surface,
and then affixed to a metal or fiberglass frame which is fabricated around lighting elements and other electrical components required for internal
illumination of the copy. The entire "box sign", comprised of copy, frame and electrical components, is mounted directly to a building or structure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 483/548
BUILDING COMMISSIONER: The Building Commissioner, or any deputy thereof; or the duly appointed building and zoning official, or any
deputy thereof, of the Village of Bloomingdale.
BUILDING FACE OR WALL: All window and wall area of a building in one plane or elevation.
BUILDING FRONTAGE: The linear length of a building facing the right-of-way.
BUSINESS FRONTAGE: The frontage of a business establishment on a lot facing a public right-of-way or privately owned circulation road which
functions mainly as a collector and distributor of customer traffic, or a customer parking lot which serves a commercial establishment.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or numerals that can be changed or rearranged manually, without
altering the face or the surface of the sign.
DECORATIVE LIGHTING: Any type of lighting element applied to the interior or exterior of a window or door, or around the perimeter of a
window or door, which is intended to be viewed from the exterior of the building or structure.
DIRECTIONAL/INSTRUCTIONAL SIGN: A sign of noncommercial nature which directs the reader to public parks, buildings, historical
structures or areas, schools and other public institutions, or provides information concerning traffic circulation or parking.
DISTRICTS: References to residential, business and manufacturing districts shall be synonymous with those contained in this title.
FACADE AREA: Total area of a building including the building face and roof as measured on a vertical plane established at the exterior wall of
the building facing the right-of-way.
FRONTAGE: The length of the property line of any one parcel parallel to and along each right-of-way it borders.
GRAND OPENINGS: Shall be limited to change in ownership, use or tenant, or remodeling which requires closing of a business to the general
public.
HEIGHT OF SIGN: The vertical distance measured from the adjacent street grade or upper surface or the nearest street curb other than an
elevated roadway, which vertical distance shall permit the greatest height to the highest point of said sign.
LETTERS AND DECORATIONS: That part of a sign pertaining to the letters, illustrations, symbols, figures, insignia and other devices employed
to express and illustrate the message of the sign.
LOCATION: A lot, premises, building, wall or any place whatsoever upon which a sign is erected, constructed or maintained.
LOT: An area of land of sufficient size to meet zoning requirements for a permitted or special use. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved
public street or on an approved private street and may consist of:
A. A single lot of record; or
B. A portion of a lot of record; or
C. A combination of complete lots of record; of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record; or of portions of lots of record.
LOT, CORNER: A lot whose frontage is adjacent to two (2) or more streets.
NONCONFORMING SIGN (LEGAL): A. A sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the effective date hereof, and any
amendments hereto, and which fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions contained in this chapter; or
B. A nonconforming sign for which a permit has been issued.
OCCUPANT: Any person who:
A. Owns, rents or leases; and
B. Occupies a property or building for the purpose of:
1. Residing in; and/or
2. Carrying on a business, trade or profession thereon or therein.
OWNER: Any person, group of persons, partnership, corporation or other legal entity holding legal or equitable title to real estate located within
the village of Bloomingdale including, but not limited to, contract purchasers and all of the beneficiaries under a land trust.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 484/548
PENNANT: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other materials, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or
string, usually in a series, designed to move in the wind.
PUBLIC AREA: A. The right of way of any area owned by the state of Illinois, any county, or the village of Bloomingdale, and which is used for a
highway, street, road or sidewalk; or
B. The right of way of any area dedicated for highway, street or road purposes; or
C. Any automobile parking area owned by or subject to a lease agreement with the village of Bloomingdale.
REVERSE COPY LETTERS: Illuminated translucent letters against a nonilluminated opaque background.
ROOFLINE: The top edge of the roof or the top of the parapet of the building; whatever forms the top line of the building silhouette.
SETBACK: A. The setback of a sign shall be defined as the shortest horizontal distance between a property line and the closest edge of a sign,
including the structure and base.
B. Where a property line extends into a street right of way, the setback of a sign shall be the shortest horizontal distance between the closest
edge of a sign, including the structure and base, and the back of the curb of the adjacent street.
C. Where a sign is located along an access drive, the setback of a sign shall be the shortest horizontal distance between the closest edge of
a sign, including the structure and base, and the back of the curb of the adjacent access drive.
SIGN: A. Any name, identification, description, advertisement, display or illustration which is affixed to or painted or represented directly upon a
building, structure or other outdoor surface or piece of land; and which directs attention to an object, idea, product, philosophy, place, activity,
person, institution, service organization or business; and which is located, on a permanent or temporary basis, on the premises at or on which
the object, idea, product, philosophy, place, activity, person, institution, service organization or business is located, offered or sold.
B. The term "sign" shall not refer to any display or official court or public notices, nor shall it include the emblem or insignia of a nation,
political unit, school or religious group. The term "sign" shall not include any name, identification, description, advertisement, display or
illustration located completely within an enclosed building or structure unless the content thereof shall be exposed to view from the outside
of the building.
C. For the purpose of this chapter, a building, or portion of a building, or any item or material (opaque, transparent, colored or illuminated)
physically attached to the exterior or interior of a building which departs from standard architectural treatment in an attempt to attract
attention to the premises by reason of color scheme and/or illumination, or part of a building or facade not required structurally or for
maintenance, and which is intended to direct attention to products, goods, services, events or entertainment, shall be considered a "sign"
and be subject to all pertinent regulations, including sign area, as defined by this chapter.
D. The term "sign" shall include, but not be limited to, the following categories, types and styles of signs:
1. Content:
a. Business Identification Sign: A sign containing information limited to the name of the business as it appears on the records of the
Illinois department of revenue, or the common name of the business as it identifies itself to the general public. Website addresses and
telephone numbers will not be permitted, with the exception that they may be allowed in the old town preservation district. Where
allowed by sign guidelines that are specific to unified shopping centers or planned developments, a logo or trademark may substitute
for one of the words, and it shall be approximate in size to one of the letter characters in the sign.
b. Community Identification Sign: A sign incorporating information referring exclusively to service clubs, churches, not for profit groups,
community slogans, directional information to public facilities or historic markers, and/or government statistics.
c. Building Identification Sign: A sign indicating the name or trademark of a building or its occupants, the name of the building's
management entity, and the telephone number of the establishment or the business directory listing of the building on which the sign
is located. Street numbers, by themselves, do not constitute an identification sign.
d. Nameplate: A nonilluminated sign identifying only the name and occupation of the occupant, or the name of the premises, on which
the sign is located.
e. Public Service Information Sign: A sign intended primarily to promote items of general interest to the community including, but not
limited to, items such as time, temperature, date, atmospheric conditions, news and/or traffic control.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 485/548
f. Residential Real Estate Sign: A freestanding sign used to advertise the availability of the property upon which it is placed as being for
sale, lease or rent.
g. Commercial Real Estate Sign: A freestanding sign of a commercial nature which advertises the sale, lease or rental of the premises,
parcel, structure, or establishment, or a portion thereof, on which such sign is located.
h. Awning Or Canopy Sign: A sign that is mounted or painted on or attached to an awning or canopy that is otherwise permitted by this
code. No such sign shall project above, below, or beyond the physical dimensions of such awning or canopy. An "awning valance" or
"canopy valance" shall be defined as the material projecting below the lowest edge of the awning or canopy to which it is attached.
Awning and canopy signs are permitted in all business districts and the old town district, except as provided in this section. All awning
and canopy signage (including valance signage) are subject to the following:
(1) All awnings, canopies and valances must be opaque;
(2) No signage is permitted on the side of any awning;
(3) Signage on awnings and canopies shall be limited to logos and/or graphics;
(4) Signage and awning or canopy valances shall be limited to text only. Such text shall be limited to the business name as defined in
this section, goods, products or services provided by the business.
(5) All awnings, with the exception of any proposed signage, must be solid in color and consist of the standard color palette including
black, maroon, forest green or navy. Awnings in old town may, upon the review and approval of the building commissioner, be
permitted to install an alternate color or pattern, provided it conforms to the concept, purpose and intent of the district.
(6) No websites or phone numbers shall be permitted on any portion of an awning or canopy.
(7) Total for all awning, canopy and valance signage, shall count toward and may not exceed the total wall sign area otherwise
permitted in this section.
2. Illumination And Movement:
a. Animated Sign: A sign which includes or incorporates action or movement.
b. Changeable Copy Sign: A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or numerals that can be changed or rearranged manually,
without altering the face or the surface of the sign.
c. Changing Sign (Automatic): A sign such as electronically controlled public service time, temperature and date sign message center or
readerboard, where different copy changes are shown on the same lamp bank.
d. Electrical Sign: A sign containing electrical wiring which is attached or intended to be attached to an electrical energy source.
e. Illuminated Sign: A sign in which the source of illumination is a fundamental or integral part of the sign.
f. Indirectly Illuminated Sign: A sign which reflects light from a source intentionally directed thereon.
g. Nonilluminated Sign: A sign which has no direct or indirect source of light.
3. Materials And Placement:
a. Awning: A shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and composed of nonrigid materials except for the supporting
framework. When an awning contains, embodies or displays any verbiage, trademark, logo or similar representation, these elements
shall constitute a "sign".
b. Banner Sign: A temporary sign composed of lightweight material, secured or mounted so as to allow movement of the sign such as is
caused by movement of the atmosphere. A banner sign shall include any banner with or without lettering, figures or symbols and
constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, or other light material, with or without frames.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 486/548
c. Building Sign: A sign attached to or supported by the exterior of any part of a building, except its roof, but which does not project over
a street, alley or public way.
d. Canopy: A structure, other than an awning, made of cloth, metal or other materials with frames affixed to a building and carried by a
frame which is supported by the ground. When a canopy contains, embodies or displays any verbiage, trademark, logo or similar
representation, those elements constitute a sign.
e. Freestanding Sign: A sign which is not attached to any building or structure, but is secured to the ground.
f. Portable Sign: Any sign on a trailer with or without wheels, but capable of being moved and not permanently attached to the ground or
building.
g. Roof Sign: A sign erected and maintained upon or over the roof of any building, with the principal support on the roof structure. A sign
which is attached to a mansard roof and protrudes wholly or partially above the roofline of the building or structure to which the
mansard roof is attached shall be considered a roof sign.
h. Wall Sign: A sign which is placed against a building or other structure and which is attached to the exterior front, rear or side wall of a
building. The term "wall sign" shall include a sign attached to a mansard roof and not protruding, wholly or partially, above the lowest
point of the roof of the building or structure to which the mansard roof is attached.
i. Window Sign: A sign that is posted on the interior or exterior of a window of a building or structure which is intended to be read from
the exterior of the building or structure.
SIGN STRUCTURE: Any structure which supports, has supported, or is capable of supporting a sign.
SITE PLAN: The development plan for one or more lots on which is shown, and dimensioned to scale, the existing and proposed condition of
the lot.
STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS: The supports, uprights, bracing and framework of a sign.
STRUCTURAL TRIM: The molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing and platforms which are attached to a sign structure.
UNLAWFUL SIGN: A sign which contravenes the terms of this chapter or which the Building Commissioner has declared to be unlawful
because it poses a danger to public safety by reason of dilapidation or abandonment; a nonconforming sign for which any permit required under
any previous ordinance was not obtained.
VILLAGE: That area contained within the corporate limits of the Village of Bloomingdale. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. Ord. 2008-14, 3-24-
2008; 2012 Code; Ord. 2012-27, 6-11-2012; Ord. 2017-08, 3-13-2017; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
11-14-4: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
Any sign not specifically permitted under the terms of this chapter or of the Highway Advertising Control Act of 19712, shall be prohibited. Such
signs include, but are not limited to:
A. Inflatable signs and tethered balloons.
B. Pennants.
C. Strings of lights, except those exempt by the terms of this chapter (see section 11-14-3 of this chapter, definition of "decorative lighting").
D. Beacons, except as permitted under subsection 11-14-11D of this chapter.
E. Box signs. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
11-14-5: AUTHORIZATION BY PROPERTY OWNER:
Except as provided in section 11-14-6 of this chapter, no person shall erect, alter, or relocate any sign within the Village without first obtaining
the express consent of the owner of the land upon which the sign shall be erected, altered or relocated, in addition to obtaining a sign permit
from the Building Commissioner and making payment therefor. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 487/548
11-14-6: SIGNS NOT REQUIRING PERMIT:
No permits shall be required for the following signs when erected or displayed as set forth below and in accordance with all other requirements
of the zoning district in which they are located. Except as noted, such signs shall not be illuminated and shall not be placed in or otherwise
erected upon any public right-of-way, nor be attached to any building or structure thereon.
A. Interior Signs: Any sign which is completely within an enclosed building and which sign is not intended to be visible from outside the building.
B. Monuments And Markers: Tablets, grave markers, headstones, statuary, or remembrances of persons or events which are noncommercial in
nature.
C. Decorations And Displays: Noncommercial decorations or displays celebrating the occasion of legal or religious holidays and which are
erected and/or maintained for a period of less than forty five (45) days. Such decorations or displays may be illuminated.
D. Vehicular Signs: Signs on a truck, bus, trailer or other vehicle while such vehicle is operated in the normal course of a business which is not
primarily the display of such signs.
E. Residential Real Estate Signs: Freestanding signs which are used to offer for sale, lease or rent the property upon which the sign is placed.
F. No Trespassing And No Dumping Signs: No trespassing or no dumping signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area per sign and not
exceeding four (4) signs in number per acre. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992)
G. Political Signs:
1. Signs or posters announcing or describing candidates seeking public political office, announcing or describing political issues and data
pertinent thereto.
2. Such signs shall contain a sign surface area not to exceed twenty four (24) square feet.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to post any political sign on any public property; and it shall be unlawful to post any
political sign on any property without the written consent of the owner thereof. (Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
H. Garage And Rummage Sale Signs: Temporary signs announcing the sale of new or used personal property from a private residence where
the sale activity is occasional and infrequent and not associated with a permanent commercial establishment.
I. Employment Or Help Wanted Signs: Employment or help wanted signs which are placed in the window of the establishment which intends to
employ the personnel described in the sign and which is located in any commercial, office or industrial district.
1. Employment or help wanted signs shall, in the aggregate, not exceed six (6) square feet for any one establishment.
2. No more than two (2) such signs shall be displayed for any one establishment.
J. Window Signs: Window signs describing or advertising a retail sale promotion or special sale or event shall be subject to the regulations
contained in subsection 11-14-11C of this chapter. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
11-14-7: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, reerect, alter, relocate, affix or
paint any sign, perform routine maintenance, change lettering, or change printed copy or paint on an existing sign without first having
obtained a sign permit. Where electrical and/or construction permits are required in connection with erecting, reerecting, relocating, altering,
changing, affixing or painting a sign, these shall be obtained at the same time as the sign permit. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992)
B. Application For Permit: Application for a sign permit shall be made in writing on forms provided by the Building Commissioner and shall
include: (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
1. Site plans for freestanding signs only, in triplicate, drawn to scale, and fully dimensioned, showing:
a. A north arrow.
b. A dimensioned site plan of the parcel or lot upon which the sign is to be located.
c. The name, address and telephone number of the person erecting the sign.
d. The name, address and telephone number of the person applying for the sign permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 488/548
e. The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property upon which the sign is to be erected.
f. The location and setback of the sign upon the parcel or lot upon which it is to be erected.
2. Three (3) copies of all signage drawings, including freestanding signs, with elevation and section showing sign faces; exposed surfaces
and horizontal dimension in scale as to size, proportion and color, and indicating the dimensions between the lowest elevation of the sign
and grade; the projection from buildings or sign structures; and a description of the sign including, but not limited to, illumination and
colors.
3. Three (3) copies of structural and electrical plans.
4. The written consent of the owner of the building, structure or property upon or to which the sign is to be erected. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992)
5. Such other information as the Building Commissioner shall require to show full compliance with this chapter and all other laws and
ordinances of the Village.
C. Review Of Application: Each application for a sign permit shall be reviewed by the Building Commissioner for the purpose of determining
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws and ordinances of the Village.
D. Issuance Or Denial Of Permit:
1. The Building Commissioner shall issue a sign permit for the erection, reerection, alteration, relocation, affixing or painting of a sign within
the Village when the required permit application is properly made, all appropriate fees have been paid, and the Building Commissioner has
determined that the sign will comply with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws and ordinances of the Village. (Ord.
92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
2. When any application for sign permit is denied by the Building Commissioner, he shall give written notice of the denial to the applicant,
together with a brief written statement of the reasons for the denial. Appeal from the Building Commissioner decision to deny a permit
application may be made by the applicant to the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the ordinances of the Village. (Ord.
92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
E. Permit Fees And Bond:
1. With the exception of commercial real estate signs, every sign permit application shall be accompanied by a fee established by the Village
Board of Trustees to reimburse the Village for expenses incurred in connection with its sign review, inspections and services. This fee may
be waived for nonprofit and governmental organizations. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
2. A refundable bond may be required by the Building Commissioner at the time the application is made. This fee shall be refunded
subsequent to staff approval of the sign and permit application, and final inspection by staff, after the sign has been installed. (Ord. 92-38,
6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
F. Exceptions: Any requested exception from the terms of this chapter shall be reviewed and evaluated by the Village Plan Commission at a
public meeting. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall act as a recommending body to the Village Board of Trustees, who shall be
responsible for taking action on the requested exception. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
G. Limitations: Sign permits shall permit the erection, reerection, alteration, relocation, affixing or painting of a sign only on the property
designated in the permit and only by the person to whom the permit was issued and shall not be transferable. A separate sign permit must
be obtained for each sign for which a permit is required. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992)
11-14-8: GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS:
A. Obstructions Caused By Signs: No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free access to, or egress from, any door,
window or fire escape. No sign containing advertising of any kind shall be attached or affixed to any standpipe or fire escape. (Ord. 92-38, 6-
22-1992)
B. Traffic Hazards: In order to assure traffic safety, no sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained in such a manner as will, in the
determination of the Building Commissioner or Village Engineer: (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
1. By reason of size, location, content, coloring or manner of illumination, obstruct the vision of drivers or obstruct or detract from the visibility
or effectiveness of any traffic sign or control device on streets and roads within the Village.
2. Make use of words, phrases, symbols, lights or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. (Ord. 92-38, 6-
22-1992)
C. Image/Video/Movement: Except as provided for in subsection T of this section, moving, rotating or animated signs, as well as signs creating
the illusion of movement or LED based technology or any other electronically generated graphic display, shall be prohibited. (Ord. 2016-25,
7-11-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 489/548
D. Illuminated Signs: In addition to other applicable requirements set forth in this chapter, all illuminated signs must comply with the following
provisions:
1. With the exception of "changing signs (automatic)", as defined in subsection D2c under the definition of "sign" in section 11-14-3 of this
chapter, all illuminated signs within one hundred feet (100') of any residential zoning district shall be turned off between the hours of
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. unless the establishment is engaged in the operation of business during such
period, in which case, the sign may be lit during the hours of operation only.
2. Illumination shall be installed or applied only through a translucent surface; or recessed into the sign structure; or if the light source is
external to the sign, directed to and concentrated on the sign. Signs utilizing exposed neon tubing are not permitted. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-
1992)
3. Where lighting fixtures project light upon a freestanding sign, the fixtures shall be placed so that the light source is aimed toward the sign
and away from the street. Lighting that is projected upon a sign shall not exceed one thousand six hundred (1,600) lumens per side. The
light fixture shall have the light source fully shielded or recessed into the fixture housing. (Ord. 2012-27, 6-11-2012)
4. Floodlights, gooseneck reflectors or other external sources of illumination shall be contained within a protective casing.
5. Illumination shall be constant in intensity and color and shall not consist of flashing, animated, chasing, scintillating or other illumination
conveying the sense of movement. Signs which exhibit only time and temperature may be permitted.
E. Decorative Lighting: The placement and use of "decorative lighting", as defined in section 11-14-3 of this chapter, shall be prohibited. This
prohibition is not intended to apply to temporary decorative lighting installed for the purpose of celebrating the occasion of legal or religious
holidays, which may be erected and/or maintained for a total of forty five (45) days in a calendar year.
F. Vertical And Horizontal Extensions:
1. Any sign placed flat against a wall, mansard roof, canopy or awning shall not extend beyond any vertical corner edge of such wall,
canopy, awning, roofline or parapet.
2. In addition to the requirement of subsection F1 of this section, placement of any wall sign must meet the following provisions:
a. Signs shall not cover, wholly or partially, any wall opening, nor project beyond the sides of the wall to which it is affixed.
b. Signs shall not project from the wall on which they are mounted in such a manner as to pose an obstruction or hazard to pedestrians or
vehicles. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992)
G. Changeable Copy: Except as provided under subsections D5 and T of this section and subsection 11-14-11H of this chapter, changeable
copy signs shall not be permitted. (Ord. 2016-25, 7-11-2016)
H. Signs In Public Areas: Except for official signs erected by an agency or unit of government, no sign shall be erected on any tree, utility pole,
traffic standard or other public sign standard or in public rights-of-way. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992)
I. Planned Development Signs: Signs located within a planned development shall be governed by those standards set forth in the underlying
zoning district. Such standards may, however, be modified by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 18 of this title. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
J. Old Town Signage:
1. With the exception of provisions contained in subsection J2 of this section, all new signs hereinafter installed in the Old Town District shall
comply with the requirements of section 11-11-6 of this title. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
2. The Building Commissioner may approve modifications to existing signs in the district where copy is changed to reflect a new tenant;
provided, however, that: (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
a. Materials, area, height and other applicable dimensions comply with the requirements of this chapter.
b. Color styling complements the building in which the tenant is located.
c. Lettering style is consistent with that included in the General Plan adopted for the Old Town District.
3. Signs in Old Town shall be consistent with guidelines set forth in the General Development Plan as detailed in exhibit A of the Old Town
plan attached to ordinance 2006-03. Generally, copy may consist of either routed, sandblasted, or individually applied letters, or may be
painted directly onto the sign face. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
4. Where signage is part of a special use application, review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval by the Village Board
may also be required. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
K. Flags:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 490/548
1. Unless authorized by the Village Board, flags, other than those of any nation, state or political subdivision, shall be prohibited. There shall
be a maximum of two (2) flagpoles for each zoning lot.
2. The height of a flagpole shall be in proportion to the scale of the building to which it relates, and in no case shall be higher than the
following height limitations:
Height Of Building
(Stories)
Height Of Flagpole
(Feet)
1 to 2 20
3 to 5 25
6 to 10 35
3. The vertical length of a permitted flag on a flagpole shall not exceed one-third (1/3) the length of the pole upon which it is hung. All flags
are to be maintained in an orderly fashion. Torn flags shall be taken down and replaced.
L. Billboards: It is unlawful to construct, erect, locate, or maintain any billboard without complying with the following provisions:
1. Location: Billboards may be allowed only along primary highways, expressways, and interstate highways located within a B-4 (Business)
or M-1 (Manufacturing) Zoning District.
2. Principal Use: Billboards shall be allowed only as the principal use of a zoning lot. Billboards shall not be erected on any zoning lot which
contains an existing principal structure, building or use.
3. Number: No more than one billboard shall be located on a zoning lot.
4. Area: No billboard shall exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in sign surface area per sign face.
5. Height: No billboard shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height. In all cases, height shall be measured as defined in the definition of "height
of sign" in section 11-14-3 of this chapter.
6. Bulk Requirements: Billboards shall meet the minimum yard, lot and setback requirements of the zoning district in which they are located.
7. Residential Property Setback: Billboards shall not be located closer than one hundred feet (100') from residentially zoned property.
8. Distance Between Signs: Billboards shall be located a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from any other billboard or freestanding sign.
9. Protective Curbing: Any billboard within three feet (3') of a driveway, parking area, or maneuvering area shall be completely surrounded by
a curbing that is not less than three feet (3') from the outermost perimeter of the billboard, unless the billboard is mounted on a pole with a
sign clearance of at least twelve feet (12') above grade.
10. Design: Every billboard, including the frames, braces and supports thereof, shall be securely built and designed by a structural engineer,
registered architect, or sign manufacturer, as may be required by the building official. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992)
11. Anchorage And Supports: All billboards shall be securely built, constructed, erected and certified safe by a registered architect or
engineer, upon posts and standards sunk below the natural surface sufficient to prevent overturning, to the satisfaction of the building and
zoning official. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
M. Vehicles With Signs: Any vehicle or trailer regularly and customarily used to transport persons or property for a business or activity, which
has attached thereto or located thereon any sign or advertising device for the basic purpose of providing advertisement of or directing people
to a business or activity located on any premises, shall be exempt from the regulations of this chapter, except for the following:
1. The parking of any vehicle bearing a sign shall be limited to the premises upon which the business or activity to which said sign refers is
located. The overnight parking of such a vehicle may be permitted at the private residence of the vehicle operator, provided said vehicle is
in compliance with chapter 13 of this title.
2. The parking of any vehicle bearing a sign in such a way or in such a location so that the vehicle functionally serves as a freestanding sign,
advertising or directing viewers to the business or activity to which the signage refers shall be prohibited.
3. The parking of any vehicle bearing a sign in public view which is not in operating condition and/or lacks a current registration shall be
prohibited.
N. Abandoned, Obsolete Signs:
1. Any sign which no longer identifies a bona fide business, activity, event or service conducted, or product sold on the premises where the
sign is located, or otherwise, shall be taken down by the owner of the building, structure or property upon which said sign is located. (Ord.
92-38, 6-22-1992)
2. If such sign is not removed, the Building Commissioner shall issue written notification to the owner of the building, structure or property,
and the sign shall be removed within ten (10) days of receipt of such notification. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42,
11-13-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 491/548
O. Nonconforming Signs: It is reasonable that special conditions be placed upon the continuance of existing nonconforming signs. This special
condition program permits the current owner to continue using the nonconforming sign while at the same time assuring that the district in
which the nonconforming sign exists will eventually comply.
1. Continuance Of Nonconforming Signs: Subject to the termination provisions set forth in subsection O2 of this section, any nonconforming
sign may be continued in operation and maintained after the effective date hereof. Ordinary repairs and alterations may be made to a
nonconforming sign, subject to the approval of the building and zoning official, however, no structural alterations shall be made to the sign
unless such alterations shall cause such structure to conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. A prohibited structural
alteration occurs when there is an extension or enlargement of the supporting elements of the sign, or reconstruction of a nonconforming
sign.
2. Termination Of Nonconforming Signs:
a. By Abandonment: Abandonment or cessation for a period of ninety (90) days or the change of the principal use to which the
nonconforming sign is accessory shall terminate immediately the right to maintain such sign.
b. By Violation: Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall terminate immediately the right to maintain a nonconforming sign.
c. By Destruction, Damage, Or Obsolescence: The right to maintain any nonconforming sign shall terminate and shall cease to exist when
one of the following applies:
(1) The sign is damaged or destroyed, from any cause whatsoever, to the extent that its repair or replacement cost exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of its replacement cost as of the date it became nonconforming. Notwithstanding the foregoing, damage or destruction limited
to the face of the sign may be repaired or replaced regardless of the cost of the replacement, if so desired; or
(2) The sign becomes a hazard or a danger to the safety or welfare of the general public; or
(3) The sign is totally destroyed, from any cause whatsoever.
d. Change In Use: A change of use of the building or site represented by the nonconforming sign shall terminate immediately the right to
maintain the nonconforming sign. The new owner or tenant of the new use has ninety (90) days from the close of sale or date of lease
or lease change within which to bring the nonconforming sign into compliance.
e. By New Development Or Redevelopment On The Zoning Lot: Where new construction or redevelopment occurs on a zoning lot, any
nonconforming sign which may exist on said lot shall be removed or modified as necessary to conform to the requirements of this
chapter. This shall occur before permits are issued for site development and building construction on the premises. For purposes of this
section, new development or redevelopment occurs under at least one of the following conditions:
(1) When the existing structures on a zoning lot are removed and replaced with new building(s);
(2) When there is an addition of more than fifty percent (50%) of the existing floor area to the existing buildings on a zoning lot;
(3) When there is a renovation involving building permits for more than fifty percent (50%) of the existing floor area on a zoning lot;
(4) When there is an expansion of the building on the zoning lot that necessitates the removal of the nonconforming sign.
f. By Roadway Widening: Nonconforming signs which are moved or affected by roadway widening shall not be reinstated but shall,
instead, be brought into conformance with all elements of this code.
3. Notification To Remove:
a. If the building and zoning official shall find that any sign is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or has been constructed or
erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the building and zoning official shall issue written notice of
such condition or violation to the person to whom the permit for said sign has been issued or to the building owner.
b. All notices issued by the building and zoning official shall describe the sign and its location and shall specify the manner in which the
sign is in violation of the ordinance(s) of the village. All notices issued by the building and zoning official shall be sent by certified mail to
the person to whom the permit for said sign has been issued, and to the current owner. Any time period provided in this chapter shall be
deemed to commence on the date of the receipt of the certified mail, or if receipt is refused, on the date of mailing.
c. After ten (10) days of the receipt of the certified mail as described in subsection O3b of this section, if the party to whom such notice is
issued fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the provisions of this chapter the building and zoning official may remove or
alter the sign at the expense of the owner.
d. The cost of removing the sign, including legal fees, court costs, and related trial expenses, may be recovered by the village through any
appropriate legal proceeding or by assessment against the property. The cost of removal shall be deemed to include any and all
incidental expenses, as well as all direct and indirect costs, incurred by the village in connection with removal of the sign.
e. The building and zoning official may cause any sign which is an immediate peril to the health, welfare or safety of persons or property to
be removed summarily and without notice.
f. The building and zoning official shall not issue any sign permit to any person who has failed to pay costs or expenses incurred by the
village in removing or altering any sign for which he has previously obtained a permit, regardless of whether legal proceedings have
been initiated for the purpose of recovering such costs.
4. Exceptions: Nonconforming signs may be granted formal conforming status by requesting an exception to the sign ordinance through a
public meeting conducted by the planning and zoning commission with review and approval by the village board of trustees. (Ord. 2014-
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 492/548
48, 10-27-2014)
P. Development Ordinances: The village board may execute ordinances for individual developments which contain specific language and
regulations for project related signage. Where this occurs and sign requirements set forth in the development ordinance for a specific project
conflict with the standards of this chapter, the terms of the development ordinance shall take precedence, unless the owner decides,
subsequent to the adoption of the development ordinance, to conform to the most restrictive regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-
1992)
Q. Outdoor Display Of Merchandise:
1. The outdoor display of merchandise to attract attention to a business shall be prohibited. All merchandise shall be fully enclosed within a
building, unless a special use permit is obtained in accordance with section 11-3-4 of this title. Any unauthorized merchandise on display
outdoors is considered contraband and may be summarily seized for evidence by the village.
2. After a written notice of violation, village services personnel may confiscate said unauthorized merchandise displayed illegally for
evidence in prosecution of the violation. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
R. Landscaping At Base Of Sign: All freestanding signs shall be accompanied by, at minimum, evergreen plantings at the base of the sign to
extend at least three feet (3') in all directions around the base of the sign. For freestanding signs larger than thirty five (35) square feet in
area, the area of landscaping around the base of the sign shall increase accordingly. (Ord. 2012-27, 6-11-2012)
S. Temporary Civic, Charitable, And Philanthropic Signage: Charitable, religious, or civic organizations ("organization(s)") may erect temporary
signs for fundraising and other related events, on private property that may or may not ("off premises signage") be owned or controlled by
said organization, if consistent with the following requirements:
1. The area of the temporary sign shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet.
2. Each organization shall be allowed one off premises temporary sign annually and two (2) on premises signs annually.
3. The duration of temporary signage shall not exceed thirty (30) consecutive days.
4. The placement of a temporary off premises sign on private property shall be limited to lots facing Lake Street, Gary Avenue, Schick Road,
Bloomingdale Road, Glen Ellyn Road, and Army Trail Road.
5. The organization shall obtain a sign permit from the village, although no permit fee shall be assessed.
6. The organization shall provide documentation indicating the sign location on a site plan or aerial photo, and include pertinent information
regarding size and materials.
7. Sign height and placement with respect to property line and street curb shall be the same as that required for permanent signs on the
streets and roads listed in subsection S4 of this section.
8. If site conditions preclude placement within minimum distance from the property line or street curb, the building and zoning official may
permit placement with less than the required distance subsequent to his determination that line of sight and other public safety
considerations are not adversely affected. (Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
T. Electronic Message Boards For Certain Governmental Organizations:
1. Electronic message boards shall only be permitted on properties owned and operated by school districts located within the Village of
Bloomingdale, Bloomingdale Park District and/or the Village of Bloomingdale and shall not be located within the boundaries of the Old
Town District. In addition, Bloomingdale Fire Protection District shall also be permitted one such sign for station 23, located on Gary
Avenue, and no other station. Such message boards shall only be permitted when incorporated within a freestanding monument sign. The
overall sign must comply with all existing requirements, limitations and allowance, as set forth in this chapter, regarding freestanding
monument signs. Electronic message boards incorporated into an approved sign shall be subject to the following conditions:
a. Electronic message centers shall be used to display public information only.
b. Electronic message centers shall not exceed the maximum square footage allowed for signage within the district in which the sign is
proposed.
c. Changeable copy may not be animated and may not change more frequently than once every twenty (20) seconds.
d. A maximum of two (2) electronic message centers shall be allowed per governing agency or, in the case of a school district, only one
per school. The Bloomingdale Fire Protection District shall be limited to one such sign, which may only be located at station 23 on Gary
Avenue.
e. No sounds will be permitted.
2. Any changes or amendments to this subsection T, may be approved by the Village Board without the review and recommendation of the
Planning and Zoning Commission. The Village Board may at its discretion, however, refer such requests to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for a public hearing, according to the applicable procedures for new text amendments as specified in this Code. (Ord. 2016-
25, 7-11-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 493/548
11-14-9: SIGNS IN ALL DISTRICTS:
A. Construction Signs: Construction signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts for the purpose of denoting the construction of individual
buildings or projects as follows:
1. Construction signs shall not be erected any earlier than four (4) months prior to the actual commencement of construction.
2. All construction signs shall be confined to the construction site. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
3. All construction signs shall be removed within ten (10) days of completion of construction and, in all cases, prior to the issuance of an
occupancy permit, unless otherwise approved by the Building Commissioner. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-
13-2017)
4. Upon removal of the construction sign, advertisement of the sale, lease or rent of the property may be achieved through the use of a real
estate sign in accordance with this chapter, or a commercial leasing sign in accordance with subsection D of this section.
5. The content of construction signs shall be limited to the project name/logo; the architect; the engineer; the contractor; the builder or
developer; the lending institution; the business of the establishment under construction; the opening date; the type of units being offered;
information pertaining to the price of such units; the leasing agent and his or her telephone number; and financing and amenities.
6. No more than one construction sign shall be allowed per street frontage per project. Separate construction signs may be allowed in
planned developments in accordance with the type of buildings to be constructed in the planned development.
7. The maximum size of any construction sign fronting on Lake Street, Army Trail Road or Gary Avenue shall be one hundred (100) square
feet per sign face, or two hundred (200) square feet total. The maximum size of any construction sign fronting on any other street shall not
exceed fifty (50) square feet per sign face. Construction signs may be double sided.
8. Construction signs shall not exceed nine feet (9') in height.
9. Construction signs shall be located with a minimum setback of fifteen feet (15') from any property line or from the back of the curb of an
adjacent access drive. In all cases, construction signs shall be set back twenty feet (20') from the back of the curb of an adjacent public
street.
10. Construction signs shall not be illuminated.
B. Directional Signs: Signs which provide only direction or information for vehicular movement to churches, public places, shopping centers and
places of public accommodation shall be permitted as follows: (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
1. Directional signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area, unless otherwise approved by the Building Commissioner or Village Board
as part of the site plan review process.
2. There shall be no maximum number of signs, but the number and location of all directional signs shall be as determined by the Building
Commissioner as necessary for safety. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-12-2017)
3. Except within residential/agricultural districts, directional signs may be illuminated. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
4. The maximum height of any freestanding directional sign shall not exceed four feet (4'), as measured from the top of the adjacent curb,
unless otherwise approved by the Building Commissioner or Village Board as part of the site plan review process. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992;
amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
C. Development Identification Signs: Freestanding signs shall be permitted for the purpose of identifying planned developments, subdivisions or
retail commercial development of three (3) acres or more, subject to the following conditions:
1. There shall be a maximum of one such freestanding sign for each planned unit development, residential subdivision or commercial
development of three (3) acres or more; provided, however, that:
a. Where a planned unit development has multiple entrances along public streets, additional signs may be granted by the Village Board.
(Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992)
b. Development identification signs as provided herein shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission at a public meeting and
approved by the Village Board. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
c. Identification signs for residential subdivisions may be installed on masonry entry monuments, constructed on both sides of the entry.
Where approved, entry monuments and development identification signs shall be provided with landscape plantings so that they blend
into the landscape of which they are a part. Residential signs shall be maintained by a homeowners' association or similar organization.
No such sign shall be permitted unless the applicant furnishes satisfactory proof to the Village Board that the sign will be maintained in
good condition and repair as long as it is displayed. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992)
2. The total size, including the base of a freestanding sign, shall not exceed nine feet (9') in height nor twenty four inches (24") in thickness.
Where such signs are installed on entrance monuments, said monuments shall comply with all setback requirements set forth herein.
(Ord. 2017-08, 3-13-2017)
3. The sign area shall not exceed thirty five (35) square feet per side, limited to two (2) sides, or seventy (70) square feet total. A retail
commercial or multiuse planned development of three (3) acres or more may be granted a sign area not to exceed sixty three (63) square
feet per side, limited to two (2) sides, or one hundred twenty six (126) square feet total.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 494/548
4. The sign shall be located such that the nearest edge shall be set back a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from all property lines and the curb
of adjacent access drives and, in no case, less than twenty feet (20') from the back of the curb of an adjacent public street.
5. The sign shall not impede normal pedestrian movement nor obstruct the driver line of sight for motor vehicle traffic. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-
1992)
6. Except within residential and agricultural districts, development identification signs may be illuminated. However, low level landscape
lighting shall be permitted in residential and agricultural districts, subject to review and approval by the Building Commissioner. Said
landscape lighting shall be adjusted to avoid direct illumination of the sign. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-
2017)
7. Tenant identification may be provided on freestanding development identification signs in commercially zoned districts, provided they are
consistent with the following: (Ord. 2012-27, 6-11-2012)
a. Brick, stone, or other masonry material used in the facade of the principal building shall be used for the base or side supports of the
sign. No part of the sign shall be more than eighteen inches (18") above grade. Side supports, if used, shall be less than twenty four
inches (24") in depth and width. (Ord. 2017-08, 3-13-2017)
b. A minimum of eighteen inches (18") from grade shall remain clear of sign copy to allow for landscaping at the base of the sign. (Ord.
2012-27, 6-11-2012)
c. All tenant panels' backgrounds within the sign shall be the same color. Colors and materials should have a flat, matte finish. (Ord. 2017-
08, 3-13-2017)
d. Other than text used to identify the tenants, there shall not be any other graphics used in the sign background of the tenant panels.
e. Neither telephone numbers nor website addresses shall be allowed on the multi-tenant identification sign.
f. The shape of the outer perimeter of the sign structure shall be square, rectangular, or symmetrical in shape, including the sign base. The
sign shall contain elements of articulation, such as cornices, pediments, and stone caps, to give the sign dimension.
g. The shopping center identification portion of the sign shall occupy, at minimum, the top twenty five percent (25%) of the sign face area.
A small logo, approximate in size to that of one of the letter characters in the name of the shopping center, may be allowed in the
shopping center identification portion of the sign. (Ord. 2012-27, 6-11-2012)
h. All tenant panels shall be the same size, and no more than two (2) columns shall be permitted.
i. A maximum of four (4) tenants shall be allowed on a sign with thirty five (35) square feet for properties under three (3) acres and a
maximum of six (6) tenants shall be allowed for a sign with sixty three (63) square feet for properties over three (3) acres, pursuant to
subsection C3 of this section. (Ord. 2017-08, 3-13-2017)
D. Commercial Real Estate Signs:
1. Three Acres Or More: With the exception of owner occupied residential subdivisions, commercial real estate signs shall be allowed for
developments three (3) acres or more in size under unified control, subject to the following:
a. A commercial real estate sign shall be located only upon the premises for or containing space for sale, lease or rental. No off site
commercial real estate signs shall be allowed. One commercial real estate sign is allowed per street frontage. The sign may or may not
be two (2) sided. In no case shall more than two (2) commercial real estate signs be permitted for each development.
b. The maximum size of such signs shall be thirty two (32) square feet per sign face, unless combined with a freestanding business
identification sign, in which case, total sign area shall not exceed fifty eight (58) square feet.
c. Unless combined with a freestanding business identification sign, copy shall be limited to sale, lease or rental information only. No
business or tenant identification shall be permitted.
d. The height of any commercial real estate sign shall be limited to nine feet (9').
e. A commercial real estate sign shall be set back a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from all property lines and the curb of adjacent access
drives and, in no case, less than twenty feet (20') from the back of the curb of an adjacent public street. At the discretion of the building
and zoning official, real estate signs as allowed by this section may be wall or building mounted in lieu of freestanding.
f. Commercial real estate signs shall be so designed and constructed to create and maintain a durable structure having a permanent
appearance. Plans and drawings for commercial real estate signs shall be subject to review and approval by the building and zoning
official.
g. Commercial real estate signs shall not be illuminated unless part of a project identification sign.
h. The base of any commercial real estate sign shall be landscaped with shrub plantings. Said landscaping shall be subject to review and
approval by the building and zoning official.
2. Less Than Three Acres: With the exception of owner occupied residential subdivisions, commercial real estate signs shall be allowed for
developments less than three (3) acres in size under unified control, subject to the following:
a. A commercial real estate sign shall be located only upon the premises for or containing space for lease or rent. No off site commercial
real estate signs shall be allowed. One commercial real estate sign is allowed per street frontage. The sign may or may not be two (2)
sided. In no case shall more than two (2) commercial real estate signs be permitted for each development.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 495/548
b. The maximum size of such signs shall be sixteen (16) square feet per sign face.
c. Copy shall be limited to sale, lease or rental information only. No business or tenant identification shall be permitted.
d. The height of any commercial real estate sign shall be limited to five feet (5'), as measured from the grade of the adjacent curb.
e. A commercial real estate sign shall be set back a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from all property lines and the curb of adjacent access
drives and, in no case, less than twenty feet (20') from the back of the curb of an adjacent public street. At the discretion of the building
and zoning official, real estate signs as allowed by this section may be wall or building mounted in lieu of freestanding.
f. Commercial real estate signs shall be so designed and constructed to create and maintain a durable structure having a permanent
appearance. Plans and drawings for commercial leasing signs shall be subject to review and approval by the building and zoning
official.
g. Commercial real estate signs shall not be illuminated.
h. The base of any commercial real estate sign shall be landscaped with shrub plantings. Said landscaping shall be subject to review and
approval by the building and zoning official. (Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
E. Display Of Banners For Nonprofit Or Governmental Organizations: Banners identifying a special, unique, or limited activity, service, project,
or event of limited duration may be permitted as follows: (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
1. Duration: Banners may be erected and maintained for a period not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days prior to the activity, project,
service or event to which the banner refers, unless written approval is obtained by the Building Commissioner to extend the thirty (30) day
display time for a specified number of days. In all cases, banners shall be removed within three (3) days of the termination of the activity,
project, or event. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
2. Location: Banners for nonprofit or governmental organizations may be located on public property or within public rights-of-way as follows:
a. North side of Springfield Drive, between Lake Street and Schick Road, including the intersection.
b. Schick Road, between Bloomingdale Road and Gary Avenue; and
c. Bloomingdale Road, Lake Street and Schick Road in the Old Town District.
3. Display:
a. Banners for nonprofit or governmental organizations may be located on a building, or banners may be installed on poles in customer
parking lots or along those public rights-of-way identified in subsection E2 of this section.
b. The maximum size of any banner installed on a building shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the projected elevation of the facade upon
which it is located and shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992)
c. Banners shall have a vertical clearance of nine feet (9') above grade from a sidewalk or landscaped area and twelve feet (12') above
the grade of a customer parking lot, drive aisle or public right-of-way, unless written approval is obtained from the Building
Commissioner.
d. In no case shall banners project higher than eighteen feet (18') above the sidewalk or street, unless written approval is obtained from
the Building Commissioner. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
e. Banners displayed on poles shall be double sided and shall not exceed six feet (6') in height nor two and one-half feet (21/2') in width.
f. Not more than two (2) banners shall be allowed per pole.
g. Any banner which becomes torn or tattered while being displayed shall be immediately replaced or removed. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992;
amd. 2012 Code)
4. Approval: No banner may be erected in the Village without obtaining written approval of said banner from the Building Commissioner.
5. Required Submittals: The following shall be submitted to the Building Commissioner for review and approval not less than fifteen (15)
business days prior to the intended date of display:
a. A letter which describes the organization seeking approval for banner display, the purpose of the banners, duration of display, and any
other information determined to be appropriate by the Building Commissioner. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42,
11-13-2017)
b. Drawing of the proposed banner, including dimensions, colors, copy, and materials.
c. Details for mounting banners which demonstrate that banners will comply with required vertical grade clearance and maximum height
regulations set forth in subsections E3c and E3d of this section.
d. Site plan, showing proposed location of banner display.
e. The Village may require payment of a security deposit, to be established by the Village Board of Trustees, refundable when banners are
removed within specified time period. When banners are displayed beyond the duration allowed by this subsection, the deposit shall be
forfeited to the Village. The application fee will be waived for nonprofit and governmental organizations. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd.
2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 496/548
11-14-10: SIGNS IN RESIDENCE DISTRICTS (R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-2B, R-2C, R-3, R-4, R-5):
A. Residential Real Estate Signs: Residential real estate signs shall be permitted as follows:
1. There shall be a maximum of one residential real estate sign per zoning lot; except, that on a corner lot having frontage on two (2) streets,
two (2) signs shall be permitted.
2. Residential real estate signs shall not exceed five feet (5') in height.
3. The maximum size of a residential real estate sign shall be four (4) square feet per side.
4. Residential real estate signs shall be located with a minimum setback of five feet (5').
5. Residential real estate signs shall not be illuminated.
B. Home Occupation/Nameplate Signs: Home occupation/nameplate signs shall be permitted as follows:
1. There shall be a maximum of one such sign per zoning lot.
2. Home occupation/nameplate signs shall contain only the name, address, telephone number and occupation of the occupant.
3. The maximum size of any home occupation/nameplate sign shall be one square foot.
4. Home occupation/nameplate signs shall be located with a minimum setback of eight feet (8').
5. Home occupation/nameplate signs shall not exceed five feet (5') in height.
6. Home occupation/nameplate signs shall not be illuminated.
C. Church Signs: Church signs shall be permitted as follows:
1. There shall be a maximum of one church sign per zoning lot; provided, however, that a maximum of two (2) church signs shall be
permitted when the church to which the sign refers is located on a corner lot.
2. Church signs shall be limited to an area of thirty five (35) square feet if located on Gary Avenue, Lake Street, Army Trail Road, Schick
Road, Bloomingdale Road or Glen Ellyn Road. Church signs erected on any other public right of way in the village shall be limited to an
area of sixteen (16) square feet. In no case shall a church sign exceed a height of nine feet (9').
3. Church signs shall be set back a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from all property lines and from the back of the curb of adjacent access
drives and, in no case, less than twenty feet (20') from the back of the curb of an adjacent public street.
4. Church signs may include changeable copy; provided, however, that the area of the sign devoted to changeable copy does not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the total gross surface area of the sign.
5. Church signs may be illuminated.
D. Building Identification Signs: Wall mounted building identification signs shall be permitted only in conjunction with multi-family or institutional
developments with two (2) or more buildings or structures, subject to the following conditions:
1. There shall be a maximum of one such sign per multi-family or institutional building; provided, however, that a maximum of two (2) such
signs shall be permitted when the multi-family or institutional building has entrances on more than one facade.
2. The maximum size of any building identification sign shall be four (4) square feet.
3. A building identification sign may be illuminated.
E. Garage And Rummage Sale Signs: Garage and rummage sale signs shall be permitted as follows:
1. Only one such sign shall be allowed on the premises where the sale is taking place, unless such property has frontage on two (2) public
streets, in which case, two (2) signs are permitted, one at each frontage.
2. Three (3) additional locations (not to include the public right of way or any buildings or structures thereon) may be selected for placement
of rummage sale or garage sale signs announcing the same sale. Any sign to be placed on property owned by others must have verifiable
permission of that property owner.
3. No rummage sale or garage sale sign shall exceed three (3) square feet in surface area.
4. No garage or rummage sale sign shall exceed five feet (5') in height.
5. No such sign shall be placed or otherwise erected for more than three (3) consecutive days at a location permitted under this chapter.
6. No garage sale or rummage sale signs shall be posted or displayed on streetlight poles, utility poles, street signs, traffic sign poles or
otherwise erected upon any public right of way; nor shall they be displayed on or within vehicles, or placed in such a location to cause an
obstruction to the clear view of traffic.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 497/548
7. No rummage sale or garage sale signs shall be erected before six o'clock (6:00) A.M. nor remain after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on any
day of the sale. No such signs shall be erected prior to the sale date, and all signs must be removed by seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on each
day.
8. All such signs shall have the street address and the date(s) of the sale printed legibly and be dark printing on a light background.
F. Banner Signs: Banner signs identifying a grand opening for residential planned unit developments shall be permitted as follows: (Ord. 92-38,
6-22-1992)
1. Duration: Banners may be erected and maintained for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, unless written approval is obtained by the
Building Commissioner to extend the thirty (30) day display time for a specified number of days. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code;
Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
2. Location, Size, Height And Number:
a. A banner sign may be located on a building, or banners may be installed on poles at the entrance to a planned unit development or
along the adjacent public rights-of-way:
(1) The maximum size of any banner sign installed on a building shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the projected elevation of the
facade upon which it is located and shall not exceed one hundred fifty feet (150') in area. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992)
(2) Banners shall have a vertical clearance of nine feet (9') above grade from a sidewalk or landscaped area and twelve feet (12') above
the grade of a customer parking lot, drive aisle or public right-of-way, unless written approval is obtained from the Building
Commissioner.
(3) Banners shall not project higher than eighteen feet (18') above grade, unless written approval is obtained from the Building
Commissioner. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
(4) Banners installed on poles shall be double sided and shall not exceed six feet (6') in height nor two and one-half feet (21/2') in width.
(5) Not more than two (2) banners shall be allowed per pole.
3. Display: Banners displayed on poles must be double sided. Any banner which becomes torn or tattered while being displayed shall be
immediately replaced or removed. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
4. Approval: No banner may be erected in a residential planned unit development without written approval of said banner by the Building
Commissioner.
5. Required Submittals: The following shall be submitted to the Building Commissioner for review and approval not less than fifteen (15)
days prior to the intended date of display:
a. A letter which describes the organization seeking approval for banner display, the purpose of the banners, duration of display, and any
other information determined to be appropriate by the Building Commissioner. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42,
11-13-2017)
b. Drawing of proposed banner, including dimensions, colors, copy and materials.
c. Details for mounting banners which demonstrate that banners will comply with required vertical grade clearance and maximum height
restrictions set forth in subsections F2a(2) and F2a(3) of this section.
d. Site plan, showing proposed location of banner display.
e. Payment of an application fee and security deposit in amounts to be determined by the Village Board of Trustees3, said security deposit
to be refunded when banners are removed within the specified time period. When banners are displayed beyond the duration allowed
by this subsection, the deposit shall be forfeited to the Village. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2018-41 - SIGNAGE. Go to new ordinance.
11-14-11: SIGNS IN BUSINESS DISTRICTS (B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4) AND FOR COMMERCIAL USES IN PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS OF 250 ACRES OR MORE:
A. Wall Signs: Business identification shall be permitted as follows:
1. Number: Subject to subsection A2 of this section, there shall be a maximum of one wall sign for each business establishment; provided,
however, a maximum of two (2) such wall signs for a building establishment shall be permitted when the business establishment to which
the sign refers has more than one business frontage. For the purposes of this subsection, a "business frontage" shall mean a public right
of way, a customer access drive, or a customer parking lot which serves the commercial establishment.
2. Wall Signs: A maximum of one wall sign shall be permitted for each office building housing multiple business establishments and sharing
a common building entrance, regardless of the number of business establishments within said building. However, a maximum of two (2)
wall signs shall be permitted if the building has more than one business frontage as per subsection A1 of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 498/548
3. Maximum Size: The maximum size of any business identification wall sign shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the building facade area
upon which the sign is to be located, to a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet.
4. Business Identification Signs: Business identification signs may be illuminated.
5. Individual Letters: Except as provided in subsection A7 of this section, business identification shall consist of individual letters applied
directly to the wall of the building. Installation of box signs shall be prohibited. Individual letters may be applied to a raceway, provided the
raceway is:
a. Designed to be an integral element of the architecture of the facade (i.e., recessed); or
b. The same color as the facade to which it is installed.
6. Unified Shopping Centers And Retail Planned Developments:
a. Wall signs within a shopping center under unified control shall be unified in design. Where signs are reviewed as part of a planned unit
development, special use request or in accordance with requirements of the village site plan review provisions, plans and other
documentation shall be submitted for review by the planning and zoning commission and approval by the village board which:
(1) Demonstrates sign area will not exceed requirements of subsection A3 of this section;
(2) Shows individually applied letters;
(3) Identifies the number of lines of copy proposed;
(4) Identifies the maximum and minimum letter height for each line of copy;
(5) Demonstrates that signs would be centered horizontally and vertically on the sign frieze;
(6) Addresses whether logos will be permitted;
(7) Defines proposed color styling; and
(8) Identifies the allowable percent of the length of the storefront facade to be used for signage.
b. Notwithstanding provisions regulating the maximum size of wall mounted signs elsewhere in this chapter, for wall mounted identification
signs in unified shopping centers, outlots, or retail planned developments, the maximum area allowed shall be the lesser of five percent
(5%) of the area of the facade upon which the sign is to be affixed or the following:
(1) On a structure with a distance from the arterial street right of way greater than seventy five feet (75'), but less than two hundred feet
(200'), may be allowed to be as large as one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
(2) On a structure with a distance from the arterial street right of way greater than two hundred feet (200') but less than five hundred feet
(500'), may be allowed to be as large as two hundred (200) square feet.
(3) On a structure with a distance from the arterial right of way greater than five hundred feet (500') may be allowed to be as large as
three hundred (300) square feet.
(4) These preceding allowances will supersede area limitations approved prior to the date of enactment hereof for signage in site
specific development ordinances for unified shopping centers.
(5) These limitations shall apply only to those business frontages that are parallel to the arterial street right of way (i.e., they would not
apply to businesses that are perpendicular to the street right of way).
c. Outlot buildings in planned developments or unified shopping centers, in addition to any other permitted signage, may be allowed one
additional wall mounted sign, not to exceed twenty five (25) square feet in area, to be facing the direction of the in line retail area so as
to have visibility from that direction.
7. Logos And Accent Elements: Wall mounted signs may contain elements that consist of a corporate or store logo that is similar in size to a
letter character of the principal sign copy, or another graphic accent containing sign copy that is constructed in a manner that is similar to a
box sign. Such elements may be combined with the independent channel letters as part of a single sign, so long as they are subordinate
to that portion of the sign containing channel letters. The area of the sign shall be calculated as the area of a rectangle that encompasses
the outer limits of all sign elements. (Ord. 2017-08, 3-13-2017)
B. Freestanding Signs:
1. Number: In addition to the signs otherwise permitted in business districts, one freestanding sign may be permitted per lot of record ("lot"),
however, where the principal use occupies more than a single lot that could otherwise be consolidated into a single lot through a plat of
consolidation, only one freestanding sign will be permitted.
2. Separation: There shall be a minimum distance of one hundred feet (100') between freestanding signs. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
freestanding signs in unified shopping centers and other commercial planned developments shall be allowed as provided in the zoning
ordinance approving those developments. (Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
3. Appearance: Where specifically allowed in a unified shopping center or planned development, a logo may be permitted, and it shall be
approximate in size to the character of a letter on the sign. (Ord. 2017-08, 3-13-2017)
4. Conditions: The required conditions for the erection, relocation, and maintenance of freestanding signs are as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 499/548
a. The total bulk, including the base, of a freestanding sign, shall not exceed nine feet (9') in height nor sixteen inches (16") in thickness.
b. The face of the sign area shall not exceed thirty five (35) square feet per side, limited to two (2) sides, or a total of seventy (70) square
feet. A retail, commercial, or multiuse planned development of three (3) acres or more may be granted a sign area face not to exceed
sixty three (63) square feet per side, limited to two (2) sides, or a total of one hundred twenty six (126) square feet.
c. The sign shall be located with a minimum setback of fifteen feet (15') from any property line or from the back of the curb of an adjacent
access drive. Notwithstanding this requirement, where, in the judgment of the building and zoning official, it is not possible to meet the
setback of fifteen feet (15') because the area for sign placement is narrowed by virtue of a previous right of way taking, or because of
some other unusual circumstance with respect to lot configuration, the sign may be placed as close as five feet (5') from the right of way
line, however, the sign shall not be placed nearer to the right of way line than that of other signs in the vicinity of the sign in question for
a distance of approximately three hundred feet (300') in either direction of the sign. In all cases, the freestanding sign shall be set back
twenty feet (20') from the back of the curb of an adjacent public street.
d. The sign shall not impede normal pedestrian movement nor obstruct the driver's line of sight for motor vehicle traffic.
e. The sign may be illuminated.
C. Window Signs: Each commercial use with storefront windows at street or sidewalk level may have one or more window signs, subject to the
following provisions:
1. Window sign coverage, regardless of whether temporary or permanent, shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total glass area
of the building facade in which such signs are displayed.
2. Window signs shall be nonilluminated and limited to those describing or advertising a special business feature, a retail promotion or
special sale or event for the business on which the window is located.
3. Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection C2 of this section, each commercial use that has display windows at ground level may
display a single "OPEN" sign that may be illuminated with a neon or light emitting diode (LED) light source. Said sign shall not exceed
twenty four inches (24") in length and twelve inches (12") in height, and shall not contain any moving or flashing components.
4. Window signs shall not be included in the computation of total allowable sign surface area for exterior wall mounted signage. (Ord. 2013-
33, 10-28-2013)
D. Beacons: Beacons shall be permitted for "grand openings" as defined in section 11-14-3 of this chapter, subject to the following:
1. Only one beacon shall be allowed per grand opening.
2. Light display shall be limited to Friday, Saturday and Sunday.
3. Permits shall be obtained in accordance with procedures set forth in section 11-14-7 of this chapter.
E. Automobile Service Station Signs And Automobile Stations/Minimarts Only: The following signs are permitted as accessory only to
automobile service stations, subject to the conditions specified below:
1. Racks for the orderly display of cans of engine oil may be located on or at the ends of each pump island or adjacent to the station
building.
2. Two (2) tire racks, not to exceed five feet (5') in height, six feet (6') in length, and five feet (5') in depth, shall be permitted at each gasoline
or tire service station for the purpose of displaying new tire castings. Such racks shall comply with all setback and yard requirements and
shall only advertise the products contained thereon.
3. Items for sale on the premises shall not be displayed within twenty five feet (25') of any property line, and any display of such items must
comply with all applicable regulations. Products may be displayed under pump island canopies or between pumps within the area of the
pump island base.
4. One double faced sign presenting the pricing of gasoline products sold upon the premises shall be permitted as follows:
a. Each sign shall not exceed ten (10) square feet per side.
b. No letter or numeral on any pricing sign shall exceed ten inches by fourteen inches (10" x 14") in size.
c. No pricing sign shall exceed a height of five feet (5').
d. All pricing signs shall be located with a minimum setback of fifteen feet (15') from any property line or from the back of the curb of an
adjacent access drive. In all cases, pricing signs shall be set back twenty feet (20') from the back of the curb of an adjacent public
street.
e. Pricing signs may be combined as part of the permitted freestanding business identification sign. Total area of such a combined sign
shall not exceed forty five (45) square feet per side. All other provisions of subsection B2 of this section shall apply. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-
1992)
f. Pricing signs may contain numerals consisting of light emitting diode (LED) light source technology. Only the numerals shall be allowed
to contain LED lighting. The only color permitted for the LED numerals shall be amber. The LED lighting shall be equipped with the
necessary technology to modulate the intensity or brightness of the lighting to accommodate ambient conditions, such that the numerals
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 500/548
would be brighter during the daytime, and less bright during the evening with lower light levels. The village may request that the intensity
of the LED lighting be reduced if there are concerns with glare. (Ord. 2012-27, 6-11-2012)
F. Banner Signs; Temporary Banner Signs: Wall mounted temporary banner signs shall be permitted as follows for individual businesses and
shopping centers with three (3) or more stores under unified control, provided such individual businesses and shopping centers have a
minimum frontage of two hundred feet (200'):
1. Promotion: The following shall apply to temporary banner signs that are intended to promote a special sale or event:
a. Temporary banner signs may be erected and displayed for no more than sixty (60) calendar days in any one calendar year.
b. Display of temporary banner signs shall not exceed fifteen (15) calendar days during any forty five (45) consecutive calendar day
period.
c. The use of temporary banner signs shall be limited to four (4) special sales or events per calendar year.
d. The maximum size of any temporary banner sign shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the projected elevation of the storefront or store
module and shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
e. Two (2) temporary banner signs may be allowed for shopping centers under unified control that occupy three (3) or more acres and
have access from two (2) or more public rights-of-way.
f. Temporary banner signs installed at storefront or store modules shall be secured flat against the exterior building wall surface.
g. Temporary banner permit fee shall be charged as indicated in section 10-1-2-3 of this Code. (Ord. 2016-22, 6-13-2016)
2. Seasonal Display: Banners may be displayed on existing poles in customer parking lots for the purpose of celebrating the occasion of
legal or religious holidays, provided the following criteria are met. The seasonal display of banners shall be allowed in addition to that
permitted for special sales or events as regulated by subsection F1 of this section:
a. Banners shall be double sided and shall not exceed six feet (6') in height nor two and one-half feet (21/2') in width.
b. Not more than two (2) banners shall be allowed per pole. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992)
c. Banners shall have a vertical clearance of nine feet (9') above grade from a sidewalk or landscaped area and twelve feet (12') above
the grade of a parking lot, drive aisle or public right-of-way, unless written approval is obtained from the Building Commissioner.
d. Banners shall not project higher than eighteen feet (18') above grade, unless written approval is obtained from the Building
Commissioner. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
e. Any banner which becomes torn or tattered while being displayed shall be immediately replaced or removed. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992;
amd. 2012 Code)
3. Approval: No banner may be erected in the Village without obtaining written approval from the Building Commissioner.
4. Required Submittals: The following shall be submitted to the Building Commissioner for review and approval, not less than fifteen (15)
days prior to the intended date of display:
a. A letter which describes the organization seeking approval for banner display, the purpose of the banners, duration of display, and any
other information determined to be appropriate by the Building Commissioner. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42,
11-13-2017)
b. Drawing of proposed banner, including dimensions, colors, copy, and materials.
c. Details for mounting banners which demonstrate that banners will comply with required vertical grade clearance and maximum height
regulations set forth in subsections F2c and F2d of this section.
d. Site plan showing proposed location of banner display.
e. Payment of an application fee and security deposit in amounts to be determined by the Village Board of Trustees4, said security deposit
to be refunded when banners are removed within the specified time period. When banners are displayed beyond the duration allowed
by this subsection, the deposit shall be forfeited to the Village. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
G. Awning Or Canopy Signs: Letters may be painted or otherwise permanently affixed to any permissible awning or canopy, subject to the
following conditions:
1. Lettering and/or symbols shall not project above, below, or beyond the physical dimensions of the awning or canopy.
2. Awning or canopy sign area shall count toward the total wall sign area permitted under subsection A3 of this section.
H. Changeable Copy: Changeable copy shall be permitted for churches in accordance with subsection 11-14-10C4 of this chapter and shall be
allowed on freestanding and wall signs for public agencies and theaters, provided the sign area does not exceed that allowed by the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 501/548
I. Feather Signs: Feather signs shall be permitted as follows for individual businesses and shopping centers:
1. Promotion: The following shall apply to feather signs that are intended to promote a special sale, event or business:
a. Feather signs may be erected and displayed for no more than twenty eight (28) calendar days in any one calendar year.
b. Display of feather signs shall not exceed seven (7) calendar days during any forty five (45) consecutive calendar day period.
c. The use of feather signs shall be limited to four (4) occurrences per calendar year.
d. The width of a feather sign shall not project any more than two feet (2') from the pole to which it is attached, and be no taller than eight
feet (8') from grade, at the point of installation.
e. Two (2) feather signs may be allowed for each business or tenant, however in no case shall any shopping center containing more than
two (2) tenants or tenant spaces, display or install more than four (4) feather signs in total, at any given time.
f. Content displayed on a feather sign shall be limited to a specific event or sale, and shall not be permitted to advertise a specific product
or service.
g. No portion of any feather sign may obstruct, extend or otherwise project into or onto any public right-of-way. All feather signs must be
wholly contained on private property. (Ord. 2016-22, 6-13-2016)
h. Any tenant wishing to install feather signs, must first obtain written approval from the landlord before installing such sign. All signs shall
be marked with their first day of display and the last day of display that is permitted by this Code, using the form provided by the
Building Department and prominently displayed in the window of the business for which the sign is advertising. (Ord. 2016-22, 6-13-
2016; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
i. Any business or shopping center installing the maximum allowed number of feather sign(s), as set forth in this subsection, shall be
prohibited from installing any additional temporary signs otherwise permitted by this section.
j. Feather signs as described in this section, shall not be subject to a fee. (Ord. 2016-22, 6-13-2016)
11-14-12: SIGNS IN O-D OFFICE DISTRICTS:
The following signs are permitted in office districts, subject to the requirements of this chapter and to the conditions specified below:
A. Freestanding Signs: Freestanding signs shall be permitted as follows:
1. There shall be a maximum of one such sign for each office complex.
2. The maximum size for a freestanding sign shall be thirty five (35) square feet.
3. Freestanding signs shall not exceed nine feet (9') in height.
4. Freestanding signs shall be located with a minimum setback of fifteen feet (15') from any property line or from the back of the curb of an
adjacent access drive. In all cases, freestanding signs shall be set back twenty feet (20') from the back of the curb of an adjacent public
street.
5. Freestanding signs may be illuminated. The illumination of such signs shall be only during the regular hours of business operation. (Ord.
92-38, 6-22-1992)
6. Where specifically allowed in a unified shopping center or planned development, a logo may be permitted, and it shall be approximate in
size to the character of a letter on the sign. (Ord. 2017-08, 3-13-2017)
B. Wall Signs: In lieu of a freestanding sign, business identification wall signs shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions: (Ord. 92-38,
6-22-1992)
1. There shall be a maximum of one such wall sign for each business establishment; provided, however, that a maximum of two (2) such
signs shall be permitted when the business establishment to which the sign refers has more than one business frontage. For purposes of
this subsection B1, a "business frontage" shall mean a public right-of-way, a customer access drive, or a customer parking lot which
serves the commercial establishment. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
2. Subject to subsection B1 of this section, a maximum of one wall sign shall be permitted for each office building housing multiple business
establishments and sharing a common building entrance, regardless of the number of business establishments within said building.
However, a maximum of two (2) wall signs shall be permitted if the building has more than one business frontage, as per subsection B1 of
this section. (Ord. 2008-14, 3-24-2008; amd. 2012 Code)
3. The maximum size of any business identification wall sign shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the front building facade area to a
maximum of one hundred (100) square feet.
4. Business identification signs may be illuminated. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992)
11-14-13: SIGNS IN R-R HOTEL-MOTEL RESORT AND RECREATIONAL DISTRICTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 502/548
The following signs are permitted in Hotel-Motel Resort and Recreational Districts, subject to the requirements of this chapter and to the
conditions specified below:
A. Freestanding signs shall be permitted as follows:
1. There shall be a maximum of one such sign for each motel or hotel; provided, however, that two (2) such signs shall be permitted when
the hotel-motel use is located on a corner lot.
2. Freestanding signs shall not exceed thirty five (35) square feet in area per side.
3. Freestanding signs shall not exceed nine feet (9') in height.
4. Freestanding signs shall be located with a minimum setback of fifteen feet (15') from any property line or from the back of the curb of an
adjacent access drive. In all cases, freestanding signs shall be set back twenty feet (20') from the back of the curb of an adjacent public
street.
5. Freestanding signs may be illuminated.
B. In lieu of a freestanding sign, business identification wall signs shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions:
1. There shall be a maximum of one such wall sign for each business establishment; provided, however, that a maximum of two (2) such
signs shall be permitted when the business establishment to which the sign refers is located on a corner lot.
2. The maximum size of any business identification wall sign shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the front building facade area to a
maximum of one hundred (100) square feet.
3. Business identification signs may be illuminated. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992)
11-14-14: SIGNS IN M-1 MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS:
The following signs are permitted in manufacturing districts, subject to the requirements of this chapter and to the conditions specified below:
A. Freestanding Signs: Freestanding signs shall be permitted as follows:
1. There shall be a maximum of one such sign for each industrial use; provided, however, that two (2) such signs shall be permitted when
the industrial use is located on a corner lot.
2. Freestanding signs shall not exceed thirty five (35) square feet in area per side.
3. Freestanding signs shall not exceed nine feet (9') in height.
4. Freestanding signs shall be located with a minimum setback of fifteen feet (15') from any property line or from the back of the curb of an
adjacent access drive. In all cases, freestanding signs shall be set back twenty feet (20') from the back of the curb of an adjacent public
street.
5. A freestanding sign may be illuminated.
B. Wall Signs: In lieu of a freestanding sign, business identification wall signs shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions:
1. There shall be a maximum of one such wall sign for each business establishment; provided, however, that a maximum of two (2) such
signs shall be permitted when the business establishment to which the sign refers is located on a corner lot.
2. The maximum size of any business identification wall sign shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the front building facade area to a
maximum of one hundred (100) square feet.
3. Business identification signs may be illuminated. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992)
11-14-15: INSPECTIONS:
Every new sign in the Village shall be subject to a general inspection; electrical inspection, if necessary; footing inspection; and any other
inspection(s) deemed necessary by the Building Commissioner. The Building Commissioner shall authorize or conduct subsequent periodic
inspections as he deems necessary for the purpose of ascertaining whether a sign requires removal or repair. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992; amd.
2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
11-14-16: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Every sign in the Village, regardless of whether any permit is required for such sign, shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good
structural condition at all times, including the replacement of nonfunctioning, broken or defective parts, painting, repainting, using same or like
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 503/548
color as approved by existing permit, cleaning, and any other acts required for the maintenance of such sign. All signs and sign supports shall
be kept painted, or otherwise treated, to prevent rust, rot or deterioration. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992)
11-14-17: DIAGRAMS:
The dark outline around each structure shows the projected elevation of a building face or wall area upon which the sign area is based. Where
permitted, a wall sign may comprise up to five percent (5%) of the building facade, provided it does not exceed an area of one hundred (100)
square feet. A second wall sign may be allowed if the business is located on a corner lot or relates to a customer access drive or parking lot.
Section 11-14-3, definition of "facade area", and subsection 11-14-11A3 of this chapter include standards for wall signs and should be consulted
before an application for a sign permit is submitted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 504/548
Sign area is based upon the calculation of the gross surface area within the smallest single, continuous rectangle which can be formed around
the extreme limits of both letters and any graphics which may be included as part of the sign. The three (3) examples presented above show
how the area of a wall sign should be calculated, but are intended to serve as general guidelines. Section 11-14-3 of this chapter defines "area
of sign" and should be consulted before an application for a sign permit is submitted.
Temporary window signs cannot exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total display glass area of the building facade in which such signs are
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 505/548
displayed. These signs should be limited to the advertisement of a retail promotion or special sale or event, and should be removed immediately
upon termination of the sale or event. Temporary window signs should be neatly crafted and arranged.
This graphic illustration of temporary window signage is intended only to serve as a general guideline.
Wall signs for individual tenants in a shopping center should be unified in design:
* Individual letters are required.
* Signs should not exceed five percent (5%) of the storefront facade (maximum allowable size is 100 square feet).
* Letters should not crowd roofline, canopy (if any), or adjacent signs.
* Signs should be both horizontally and vertically centered on the sign frieze.
* Letter color and lightness or darkness should contrast with the background wall for readability.
* Letter styling should be coordinated so that it is harmonious.
* Light levels should be consistent along the facade.
These graphics are intended to serve only as general guidelines for tenant wall signage. Consult subsection 11-14-11A6 of this chapter before
submitting an application for a sign permit.
Freestanding signs, thirty five (35) square feet in area, may be installed to identify restaurants and service stations, in addition to wall signage
otherwise allowed by this chapter. Freestanding signs may also be permitted for offices, provided a freestanding sign is used in lieu of wall
signage. Because this graphic is intended to serve only as a general guideline for signage, subsection 11-14-11B of this chapter should be
consulted before submitting an application for a sign permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 506/548
Freestanding signs are also permitted for the purpose of identifying planned developments, subdivision or retail commercial developments of
three (3) acres or more in size. Because sign area varies for residential and commercial uses, subsection 11-14-9C of this chapter should be
consulted before submitting an application for a sign permit. Said subsection also contains design guidelines for landscaping and lighting.
These graphics are intended to serve only as general guidelines for freestanding signage. Please refer to subsections 11-14-9C and 11-14-11B
of this chapter for applicable standards before submitting an application for a sign permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 507/548
These graphics are intended to serve only as general guidelines. Consult subsections 11-14-9C and 11-14-11B of this chapter for applicable
standards before submitting an application for a sign permit. (Ord. 92-38, 6-22-1992)
Chapter 15
ANTENNA STRUCTURES AND EARTH SATELLITE STATIONS
11-15-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
A. It is the intent of this chapter to provide rules and regulations for the size, placement and screening of antenna structures/earth satellite
stations within the village.
B. The village has already taken numerous actions as part of a comprehensive strategy to create an aesthetically pleasing environment through
extensive regulations pertaining to signage, landscaped public rights of way, landscaped setbacks and perimeter yards of zoning lots in
business districts, screening of off street parking and loading facilities, and screening of rooftop mechanical equipment.
C. The physical characteristics of antenna structures/earth satellite stations make it necessary and essential to regulate such devices in order to
further the aesthetic and safety objectives of the village, specifically to:
1. Promote the public health, safety and welfare of the community;
2. Provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for such residential and commercial use of antenna structures/earth satellite stations; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 508/548
3. Promote an orderly visual environment and protection of adjacent property values through screening of antenna structures/earth satellite
stations from adjacent properties and public and private rights of way. (Ord. 92-77, 11-23-1992)
11-15-2: APPLICATION, INTERPRETATION AND COMPLIANCE:
A. This chapter shall not apply to any antenna structure/earth satellite station that was erected or which was approved by the village prior to the
effective date hereof; provided, however, that this chapter shall apply if the location of such an antenna structure/earth satellite station is
changed, or if such an antenna structure/earth satellite station is increased in size or height, or if such antenna structure/earth satellite
station is modified or repaired and the cost of such modification or repair exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the value of the antenna
structure/earth satellite station. Before the location of an antenna structure/earth satellite station for which a permit has been issued can be
changed, and before the size or height of an antenna structure/earth satellite station for which a permit has been issued can be increased, a
new antenna structure/earth satellite station permit must be obtained.
B. The specific terms and conditions of this chapter shall prevail against other existing ordinances of the village to the extent that there might be
any conflict.
C. Except for the limitation of subsection B of this section, the development of the subject property is subject to all terms and conditions of
applicable ordinances and regulations of the village including, without limitation, this title and the building codes, subdivision regulations and
regulations concerning the construction and design of public improvements. (Ord. 92-77, 11-23-1992)
11-15-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ANTENNA: A device, other than an earth satellite station, used for transmitting or receiving microwaves, radio waves (including, but not limited
to, radio and television signals) and other electromagnetic energy signals.
ANTENNA STRUCTURE: The combination of an antenna and antenna tower.
ANTENNA TOWER: Any mast, pole, tripod or similar structure utilized to support an antenna.
EARTH SATELLITE STATION: An apparatus or device which includes a main reflector, subreflector, feed, amplifier and support structure that
has been designed for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving of microwave, television, radio, satellite, or other electromagnetic energy
signals into or from outer space, but does not include conventional television, radio and amateur radio antennas.
HEIGHT: Either:
A. The vertical distance measured from the ground level or to the top of a ground supported antenna structure/earth satellite station in either
residential or nonresidential districts, when the antenna structure/earth satellite station is extended to its fullest height; or
B. The distance measured from the surface of the roof to the top of the antenna structure/earth satellite station in a nonresidential district,
when the antenna structure/earth satellite station is extended to its fullest height.
MAIN REFLECTOR: That part of an earth satellite station which, absent any protective covering, is dish shaped, parabolic, spherical or conical
in configuration and design and which has been designed for the reception and/or transmission of microwave, television, radio or other
electromagnetic energy signals.
PARAPET: The extension of the main walls of a building above the roof level.
VILLAGE: The municipal corporation of Bloomingdale, Illinois, including its associated elected and appointed officials, officers and staff. (Ord.
92-77, 11-23-1992)
11-15-4: ACCESSORY USE:
An antenna structure/satellite station shall be permitted in any zoning district as an accessory use, subject to the provisions contained in this
chapter. (Ord. 92-77, 11-23-1992)
11-15-5: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: The following shall not be constructed, erected or maintained within the village unless an antenna structure/earth satellite
station permit has been issued by the village:
1. An earth satellite station;
2. A freestanding antenna structure; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 509/548
3. An antenna structure which is attached to a building and which extends more than five feet (5') above the highest point of the building to
which the antenna is attached.
B. Application For Permit; Issuance:
1. An application for an antenna structure/earth satellite station permit shall be filed with the village clerk on a form prescribed by the
president and village board of trustees. The following materials and information shall accompany the application:
a. Site information, including:
(1) The names and addresses of the applicant and owner of the property upon which the antenna structure/earth satellite station is to be
located;
(2) A copy of a plat of survey by a registered surveyor, including a legal description of the subject property; and
(3) Pictures of the proposed location of the antenna structure/earth satellite station, including its surroundings, and an illustration of the
proposed antenna structure/earth satellite station;
b. A copy of the manufacturer's specifications;
c. The name and address of the person or persons who will be erecting, constructing or installing the antenna structure/earth satellite
station;
d. A certified statement from a technologically qualified representative of the manufacturer or an independent engineer indicating:
(1) Any technological reasons why the antenna structure/earth satellite station must be located at a particular point on the property, or
indicating any limitations as to its specific location on the lot; and
(2) Intended transmission/reception capabilities and type of data transmitted/received and a statement of proposed measures to
mitigate the effects of any harmful signals which may be emitted from the antenna structure/earth satellite station, if applicable, which
may or may not include enclosing the antenna structure/earth satellite station with a fence;
e. A site plan, if the antenna structure/earth satellite station is ground supported in accordance with section 11-15-7 of this chapter,
illustrating:
(1) Date, scale and north arrow;
(2) The exact location of the proposed antenna structure/earth satellite station;
(3) The height of the proposed antenna structure/earth satellite station and the diameter of the main reflector, if applicable;
(4) Location of utilities and overhead wires;
(5) The proposed direction in which the antenna structure/earth satellite station will be faced, if applicable;
(6) Location and size of all buildings and structures, both existing and proposed;
(7) Existing and proposed fencing, berms, plantings or other barriers which will be used to provide protection and screening of the
antenna structure/earth satellite station from view of adjoining properties and public or private rights of way;
(8) Yards and spaces between all structures; and
(9) Location and dimensions of all fences and walls.
f. Drawings and other site information, if the antenna structure/earth satellite station is roof mounted in a nonresidential zoning district, in
accordance with section 11-15-8 of this chapter, illustrating:
(1) Date, scale and north arrow.
(2) The exact location of the proposed antenna structure/earth satellite station.
(3) The height of the proposed antenna structure/earth satellite station and the diameter of the main reflector, if applicable.
(4) Location of utilities and overhead wires.
(5) The proposed direction in which the antenna structure/earth satellite station will be faced, if applicable.
(6) Location and size of all buildings and structures, both existing and proposed.
(7) Elevations of the roof parapet and surface to which the earth satellite station will be mounted; and
(8) Sightline drawings, if determined to be necessary by the village.
g. Any other additional information that may be requested by the village.
2. All applications for an antenna structure/earth satellite station permit shall include a statement in writing by the applicant showing that the
proposed installation of the antenna structure/earth satellite station shall conform to all standards and specifications contained in this
chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 510/548
3. No permit for an antenna structure/earth satellite station in any zoning district shall be issued unless all information required by this
subsection has been furnished by the applicant. (Ord. 92-77, 11-23-1992)
C. Fee And Deposit:
1. Permit Fee: A building permit fee as established by the village board of trustees shall be paid by the applicant for an antenna
structure/earth satellite station permit.
2. Deposit:
a. In addition to the permit fee, the applicant shall agree to deposit a sum as established by the village board of trustees to cover the cost
of review services provided by the village. (Ord. 92-77, 11-23-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
b. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be returned to the applicant.
c. If the cost of review services exceeds the amount of deposit, sufficient additional funds shall be deposited before an antenna
structure/earth satellite station permit shall be issued.
D. Conditions Of Permit: All antenna structures/earth satellite stations must be constructed and maintained in accordance with any conditions
that are placed on the issuance of the antenna structure/earth satellite station permit. (Ord. 92-77, 11-23-1992)
11-15-6: REGULATIONS IN ALL DISTRICTS:
The following regulations shall apply in all zoning districts:
A. Location And Number:
1. The specific location of an antenna structure/earth satellite station shall be subject to the determination of the village. Placement shall be
based upon the ability to minimize visual impacts to any adjacent properties or public rights of way, while at the same time maintaining
sightlines required for the operation of the antenna structure/earth satellite station;
2. Location of existing fences, berms, landscaping and/or structures which would augment screening will be taken into consideration by the
village when determining the placement of an antenna structure/earth satellite station on any lot;
3. Only one antenna structure/earth satellite station shall be permitted on the applicant's property; and
4. All antenna structures/earth satellite stations shall be located so that they do not constitute a potential hazard to utility lines.
B. Wires And Cables: All wiring and connecting cables between an antenna structure/earth satellite station and the principal building shall be
buried underground.
C. Screening:
1. Views of ground supported antenna structures/earth satellite stations from adjacent residential and institutional properties and public and
private rights of way shall be effectively screened on all sides through the use of fences, berms, plant materials, or other structures as
shown in subsection 11-15-11A, figures 1, 2 and 3 of this chapter;
2. Plant materials to be used for screening shall consist of both tall and low deciduous and evergreen plants, selected from an approved list
of materials as specified in subsection 11-15-11B of this chapter, unless the written approval of the village is obtained. The placement of
approved plant materials shall be as shown in subsection 11-15-11A, figures 4 and 5 of this chapter;
3. Existing plant materials may be incorporated into the required screening of antenna structures/earth satellite stations with allowances for
such plant materials to be granted at the discretion of the village;
4. Plant materials shall be installed to achieve a six foot (6') high screen and shall be spaced as specified in subsection 11-15-11B, tables 1
and 2 of this chapter;
5. All materials used for the purpose of screening must be maintained in good condition in order to minimize the visibility of antenna
structures/earth satellite stations;
6. Proposed plans for effectively screening antenna structures/earth satellite stations shall be subject to the review and approval by the
village; and (Ord. 92-77, 11-23-1992)
7. Plant materials to be used for screening shall be installed immediately upon erection of the antenna structure/earth satellite station, or if
said plant materials cannot be installed due to inclement weather, the applicant shall post a bond or cash deposit, per tree, in an amount
to be determined by the Building Commissioner, refundable upon tree installation. (Ord. 92-77, 11-23-1992; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-
42, 11-13-2017)
D. Color And Advertising:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 511/548
1. All antenna structures/earth satellite stations shall be neutral in color and be compatible with the existing elements and characteristics of
the property; and
2. Advertising of any kind shall not be permitted on an antenna structure/earth satellite station.
E. Use:
1. An antenna structure/earth satellite station in a residential district shall only be used by residents of the principal building on the
applicant's property;
2. All antenna structures/earth satellite stations must be constructed and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications;
3. Any connections, by cable or otherwise, to adjacent properties shall constitute a violation of the terms and conditions of this section and
sections 11-15-7 and 11-15-8 of this chapter, and shall be subject to the provisions contained in section 11-15-10 of this chapter; and
4. The construction and operation of an antenna structure/earth satellite station shall fully comply with all applicable Federal and State
Statutes, regulations and requirements, including those pertaining to safety levels of radio frequency and electromagnetic fields with
respect to human exposure. (Ord. 92-77, 11-23-1992)
11-15-7: REGULATIONS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
The following regulations shall apply in residential zoning districts:
A. Location: An antenna structure/earth satellite station shall be erected only on the ground in a secure, nonmobile fashion, subject to the
following:
1. Antenna structures/earth satellite stations shall be located in a rear yard only, and shall not be closer to any property line than the height
of the antenna structure/earth satellite station, but never less than eight feet (8') from any property line;
2. An anchor for a guywire or cable, however, may be located in an interior side or rear yard, provided it is not closer than five feet (5') to
such property line, and it is clearly visible and protected to prevent injury;
3. Antenna structures/earth satellite stations shall be located in one of three (3) areas within a rear yard:
a. Within an area entirely behind a principal building, but not more than twenty feet (20') from the exterior wall of said principal building, as
measured from the pole/vertical support of the antenna structure/earth satellite station to the principal building's wall (see subsection 11-
15-11A, figure 1 of this chapter);
b. Near the corner of a rear yard, so that the antenna structure/earth satellite station is located no closer than the height of the antenna
structure/earth satellite station, but never less than eight feet (8') from the side and rear lot lines. Distances shall be measured from the
pole/vertical support of the antenna structure/earth satellite station to the side and rear lot lines (see subsection 11-15-11A, figure 2 of
this chapter); and
c. Within an area on that side of an accessory structure which faces the interior of the lot, but not more than fifteen feet (15') away from the
exterior wall of the accessory structure, as measured from the pole/vertical support of the antenna structure/earth satellite station to the
exterior wall of the accessory structure (see subsection 11-15-11A, figure 3 of this chapter).
B. Size:
1. The height of an antenna structure/earth satellite station shall not exceed fifteen feet (15'); and
2. The diameter of the main reflector of an earth satellite station shall not exceed twelve feet (12'). (Ord. 92-77, 11-23-1992)
11-15-8: REGULATIONS IN NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
A. Earth Satellite Stations:
1. In business, manufacturing, office, hotel-motel resort and recreational, and business park zoning districts, an earth satellite station may be
erected either on the ground or on the roof of the principal building, in a secure, nonmobile fashion. If the earth satellite station is to be
ground mounted, the regulations in section 11-15-7 of this chapter shall apply. If an earth satellite station is to be roof mounted, it shall be
subject to the following:
a. It shall be fully screened from public view on all sides of the building. Screening shall be accomplished by the roof or parapet walls as
shown in section 11-15-11, figure 6 of this chapter. However, if the earth satellite station is to be installed on a multi-tenant retail center,
where roof mounted mechanical equipment already exists, and screening has been provided on only three (3) sides of the building,
screening on the fourth side shall not be required. This exception shall not, however, apply to single-tenant structures. (Ord. 92-77, 11-
23-1992)
b. The earth satellite station shall be so constructed and installed to withstand the wind load, ice load and other forces, as provided under
the village building code, and in that respect, shall be subject to the review and approval of the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 512/548
c. All applications shall include certification by an engineer, registered in the state of Illinois, that the proposed installation complies with
those standards listed in the village building code. Furthermore, written documentation of such compliance, including load distributions
within the building's support structure, shall be furnished. (Ord. 92-77, 11-23-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
2. However, if the earth satellite station is to be installed on a multi-tenant retail center where roof mounted mechanical equipment already
exists and screening has been provided on only three (3) sides of the building, screening on the fourth side shall not be required. This
exception shall not, however, apply to single-tenant structures.
B. Antenna Structures: In business, manufacturing, office, hotel-motel resort and recreational, and business park zoning districts, a ground
supported antenna structure may be erected subject to the following:
1. The height shall not exceed forty feet (40'); and
2. The antenna tower, or base, shall be screened subject to subsection 11-15-6C of this chapter. (Ord. 92-77, 11-23-1992)
11-15-9: AUTHORIZED VARIATIONS:
A. The planning and zoning commission shall decide upon authorized variations of the provisions of this chapter and shall grant them only in the
specific instances where there are demonstrated practical difficulties or particular hardships in implementing the regulations of this chapter.
(Ord. 92-77, 11-23-1992; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
B. Any individual, firm, or corporation applying for a variation shall be subject to the procedures contained in section 11-3-6 of this title; except,
that the applicant shall not be required to pay any additional review fees as stated in subsection 11-15-5C2 of this chapter. (Ord. 92-77, 11-
23-1992)
C. The decision by the planning and zoning commission to grant a variation in the regulations specified in sections 11-15-6, 11-15-7 and 11-15-8
of this chapter shall be based upon the criteria listed below: (Ord. 92-77, 11-23-1992; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
1. Whether the proposed antenna structure/earth satellite station will have an adverse effect upon the ability of the persons who own, occupy
or reside on nearby properties to use and enjoy their properties;
2. Whether the antenna structure/earth satellite station will constitute a hazard to the safety of persons or property;
3. Whether the proposed antenna structure/earth satellite station will have an adverse effect on the value of nearby properties;
4. Whether the proposed antenna structure/earth satellite station has been adequately screened from view of adjacent properties and public
and private rights of way; and
5. Whether the proposed antenna structure/earth satellite station will be detrimental to the public welfare. (Ord. 92-77, 11-23-1992)
11-15-10: PENALTIES:
Any person causing or allowing a violation of the terms and conditions of this chapter to occur shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided
in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. In addition, the village may pursue such other remedies as shall be appropriate to prevent the
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 92-77, 11-23-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
11-15-11: APPENDICES:
A. Appendix A, Diagrams:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 513/548
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 514/548
Chapter 16
TREE PRESERVATION1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 515/548
11-16-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The provisions of this chapter have been established for the preservation of existing trees within the village. The intent of this chapter is to:
A. Encourage the protection of the reasonable maximum number of trees early in the planning and site development process, while allowing for
the reasonable development of land within the village according to the village comprehensive land use plan.
B. Preserve and protect the reasonable maximum number of mature trees on private property in the village, while allowing for the reasonable
development of land within the village according to the village comprehensive land use plan.
C. Establish requirements for tree replacements on applicable private property when permits for tree removal are obtained through procedures
set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996)
11-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. Where
applicable, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include singular, and words in the singular include the plural.
The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory.
CALIPER: Refers to the diameter of a tree trunk, measured in inches. For the purpose of this chapter, caliper shall be taken six inches (6")
above the ground up to, and including, four inch (4") caliper trees, and twelve inches (12") above the ground for larger sizes. Caliper is generally
associated with nursery stock for new plantings.
COMMON AREA: That portion of a planned development that includes land, amenities, easements, and associated landscaping that has been
designated on a plan or plat of subdivision and conveyed to a condominium or homeowners' association for its administration, maintenance and
use.
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE: The area inscribed by an imaginary circular line on the ground beneath a tree, having at its center point the center of
the trunk of the tree and a radius equal to one foot (1') for every inch of diameter at breast height.
DEVELOPMENT: Means and refers to any proposed physical change in the use of character of land including, but not limited to, the
replacement of any structure or site improvements on land. When appropriate to the context, "development" may refer to the act of issuing any
building permit.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (dbh): The diameter of the trunk of a tree, measured in inches, at a point four and one-half feet (41/2') above
ground level or grade. This point of measurement shall be used for established mature trees.
LANDSCAPE EASEMENT: A landscaped area intended to enhance the appearance of a planned development and/or provide screening from
public rights of way that has been designated on a plan or plat of subdivision and is maintained by a condominium or homeowners' association.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A parcel of land, as specified by ordinance, developed according to plan as a single entity, and containing one or
more structures with appurtenant common areas.
PROPERTY OWNER: The person owning property or a parcel of land as shown by the County Auditor's plat of DuPage County, Illinois.
REMOVE OR REMOVAL: The causing or accomplishing of the actual physical removal of a tree or the effective removal through damaging,
poisoning, or other direct or indirect action resulting in, or likely to result in, the death of a tree.
SITE: That parcel of land for which a tree removal permit is sought.
TREE: A large, woody plant having one or several self-supporting stems or trunks and numerous branches; may be classified as deciduous or
evergreen.
TREE PRESERVATION PLAN: A written plan having text and/or graphic illustrations indicating the methods which are to be used to preserve
existing trees during construction.
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT: The permit required by this chapter in order to remove any tree within the corporate limits of the Village of
Bloomingdale.
VILLAGE: The Village of Bloomingdale, DuPage County, Illinois. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996)
11-16-3: TREE REMOVAL PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Permit Required: A tree removal permit shall be required, per the procedure defined in section 11-16-4 of this chapter, to directly or indirectly
cut down, destroy, remove, move, or effectively destroy, from any nonresidential planned development, common area or landscape
easement in residential planned developments that are visible from an adjoining street, residentially zoned property one or more acres in
area, or nonresidential property regardless of size:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 516/548
1. Any live tree with a trunk size of six inches (6") in diameter or larger, as measured four and one-half feet (41/2') above ground level; or
2. Any live two (2) or more trees with an aggregate trunk size of twelve inches (12") in diameter or larger, as measured four and one-half feet
(41/2') above the ground.
B. Failure To Obtain Permit: Failure to obtain a tree removal permit prior to removing trees will result in fines; required tree replacements; and/or
suspension of permits issued for a parcel of land, according to criteria in section 11-16-7 of this chapter.
C. Emergencies: There may be times, however, when trees must be immediately removed by the Village or property owner to eliminate
immediate threats to public or private property or public safety. The ability to remove a tree under these circumstances is addressed under
section 11-16-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996)
11-16-4: PRESERVATION AND REMOVAL APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR TREES ON
PRIVATE PROPERTY:
Subsection A of this section provides procedures and requirements for tree preservation and tree removal permits related to rezoning,
subdivision, site plan approval and/or building permits. Because the Village finds it is in the best interests of the community to preserve and
protect all trees from unnecessary or unreasonable damage and destruction, procedures and requirements have also been developed to
regulate trees on private property when rezoning, subdivision, site plan approval or building permits are not required. These regulations are
presented in subsection B of this section.
A. Rezoning, Subdivision, Site Plan Approval And/Or Building Permit: Every effort shall be made to retain existing trees by integrating them into
site and landscape plans for rezoning, subdivisions, planned developments, and proposals for individual lot development. Trees shall not be
removed without first obtaining a tree removal permit according to the following procedures and criteria: (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012
Code)
1. Tree Removal Permit Application And Fee:
a. Applications for tree removal permits subject to this subsection may be obtained from the Building Department, and, upon completion,
submitted to the Building Commissioner. The Building Commissioner, or appointed designee, shall be responsible for reviewing
applications and issuing permits. No building or site development permits shall be issued until such time as there is compliance with the
terms and conditions of this chapter, and a tree removal permit has been issued according to procedures set forth in this subsection.
(Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
b. The application for a tree removal permit shall be accompanied by the following:
(1) Name of applicant.
(2) Commonly known address of the lot or property where the tree(s) sought to be removed is located.
(3) A written statement indicating the reasons for removal of the tree(s).
(4) A tree identification plan, according to subsection A2 of this section.
(5) A tree preservation plan, as required under subsection A5 of this section.
(6) Name and address of contractor or other person who is proposed as having responsibility for tree removal.
c. A fee as established by the Village Board of Trustees shall be charged for each tree removal permit to cover the cost of staff review2. A
single permit may authorize the removal of more than one tree but shall only apply to a single parcel of land. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996;
amd. 2012 Code)
2. Tree Identification Plan:
a. Applicability:
(1) A plan which identifies existing trees shall be submitted to the Building Commissioner as a part of the site plan review or plat
approval process for subdivisions, planned developments, and the construction of residential, commercial, manufacturing and
institutional buildings on individual lots; and
(2) Where site plan or plat approval is not required by this title or the Village subdivision control ordinance, the tree identification plan
shall be submitted with drawings presented to the Building Commissioner for site development and building permits. (Ord. 96-12, 3-
25-1996; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
b. Plan Requirements: The tree identification plan shall:
(1) Be superimposed on the proposed grading plan and shall identify the location, size, condition and species of all trees on the property
and existing trees that are twenty five feet (25') beyond all property lines which have a diameter at breast height (dbh) that is six (6) or
more inches;
(2) Identify all trees with a dbh six (6) or more inches in size that are proposed to be removed; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 517/548
(3) Identify all groups (2 or more) of trees with an aggregate trunk size of twelve inches (12") in diameter or larger, as measured four
and one-half feet (41/2') above grade, which are proposed to be removed.
3. Tree Preservation Requirements:
a. Every effort shall be made to preserve trees with a dbh that is six (6) or more inches, or groups (2 or more) of trees with an aggregate
trunk size of twelve inches (12") in diameter or larger, as measured four and one-half feet (41/2') above grade, that are illustrated on the
tree identification plan. The Village has the right to require an individual lot owner or developer to modify the proposed development as
may be necessary to preserve existing, mature trees that substantially contribute to the aesthetics of the area or provide screening,
shade, slope stabilization or wildlife habitat. Development modifications that may be required include, but are not limited to:
(1) Reconfiguring the proposed site plan including building location(s), street network and/or parking layout;
(2) Reducing the intensity of development; or (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code)
(3) Increasing the intensity of development on that portion of a property that does not include trees identified for preservation.
Exceptions that may be required from the bulk regulations of the underlying zoning and/or subdivision control ordinances to
accommodate the development shall, however, be presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission and Village Board for review
and approval at a public hearing. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
b. The Building Commissioner, or appointed designee, shall evaluate existing trees and proposed site development and shall, in
conjunction with the individual lot owner or developer, determine which trees shall be preserved. All trees identified for preservation shall
be preserved and protected according to procedures and requirements set forth in subsection A5 of this section.
c. The Building Commissioner, or appointed designee, shall also determine which trees may be removed and replaced, due to one or
more of the following conditions: (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
(1) Necessity to remove trees in order to:
(A) Provide for essential grade changes;
(B) Provide for surface water drainage and utility installations;
(C) Reasonably maximize the property development potential while remaining consistent with the goals and objectives of the Village
Comprehensive Land Use Plan and this chapter;
(D) Locate proposed building(s), structure(s), required parking, or access drive(s) without causing unreasonable economic hardship;
and
(E) Observe reasonable forestry practices regarding the number, species and location of healthy trees the parcel will support.
(2) Necessity to remove trees which:
(A) Pose a safety hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or threaten to cause disruption of public services;
(B) Pose a safety hazard to buildings, both existing and proposed;
(C) Are diseased or weakened by age, storm, fire or other injury; and
(D) Are fast growing, short lived, softwood trees. These include:
Common Name Botanical Name
Box elder Acer negundo
Mountain ash Sorbus species
Mulberry Morus alba
Poplar Populus species
Siberian elm Ulmus pumila
Silver maple Acer saccharinum
Tree of heaven Ailanthus species
Willow Salix species
(Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code)
4. Required Tree Replacement: Unless otherwise approved by the Building Commissioner, appointed designee, or the Village Board, trees
which have been specified for removal for one or more reasons set forth in subsection A3 of this section shall be replaced according to the
following: (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 518/548
a. Replacement trees shall either:
(1) Equal or exceed the size of the tree(s) removed; or
(2) Consist of smaller trees, not less than three inches (3") in caliper, as measured six inches (6") above grade, which, in combination,
equal the size of the original tree(s); and
b. In no instance shall more than three (3) 3-inch caliper trees be required to replace any single tree, of any size, that will be removed. The
Village finds this necessary to avoid unreasonable crowding of trees on the property that could otherwise occur if trees were replaced
according to the formula specified in subsection A4a of this section. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code)
c. Species selected for replacement trees shall be limited to the following, unless written approval from the Building Commissioner, or
appointed designee, is obtained: (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
Common Name Botanical Name
Arborvitae species Thuja species
Bald cypress Taxodium distichum
Black walnut Jualans nigra
Buckeye Aesculus species
Common horse chestnut Aesculus hippocatanum
Crabapple Malus species
Ginkgo Ginkgo biloba (male)
Hackberry Celtis species
Hawthorne Crataegus species (thornless)
Heldrich pine Pinus heldrichi var. leucodermis
Homestead elm Ulmus carpinifolia 'Homestead'
Kentucky coffee tree Gymnocladus dioicus
Linden Tilia species
London planetree Platunus x acerifolia
Maple1 Acer species
Oak species Quercus species
Pear species Pyrus species
Shagbark hickory Curya ovata
Spruce species Picea species
Tulip tree Liriodendron tulipitera
Note:
1. Excluding silver maple and box elder.
d. Species selection shall be submitted for approval. Each species shall constitute only fifteen percent (15%) of the total site tree
replacement requirements.
e. The location, size and species of all required replacement trees shall be depicted on both the final landscape and grading plans. (Ord.
96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code)
f. Replacement trees may, at the discretion of the Building Commissioner, appointed designee, Planning and Zoning Commission and/or
Village Board, be used for perimeter yard landscaping and screening on the subject property that may otherwise be required by other
ordinances of the Village. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
5. Tree Preservation Plan:
a. A tree preservation plan, establishing the methods to be used for protecting and preserving trees, shall be submitted once trees have
been identified for preservation according to the process and criteria specified in subsections A3 and A4 of this section. This plan shall
be submitted simultaneously with other documents prepared for final plan or final plat approval and/or building and site development
permits, according to procedures set forth in applicable sections of this title and the Village subdivision control ordinance. (Ord. 96-12, 3-
25-1996; amd. 2012 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 519/548
b. The tree preservation plan shall be subject to review and approval by the Building Commissioner, or appointed designee. The plan shall
also be approved by the Village Board if it is part of a rezoning or development proposal that is reviewed by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Village Board according to established procedures for site plan review. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code; Ord.
2014-48, 10-27-2014; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
c. The preservation plan shall be superimposed on the proposed grading plan and shall show, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Size, species, condition and location of each tree approved for preservation;
(2) Protective fencing at the critical root zone of a tree or trees identified for preservation, or to the edge of disturbance, to protect trees
from grading, and from root compaction by construction equipment. If construction is allowed to occur within the critical root zone of
one side of a tree proposed for preservation, protective fencing shall be extended beyond the critical root zone of the other side of the
tree in order to maximize protection of the root system. The area of the root system protected by protective fencing shall, in no case,
be less than the total area of the critical root zone of the tree; (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code)
(3) Trees which are to be preserved, but which could be negatively affected during the construction process. The crowns and roots of all
such trees shall, unless otherwise determined by the Building Commissioner, or appointed designee, be pruned by a qualified
arborist, according to the tree pruning standards set by ANSI 2100 Code, to: (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42,
11-13-2017)
(A) Compensate for root loss due to construction; and
(B) Minimize damage to root systems;
(4) Areas where crushed limestone or other materials detrimental to the health of trees would be stored. Placement of these materials
within a tree's drip line or at higher elevations where drainage would be routed toward a tree or stand of trees proposed for
preservation shall be prohibited; and
(5) Areas proposed for washing concrete trucks. These areas should be designed and located such that wash water is directed into a
silt trap and not allowed to be routed toward trees approved for preservation.
d. Approval of a development proposal, final plan or final plat of subdivision shall be withheld until all of the information required by this
chapter has been submitted, and the evaluation of existing trees on the subject property has been completed by the Village. (Ord. 96-
12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code)
e. The Village shall, at its discretion, have the right to retain a professional tree consultant/forester to review tree preservation plans and to
submit a written report to the Building Commissioner. All expenses incurred by the Village for the use of the tree consultant shall be
reimbursed by the developer.
6. Review Period:
a. After completion of the applicable public hearing or public meeting process, the Building Commissioner, or appointed designee, shall,
within approximately three (3) weeks of the receipt of all final plans and support documentation set forth in subsections A1 through A5 of
this section, either: (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
(1) Issue a tree removal permit; or
(2) Provide written documentation to the applicant which fully indicates why the request for a tree removal permit has been denied. (Ord.
96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code)
b. Additional time, however, may be required if the tree identification and tree preservation plans are being reviewed and evaluated by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and Village Board as part of a rezoning, subdivision, or site plan approval process. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-
1996; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
7. Inspection:
a. Site grading and other development shall not occur until such time as the Building Commissioner, or appointed designee, inspects the
site to verify that tree protection measures are in place according to the approved plan. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code; Ord.
2017-42, 11-13-2017)
b. The Village shall have the right to inspect the subject property at any time during the construction process in order to verify that the
developer and contractor have protected trees according to the approved tree preservation plan.
c. In the event that a tree identified for preservation is destroyed or damaged during construction, such tree shall be replaced according to
criteria set forth in subsection A4 of this section. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code)
8. Development Ordinances: On sites designated for tree protection or tree preservation, the following standard provision will be included in
the development ordinance regulating the site:
Should any trees specifically designated to be preserved, maintained and protected on the subject property be removed, destroyed or
injured in such a fashion that its death is imminent, the owner or other party in interest of the subject property shall be required to replace
the removed, destroyed or injured tree(s) with additional trees of like kind that have the same monetary value as the tree removed,
destroyed or injured. The value of the tree removed, destroyed or injured shall be determined by the Trunk Formula Method equation
below as published in the Guide for Plant Appraisal as published by the International Society of Arboriculture Council Of Tree and
Landscape Appraisers.
V = B x S x C x L, where:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 520/548
V
=
Removed tree value
B
=
Basis tree value as determined by the Building Commissioner or his designee
S
=
Tree species rating as determined by the Building Commissioner or his designee
C
=
Tree condition rating as determined by the Building Commissioner or his designee
1.00 = excellent
0.80 = good
0.50 = fair
0.30 = poor
L
=
Tree location rating as determined by the Building Commissioner or his designee after considering the site, contribution and
placement of the subject tree
This formula may be updated from time to time by the Building Commissioner based on information from the International Society of
Arboriculture.
Replacement trees shall be in addition to any trees required to be planted pursuant to the approved landscape plan. The number and
placement of replacement trees shall be approved by Village staff, prior to installation.
(Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
B. Unrelated To Rezoning, Subdivision, Site Plan Approval And/Or Building Permits: The Village finds that it is in the best interests of the
community to preserve existing trees on private property. Therefore, any live tree with a diameter at breast height (dbh) that is six (6) or more
inches in size, or two (2) or more live trees with an aggregate trunk size of twelve inches (12") in diameter or larger, as measured four and
one-half feet (41/2') above grade, shall not be removed from: nonresidential planned developments; common areas or landscape easements
in residential planned developments that are visible from an adjoining street; residentially zoned properties which are one or more acres in
area; or any nonresidential property, regardless of size, without first obtaining a tree removal permit according to the following procedures
and criteria: (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996)
1. Tree Removal Permit Application And Fee:
a. Applications for tree removal permits subject to this subsection may be obtained from the Building Department, and, upon completion,
submitted to the Building Commissioner. The Building Commissioner, or appointed designee, shall be responsible for reviewing
applications and issuing a tree removal permit. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
b. The application for a tree removal permit shall be accompanied by the following:
(1) Name of applicant;
(2) Commonly known address of lot or property where the tree(s) sought to be removed is located;
(3) A written statement indicating the reason for removal of the tree(s);
(4) A drawing of the site, drawn to scale, which shows:
(A) The location, size, species and condition of the tree(s) for which a tree removal permit is sought; and
(B) The location, size and species of all required replacement trees;
(5) A written description of other trees on the lot, including size, condition, number and species; and
(6) Name and address of the contractor or other person who is proposed as having responsibility for tree removal. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-
1996)
c. A fee as established by the Village Board of Trustees shall be charged for each tree removal permit to cover the cost of staff review3. A
single permit may authorize the removal of more than one tree but shall only apply to a single parcel of land. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996;
amd. 2012 Code)
2. Justification For Permit:
a. The Building Commissioner, or appointed designee, shall determine which trees may be removed and replaced based on, but not
limited to, one of the following reasons: (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
(1) The tree is dying;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 521/548
(2) The tree poses a safety hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or threatens to cause disruption of public services;
(3) The tree poses a safety hazard to buildings, both existing and proposed;
(4) The tree is diseased or weakened by age, storm, fire or other injury;
(5) The tree is a willow, silver maple, or other fast growing, short lived, softwood tree (see subsection A3c(2) of this section);
(6) Removal of the tree is consistent with reasonable forestry practices regarding the number, species and location of healthy trees the
parcel will support;
(7) Removal of the tree will avoid or alleviate an economic hardship or hardship of another nature on either the lot or the residence
located on the lot. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996)
b. A tree removal permit shall also be required for the removal and transplanting of a tree with a dbh six (6) or more inches to another
location. The Building Commissioner, or appointed designee, shall have the authority to deny the application if it is determined that the
tree cannot reasonably be expected to survive the transplant procedure unless suitable replacement is provided according to subsection
A4 of this section.
3. Required Tree Replacement:
a. Unless otherwise approved by the Building Commissioner, or appointed designee, or the Village Board, trees which have been specified
for removal for one or more reasons set forth in subsection B2 of this section, shall be replaced according to subsection A4 of this
section.
b. The Village encourages the replacement of trees for which a tree removal permit has been issued, even though the Building
Commissioner, or appointed designee, may not require such replacement.
4. Review Period: The Building Commissioner, or appointed designee, shall, within approximately three (3) weeks of the receipt of all plans
and support documentation set forth in subsection B1 of this section either: (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
a. Issue a tree removal permit; or
b. Provide written documentation to the applicant which fully indicates why the request for a tree removal permit has been denied. (Ord.
96-12, 3-25-1996)
11-16-5: EMERGENCY TREE REMOVALS:
A. Emergency Removal By Owner: In the event that any tree shall endanger the public health, safety, welfare or property and requires
immediate removal without delay (e.g., a tree which has been struck by lightning or which has been blown over): (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996;
amd. 2012 Code)
1. Verbal authorization may be given by the Building Commissioner, or appointed designee, and the tree removed without obtaining a written
permit as herein required. Such verbal authorization shall later be confirmed in writing by the Building Commissioner upon written
application by the applicant; or
2. If neither the Building Commissioner nor the appointed designee is available to issue such verbal authorization, it shall be lawful to
proceed with the cutting of the tree to the extent necessary to avoid immediate danger or hazard. However, the person causing the cutting
shall report the action taken in writing to the Building Commissioner within forty eight (48) hours. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code;
Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
3. Emergency removal shall be subject to replacement per subsection 11-16-4A4 or B3 (as applicable) of this chapter.
B. Emergency Removal By Village:
1. The Village shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the Village when such trees
constitute a hazard to life and property or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the Village:
(Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code)
a. The Building Commissioner, or appointed designee, shall issue written notice of such condition to the owner of the property upon which
the tree is located and request immediate removal of the tree. The notice shall be sent by certified mail.
b. If the person to whom the notice is issued fails to respond within ten (10) days of the receipt of the certified mail, the Building
Commissioner, or appointed designee, may remove the tree at the expense of the owner. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code;
Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
c. The cost of removing the tree may be recovered by the Village through any appropriate legal proceeding against the property. The cost
of removal shall be deemed to include any and all incidental expenses, as well as all direct and indirect costs incurred by the Village in
connection with removal of the tree, including legal fees, court costs, and related trial expenses. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012
Code)
d. The Building Commissioner, or appointed designee, may cause any tree which is an immediate threat to the health, welfare and/or
safety of persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-
13-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 522/548
11-16-6: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PROVIDING AND MAINTAINING TREES:
All trees preserved or replaced as required by this chapter shall be provided and maintained by the owner of the property. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-
1996)
11-16-7: PENALTIES:
A. Penalty: Any person, firm, or private or public corporation failing to adhere to the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code)
B. Replacement Trees Required: Replacement trees shall be planted according to the formula set forth in subsection 11-16-4A4 of this chapter
whenever trees subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter have been removed without a tree removal permit by the property owner,
the property owner's contractor, agent, or employee, or any individual or entity authorized to be on the property owner's property. (Ord. 96-
12, 3-25-1996)
C. Suspension Of Permit: The Village may suspend any and all permits issued for a parcel of land if the Village determines that the provisions of
this chapter are not being adhered to. Suspension of permits shall be repealed only at such time as it is determined by the Building
Commissioner, or appointed designee, that the owner of the property, or his or her designee, is in compliance with the approved tree
preservation plan. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
11-16-8: APPEALS:
A. Any applicant may appeal the denial of a tree removal permit, and a person or entity deemed by the Building Commissioner to be in violation
of this chapter may appeal the suspension of permits by the Village, by filing a written appeal with the Village Clerk within thirty (30) days of
the denial of a permit or suspension of permits. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 11-13-2017)
B. The appeal shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission who shall, in all instances, make the final administrative determination,
consistent with procedures set forth in section 11-3-7 of this title. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
11-16-9: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
The specific terms and conditions of this chapter shall prevail against other ordinances of the Village to the extent that there might be any
conflict. (Ord. 96-12, 3-25-1996)
Chapter 17
ADULT USES1
11-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having, as a substantial or significant portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for
sale or for viewing on the premises by use of motion picture devices or by coin operated means, and periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such materials; or an establishment that holds itself out to the public
as a purveyor of such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin operated booths,
exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any other factors showing the establishment's primary purpose is to purvey such
material.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A public or private establishment which: a) features topless dancers, strippers, "go-go" dancers, male or
female impersonators, lingerie or bathing suit fashion shows; b) not infrequently features entertainers who display specified anatomical areas; or
c) features entertainers who, by reason of their appearance or conduct, perform in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the
prurient interest of the patron or features entertainers who engage in or are engaged in explicit simulation of specified sexual activities.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A building or area used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT NOVELTY STORE: An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its sales or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices,
clothing "novelties", lotions and other items distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on or use for specialized sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its signage,
advertising, displays, actual sales, exclusion of minors from the establishment's premises or any other factors showing the establishment's
primary purpose is to purvey such material.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 523/548
ADULT USE: Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult entertainment cabarets, adult novelty stores and other similar uses.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Less than completely and opaquely covered:
1. Human genitals;
2. Pubic region;
3. Buttock;
4. Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
C. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts. (Ord. 98-05, 2-23-1998)
11-17-2: SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIRED:
Prior to the issuance of any permit for the construction or occupancy of an adult use, the applicant for said permit(s) must first proceed through
the site development and plan review procedure set forth in chapter 4 of this title. However, site plan review for an adult use shall be considered
by the planning and zoning commission within sixty (60) days of filing. After consideration by the planning and zoning commission, findings shall
be forwarded to the village board and considered within sixty (60) days of the planning and zoning commission's consideration. The planning
and zoning commission and village board may place conditions on the development and operation of the adult use related to site plan, floor
plan, construction materials, lighting, parking and circulation, ingress and egress, landscaping and screening, and signage in order to assure
that the design and operation of the adult use is in conformance with all village ordinances and is compatible with surrounding uses. (Ord. 98-
05, 2-23-1998; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
11-17-3: LOCATION:
Adult uses are permitted in a business or manufacturing district, including planned unit development business or manufacturing areas, provided:
A. No adult use shall be located within eight hundred feet (800') of any property which is zoned or used for residences, churches, schools, parks
or other adult use.
B. No adult use shall be permitted to operate within three hundred feet (300') of the centerline of Lake Street, Army Trail Road or Gary Avenue.
(Ord. 98-05, 2-23-1998)
11-17-4: LIQUOR LICENSE PROHIBITED:
No liquor license shall be issued and no liquor shall be sold or consumed on the premises of any adult use. (Ord. 98-05, 2-23-1998)
11-17-5: EXTERIOR DISPLAY:
No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from any property not registered as an adult use. This section shall apply to any
display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. (Ord. 98-05, 2-23-1998)
11-17-6: EXISTING ADULT USES:
Any adult use which existed lawfully, but which became nonconforming upon the effective date hereof, may be continued as hereinafter
provided:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 524/548
A. Upon written notice from the village to the owners or interests therein that any building, structure, lot or regulated use is nonconforming under
the provisions of this title, the owners or interests therein shall, within two (2) months from the date of such notice, apply to the village clerk
for a certificate of nonconformance.
B. Failure to apply for a certificate of nonconformance within two (2) months of the notice provided in subsection A of this section will require the
amortization of the nonconformance within six (6) months of said notice.
C. Nonconformances that have applied for a certificate of nonconformance from the village clerk shall be discontinued within one year of the
notice provided in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 98-05, 2-23-1998)
Chapter 18
PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
11-18-1: PURPOSE:
A. Planned developments are of such substantially different character from other special uses that specific and additional standards and
exceptions are hereby established to govern the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission and the action of the village
board of trustees. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
B. These regulations are designed to provide for the integrated development of substantial land areas into planned developments considering
all the elements of planning; providing adequate relationship between structures and land uses; relaxing specific provisions of applicable
district requirements; but at the same time providing for adequate space, light, air, use and bulk limitations. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-18-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A planned development shall conform to the following requirements:
A. Be consistent with the purpose and intent of this title.
B. Be laid out and developed as a unit in accordance with an integrated overall design, as approved and authorized by the board of trustees.
C. The number of dwelling units erected shall not exceed the number permitted by the regulations of the district in which it is located unless an
exception is permitted as stipulated under section 11-18-3 of this chapter.
D. The yards and open spaces adjoining the boundaries of the project shall not be less than the yard requirements of the district in which it is
located.
E. No building is permitted to exceed the height limit of the district by more than ten percent (10%).
F. If more intensive uses (i.e., uses other than which the district is zoned, such as community business district usage in R-3 general residence
districts) are granted than are permitted by the district regulations, there must be clear evidence that such uses are needed to service the
project, provided the evidence shall show:
1. That the uses permitted by such exceptions are necessary or desirable and are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the
development;
2. That the uses permitted by such exception are not of such a nature or so located as to exercise a detrimental influence on the
development nor on the surrounding neighborhood;
3. That not more than ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of such development shall be devoted to the uses permitted by said
exception;
4. That in a planned industrial development, such additional uses allowed by exception shall conform with the performance standards of the
district in which the development is located as set forth in this title; (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
5. That the use exceptions so allowed are recorded on the zoning district maps by appropriate symbols or by reference to documents on file
with the building and zoning official; (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. 2012 Code)
6. Where the planned development is to be located in a residential district, no use exceptions shall be allowed unless the size of the planned
development exceeds twenty (20) acres.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 525/548
G. The amount of off street parking must be adequate to serve the needs of the projects, and the village board may require more off street
parking than is otherwise required by this title.
H. If any open space or recreational facility is to be used solely by the residents of the project, adequate provisions shall be made for
assessments against the property within the project for their proper improvement, maintenance and operation.
I. Underground utilities, including communications and electric systems, are required within the limits of a planned development. Appurtenances
to these systems which can be effectively screened may be excepted from this requirement if the village board finds that such exemption will
not violate the intent or character of the development.
J. The streets proposed must be suitable and adequate to carry anticipated traffic and increased densities and must not overload the street
network outside the development. All ingress and egress streets must be constructed in accordance with the subdivision code.
K. The planned development must be in accordance with the comprehensive plan of the village.
L. The existing and proposed utility services must be adequate for the population densities proposed. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-18-3: EXCEPTIONS:
In the case of any planned development, the planning and zoning commission may recommend, and the village board may authorize,
exceptions to the applicable regulations of this title within the boundaries of such development; provided, that the evidence shows: (Ord. 2007-
20, 5-24-2007; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
A. That such exception shall be solely for the purpose of encouraging a desirable living environment no less beneficial to the residents or
occupants of such development, as well as of neighboring properties, than would be obtained under the bulk regulations of this title for
buildings developed on separate zoning lots.
B. That maximum parcel coverage in a residential planned development shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) in the residential zoning
districts. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
C. Other standards for density, yard regulations, parking, loading and screening for a planned development shall be governed by the standards
of the residential, business or manufacturing zoning district(s) most similar in nature and function to the proposed planned development as
determined by the village board. Standards for public improvements shall be governed by the applicable ordinances and laws of the village.
Exceptions to these standards by the village board are possible when they find that such exceptions are warranted in terms of the total
proposed development. However, in regard to developments containing residential uses: (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. 2012 Code)
1. In no event shall the floor area ratio exceed more than thirty percent (30%) over that prescribed in this title for the district in which it is
located.
2. In no event shall the minimum square footage per dwelling unit requirements applicable to such districts be decreased by more than ten
percent (10%). A further decrease of not more than ten percent (10%) on the already reduced square footage per dwelling unit may be
permitted in the event that parking facilities are provided either underground or in the building proper, i.e., for each underground or on
building parking space, an equivalent reduction may be permitted to the allowable limit of ten percent (10%) before specified. (Ord. 69-12,
4-23-1969)
11-18-4: APPLICATION AND APPROVAL:
A. Tentative Approval:
1. The developer shall submit a tentative planned development to the planning and zoning commission for an approval, in principle, and
which the commission shall approve prior to the submission of an application for approval of a planned development special use permit.
The written consent of all property owners within the development shall be on file with the village before study of a tentative planned
development shall be commenced. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
2. Any tentative development plan shall be prepared and shall include the following information presented in a general schematic fashion:
a. Proposed land uses, population densities and building intensities.
b. Proposed circulation pattern indicating both public and private streets and off street parking ratios.
c. Proposed parks, playgrounds, school sites and other open spaces.
d. A market analysis of proposed commercial uses if the property is not zoned for commercial purposes at the time of submittal of the
preliminary development plan.
e. Delineation of the units to be constructed in progression if any.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 526/548
f. Relation to future land use in the surrounding area and the village comprehensive plan. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
3. Approval, in principle, of the tentative planned development shall be limited to the general acceptability of the land uses proposed and the
interrelationships, and shall not be construed to endorse precise location of uses, configuration of parcels, or engineering feasibility. The
purpose of this conference is to afford the developer an opportunity to avail himself of the advice and assistance of the planning and
zoning commission before incurring the expense of a plan. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
B. Application For Approval For Special Use Permit: Any person or persons owning lots or land within the village or any persons owning lots or
land outside the village coming under a preannexation agreement may apply to the village board for approval of a planned development
special use permit. The development plan submitted after the preliminary conference shall include, as a minimum, the following:
1. A topographic and boundary line map of the project, locating its relationship to surrounding properties;
2. Pattern of public and private roads, driveways, parking facilities, and intended design standards;
3. Size, area and location of lots or of proposed building groups;
4. Location, type and size of landscaping;
5. Use, type, size and location of structures;
6. Location of sewer and water facilities;
7. Architectural drawings and sketches illustrating the design and character of proposed structures;
8. Location of recreational and open space area;
9. Existing and proposed storm drainage pattern;
10. Statistical data pertinent to a comprehensive evaluation of the proposed development;
11. Organizational details of any property owners' association;
12. Aspects of the maintenance of common open space areas;
13. Schedule for the development of units to be constructed in progression;
14. List of use and bulk exceptions requested;
15. Engineering feasibility studies as necessary; and
16. Relation to future land use in the surrounding area and the village comprehensive plan. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
C. Public Hearing; Approval Or Denial Of Permit:
1. The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing on the application. The planning and zoning commission may approve or
disapprove the application or make recommendations regarding changes or revisions that it deems desirable, and forward their report and
recommendation to the village board. Approval for each unit of the development by the village board shall be valid for a period of eighteen
(18) months from the date of approval of the final plan of planned development. (Ord. 2011-10, 2-28-2011; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-
2014)
2. There shall also be submitted with the final plan, a written agreement of restrictions signed by the owners of the planned development
assuring the village that the development will be carried out in full compliance with the final plan and within the time schedule of
construction submitted with the final plan. Once the plan is authorized by the village board, no modification may be made without
authorization of the village board. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969)
11-18-5: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
Whenever the village board approves the final plan, the building and zoning official shall issue the necessary permits for all of the project or for
such units thereof that are to be constructed. (Ord. 69-12, 4-23-1969; amd. 2012 Code)
11-18-6: VALIDITY OF PERMIT:
If no construction has commenced within a period of eighteen (18) months from the date of approval of the final plan, the permits shall be
declared null and void, and the project shall not be initiated unless it is resubmitted and reapproved in the same manner that it was approved in
the first instance. The village board may, however, extend the period for commencing construction in accordance with this section upon a
showing of good and sufficient cause. (Ord. 2011-10, 2-28-2011)
11-18-7: PERFORMANCE INSURANCE:
At the time of the granting of the permit, the village board shall make appropriate arrangements with the applicant which will ensure the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 527/548
accomplishment at the scheduled times of the public improvements and grants of easement shown on the approved final plan. (Ord. 69-12, 4-
23-1969)
Chapter 19
FENCING AND SCREENING
11-19-1: INTERPRETATION:
A. In their interpretation and application the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and welfare.
B. This chapter is intended to govern the erection, enlargement, reconstruction, movement, or altering of fences and screens, as hereinafter
defined.
C. This chapter is not intended to modify or abrogate any easement, covenant, homeowners' association regulations or other private agreement
setting forth fence or screen regulations provided that where the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive, or impose higher standards
or requirements than such easements, covenants, homeowners' association regulations or other private agreements, the requirements of
this chapter shall govern. A permit application submittal will not be reviewed for compliance without prior written approval from a
homeowners' association where regulations exist for specific fence and/or screen installation.
D. The building commissioner is authorized to prepare guidance documents as necessary to facilitate the enforcement of requirements as set
forth herein. (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011)
11-19-2: APPEALS AND VARIATIONS:
Any appeal from any decision by the building commissioner or other authorized representative hereunder, and any application for a variation,
shall be made pursuant to the applicable provisions of chapter 3, article A of this title. (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011)
11-19-3: DEFINITIONS IN REGULATING FENCE OR SCREEN INSTALLATIONS:
ARTERIAL ROAD, MAJOR: For determining fence height limitations as indicated within these regulations, major arterial roads are as follows:
Army Trail Road, Bloomingdale Road, Gary Avenue, Glen Ellyn Road, Lake Street, Schick Road and Springfield Drive.
ENTRY STRUCTURE: A partial fence or decorative wall, column(s), posts at the frontage or entry point of a lot from the adjacent street,
roadway or sidewalk designating a point of entry at each side of a driveway or walkway leading to the main building on a lot. Entry structures
may also include a gate or gates that provide a movable barrier across a driveway or walkway.
FENCE: A structure forming a boundary or barrier at final grade level, between lots, between lots and a street, alley or roadway, or between
portions of a lot or lots, including, but not limited to, those used for screening, confinement, protection, privacy or delineation.
FENCE, CHAINLINK/CYCLONE: A fence made of metal wire twisted together to form a pattern. This type of fencing shall be required to have a
green, brown or black color protective finish or coating factory applied by the manufacturer. Slats shall not be permitted. Approval shall be at the
discretion of the building commissioner.
FENCE, OPEN: A fence, including gates, which has over its entirety seventy percent (70%) of the surface area in open space as viewed from
an angle of ninety degrees (90°) from the fence line.
FENCE, SNOW: A fence used to control or prevent the drifting of snow, causing the drifting to occur at the boundary created by the fence rather
than randomly. Such fencing may consist of wood stripping connected by metal wire, or heavy type perforated flexible plastic, attached to
temporary stakes at appropriate intervals to adequately support the temporary fencing.
FENCE, SOLID: A fence, including gates, which conceals from view from adjoining properties, streets or alleys, activities conducted behind it.
FENCE, SPLIT RAIL: A fence comprised of horizontal rails between support posts.
FENCE/WALL: A structure, requiring a continuous structural foundation for support, made of material similar or compatible to the main building
on a lot.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the junction of, abutting on, or facing two (2) intersecting streets or roadways; or a lot at the point of deflection
in alignment of a single street, the interior angle of which is one hundred thirty five degrees (135°) or less. Lot lines fronting, abutting or facing
the streets shall be considered to be front lines. See section 11-19-16, illustration (B) of this chapter.
LOT, CORNER REVERSED: A lot the same as a corner lot except that its front lot line with the greatest dimension is substantially a
continuation of the front lot lines of the interior lots to its rear, and its rear lot line adjoins or abuts the side lot line of the lot to its rear. Lot lines
abutting, fronting or facing a street or roadway shall be considered to be front lot lines. See section 11-19-16, illustration (G) of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 528/548
LOT, CORNER THROUGH: A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) more or less parallel streets or roadways and has another
lot line fronting or facing another street or roadway and has its side lot line adjoining or contiguous to another lot or lots. On a corner through lot,
all lot lines parallel to, fronting or facing any street or roadway shall be considered as front lot lines. See section 11-19-16, illustration (D) of this
chapter.
LOT, INTERIOR: Any lot, other than a corner lot, having a lot line fronting or facing only one street. See section 11-19-16, illustration (A) of this
chapter.
LOT, INTERIOR THROUGH: A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) more or less parallel streets or roadways and which is not
a corner lot. On an interior lot, both lot lines parallel to, fronting or facing a street or roadway shall be considered to be front lot lines. See
section 11-19-16, illustration (C) of this chapter.
SCREEN: A structure constructed, erected or installed, which may include vegetation planted for, including, but not limited to, the purpose of
concealing or obstructing the view of persons on either side of it. Screening shall be a maximum of eight feet (8') in height or such lesser height
to be determined by the building commissioner. A screen if constructed, manufactured or installed shall be a minimum of seventy five percent
(75%) solid when viewed at an angle of ninety degrees (90°) of the screen line.
SETBACK LINE, BUILDING: The distance between a lot line and a main/principal building located on a lot, based on applicable residence
zoning district yard setback requirements.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a main building, unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky.
YARD, FRONT/CORNER LOT AND REVERSED CORNER LOT: The areas extending within and along the front lot lines to the rear and side lot
lines and then inward along the rear and side lot lines to a point equal to that part of the main building closest to the front lot lines, and then
inward from the rear and side lot lines to that part of the main building. See section 11-19-16, illustrations (B) and (G) of this chapter indicated as
Front Yard (Front) and Front Yard (Side) on the illustrations.
YARD, FRONT/CORNER THROUGH LOT: A corner through lot consists of three (3) front yards as follows:
A. Front Yard (Front): The area extending across the front of the lot with the least dimension and being contained within that front lot line, the
front of the main building, the interior side lot line and the opposite corner side yard area. See section 11-19-16, illustration (D) of this
chapter.
B. Front Yard (Rear): The area extending across the rear of the lot, opposite from the front yard (front) and being contained within its front lot
line, the interior side lot line and the opposite front corner side yard area, and for a minimum depth of a front yard as required for the
applicable zoning district. See section 11-19-16, illustration (D) of this chapter. Any corner through lot having a depth of less than two
hundred feet (200') shall be exempt from the requirements of having a front yard (rear). See section 11-19-16, illustration (F) of this
chapter.
C. Front Yard (Side): The area extending along the front of the lot with the greatest dimension and contained between the front lot line (front)
and the front lot line (rear), the front lot line (side) and the main building. See section 11-19-16, illustration (D) of this chapter.
YARD, FRONT/INTERIOR LOT: The area extending across the front of a lot and being contained within the front lot line, the front of the main
building and the side lot lines. See section 11-19-16, illustration (A) of this chapter.
YARD, FRONT/INTERIOR THROUGH LOT: Interior through lots consist of two (2) front yards as follows:
A. Front Yard (Front): The area extending across the front of the lot and being contained within the front lot line, the side lot lines and the
front of the main building. See section 11-19-16, illustration (C) of this chapter.
B. Front Yard (Rear): The area extending across the rear of the lot, opposite from the front yard (front) and being contained within its front lot
line, the side lot lines and for the minimum depth of a front yard as required for the applicable zoning district. See section 11-19-16,
illustration (C) of this chapter. Interior through lot having a depth of less than two hundred feet (200') shall be exempt from the
requirements of having a front yard (rear). See section 11-19-16, illustration (E) of this chapter.
YARD, REAR/CORNER LOT AND REVERSED CORNER LOT: The area extending across the rear of a lot and parallel to the street upon which
the lot has its least dimension. Such area shall be within and extending along the rear lot line to a point equal to that part of the main building
closest to the front (corner side) lot line and then inward from the rear lot line to that part of the main building, and from the rear lot line along the
side lot line to a point equal to that part of the main building closest to the rear lot line and then inward from the side lot line to that point of the
building. See section 11-19-16, illustrations (B) and (G) of this chapter.
YARD, REAR/CORNER THROUGH LOT: The area contained between the front yard (rear) and the main building, and the interior side lot line
and the front yard (corner side). See section 11-19-16, illustration (D) of this chapter.
YARD, REAR/INTERIOR LOT: The area extending across the rear of a lot and being contained within the rear lot line, the rear of the main
building, the side lot lines, and at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. See section 11-19-16, illustration (A) of this chapter.
YARD, REAR/INTERIOR THROUGH LOT: The area remaining after determining the front yard (rear) (see subsection B of the definition of Yard,
Front/Interior Through Lot) and being contained within the front yard (rear), the side lot lines and the rear of the main building. See section 11-
19-16, illustration (C) of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 529/548
YARD, SIDE/CORNER LOT AND REVERSED CORNER LOT: That area remaining after establishing the front and rear yards (see definitions of
Yard, Front/Corner Lot And Reversed Corner Lot and Yard, Rear/Corner Lot And Reversed Corner Lot), or that area extending along a side lot
line and contained between the front and rear yards, the main building and the side lot line. See section 11-19-16, illustrations (B) and (G) of this
chapter.
YARD, SIDE/CORNER THROUGH LOT: The area extending along a side lot line and contained between the side lot line and the main building,
and the front yard (front) and the rear yard. See section 11-19-16, illustration (D) of this chapter.
YARD, SIDE/INTERIOR LOT: The area extending along a side lot line and contained between the front and rear yards, the side lot line and the
main building. See section 11-19-16, illustration (A) of this chapter.
YARD, SIDE/INTERIOR THROUGH LOT: The area extending along a side lot line and contained between the side lot line and the main building
and the front yard (front) and the rear yard. See section 11-19-16, illustration (C) of this chapter.
Any words not defined by this section shall be construed in their general accepted meanings as defined by the most recent edition of "Webster's
Dictionary", or equivalent reference source subject to approval by the building commissioner. Illustrations incorporated in section 11-19-16 of
this chapter are provided as a visual aid to the written regulations. (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011)
11-19-4: PERMITTED LOCATION OF RESIDENTIAL FENCE AND SCREEN INSTALLATIONS:
11-19-4-1: RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL YARDS:
A. No fence or screen shall be permitted in or on the property between the front lot line and the street or roadway.
B. Permit shall be obtained prior to installation (see section 11-19-8 of this chapter). (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011)
11-19-4-2: CORNER LOT AND REVERSE CORNER LOT:
A. Permitted Rear And Interior Side Yard Fences: Fences, open or solid, not to exceed six feet (6') in height (exclusive of posts or ornamental
objects on posts not to exceed an additional 6 inches above the maximum allowable 6 foot fence height). Such fences shall not be permitted
to extend closer to any street or roadway than that part of the main building closest to the street or roadway, and at least the minimum
required depth of a front yard for the applicable zoning district. See section 11-19-16, illustrations (B) and (G) of this chapter.
B. Permitted Lot Front Yard (Front And Side) Fences (Reverse Corner): Fences shall not exceed forty two inches (42") in height (exclusive of
posts or ornamental objects on posts not to exceed an additional 6 inches above the maximum allowable 42 inch height) and shall be at
least seventy percent (70%) open when viewed from an angle of ninety degrees (90°). See section 11-19-16, illustration (G) of this chapter.
Chainlink fencing shall not be permitted within a front (front and side) yard.
C. Permitted Lot Front Yards (Front And Side) Fences (Corner):
1. Front Yard (Front): Fences shall not exceed forty two inches (42") in height (exclusive of posts or ornamental objects on posts not to
exceed an additional 6 inches above the maximum allowable 42 inch height) and shall be at least seventy percent (70%) open when
viewed from an angle of ninety degrees (90°). See section 11-19-16, illustration (B) of this chapter. Chainlink fencing shall not be permitted
within a front yard.
2. Front Yard (Side): Fences shall not exceed forty eight inches (48") in height (exclusive of posts or ornamental objects on posts not to
exceed an additional 6 inches above the maximum allowable 48 inch height) as indicated in section 11-19-16, illustration (B) of this
chapter and may be open or solid type fencing. Exception to the maximum front yard (side) fence height limitation may be granted by the
building commissioner, not to exceed six feet (6') in height, based on the presence of existing property fencing previously permitted to be
repaired or replaced, or due to property location along a major arterial road. Evergreen landscaping shall be installed to buffer new fencing
taller than forty eight inches (48") in height as permitted by this exception.
D. Vision Obstructions Prohibited: Fences shall not be permitted on corner lots if located within the area of a triangle, two (2) legs of which are a
distance of twenty feet (20') each, when measured along each of the intersecting front lot lines and from a point where such lines intersect.
See section 11-19-16, illustration (H) of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011)
11-19-4-3: CORNER THROUGH LOT:
A. Permitted Interior Side Yard Fences: Fences, open or solid, not to exceed six feet (6') in height (exclusive of posts or ornamental objects on
posts not to exceed an additional 6 inches in height above the maximum allowable 6 foot fence height). Such fences shall not be permitted
to extend closer to any street or roadway than the front building setback line or the front of the main building, whichever is the farthest from
the front lot lines. See section 11-19-16, illustration (D) of this chapter.
B. Permitted Front Yard (Front, Corner Side And Rear) Fences:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 530/548
1. Front Yard (Front And Rear): Fences not to exceed forty two inches (42") in height (exclusive of posts or ornamental objects on posts not
to exceed an additional 6 inches above the maximum allowable 42 inch fence height) and shall be at least seventy percent (70%) open
when viewed from an angle of ninety degrees (90°). Exception to this requirement may be granted by the building commissioner based on
the presence of existing property fencing previously permitted due to unique lot conditions. Any corner through lot having a depth of less
than two hundred feet (200') shall be exempt from the requirements of having a front yard (rear) and shall comply with subsection C of this
section. See section 11-19-16, illustration (F) of this chapter. Chainlink fencing shall not be permitted within a front yard.
2. Front Yard (Side): Fences shall not exceed forty eight inches (48") in height (exclusive of posts or ornamental objects on posts not to
exceed an additional 6 inches above the maximum allowable 48 inch height) in the front yard (side), as indicated in section 11-19-16,
illustration (D) of this chapter and may be open or solid type fencing. Exception to the maximum front yard (side) fence height limitation
may be granted by the building commissioner, not to exceed six feet (6') in height, based on the presence of existing property fencing
previously permitted to be repaired or replaced, or due to property location along a major arterial road. Evergreen landscaping shall be
installed to buffer new fencing taller than forty eight inches (48") in height as permitted by this exception.
C. Permitted Rear Yard Fences: Fences, open or solid, not to exceed six feet (6') in height (exclusive of posts or ornamental objects on posts
not to exceed an additional 6 inches above the maximum allowable 6 foot fence height) for a lot having a depth of less than two hundred feet
(200'). See section 11-19-16, illustration (F) of this chapter. Evergreen landscaping shall be installed to buffer new fencing taller than forty
eight inches (48") in height as permitted by this exception.
D. Vision Obstructions Prohibited: Fences shall not be permitted on corner through lots if located within the area of a triangle, two (2) legs of
which are a distance of twenty feet (20') each, when measured along each of the intersecting front lot lines from a point where such lines
intersect. See section 11-19-16, illustration (I) of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011)
11-19-4-4: INTERIOR LOT:
A. Permitted Rear And Side Yard Fences: Fences, open or solid, not exceeding six feet (6') in height (exclusive of posts or ornamental objects
on posts not to exceed an additional 6 inches above the maximum allowable 6 foot fence height). Such fences shall not be permitted to
extend closer to any street or roadway than the front building setback line or the front of the main building, whichever is the farthest from the
front lot line. See section 11-19-16, illustration (A) of this chapter.
B. Permitted Front Yard Fences: Fences not to exceed forty two inches (42") in height (exclusive of posts or ornamental objects on posts not to
exceed an additional 6 inches above the maximum allowable 42 inch fence height) and that are at least seventy percent (70%) open when
viewed from an angle of ninety degrees (90°). See section 11-19-16, illustration (A) of this chapter. Chainlink fencing shall not be permitted
within a front yard. (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011)
11-19-4-5: INTERIOR THROUGH LOT:
A. Permitted Side Yard Fences: Fences, open or solid, not exceeding six feet (6') in height (exclusive of posts or ornamental objects on posts
not to exceed an additional 6 inches above the maximum allowable 6 foot fence height). Such fences shall not be permitted to extend closer
to any street or roadway than the front building line or the front of the main building, whichever shall be the farthest from the front lot line.
See section 11-19-16, illustration (C) of this chapter.
B. Permitted Front Yard (Front And Rear) Fences: Fences that do not exceed forty two inches (42") in height (exclusive of posts or ornamental
objects on posts not to exceed an additional 6 inches above the maximum allowable 42 inch height) and that are at least seventy percent
(70%) open when viewed from an angle of ninety degrees (90°). See section 11-19-16, illustration (C) of this chapter. Any interior through lot
having a depth of less than two hundred feet (200') shall be exempt from the requirements of having a front yard (rear). See section 11-19-
16, illustration (E) of this chapter. Chainlink fencing shall not be permitted within a front yard.
C. Permitted Rear Yard Fences: Fences, open or solid, not to exceed six feet (6') in height (exclusive of posts or ornamental objects on posts
not to exceed 6 inches above the maximum allowable 6 foot fence height) for a lot having a depth of less than two hundred feet (200'). See
section 11-19-16, illustration (E) of this chapter. Evergreen landscaping shall be installed to buffer new fencing taller than forty eight inches
(48") in height as permitted by exception. (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011)
11-19-4-6: SCREENS:
Residential screens may be permitted at the discretion of the building commissioner. If permitted, a screen shall only be located in a rear yard
with the construction of the screen subject to review and approval by the building commissioner. (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011)
11-19-5: PERMITTED LOCATION OF COMMERCIAL FENCE AND SCREEN INSTALLATIONS:
A. Fences: Commercial fencing shall be subject to the requirements of this code for site development and plan review. Permit shall be obtained
prior to installation (see section 11-19-8 of this chapter).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 531/548
B. Screens: Commercial screens shall be subject to the requirements of this code for site development and plan review. Permit shall be
obtained prior to installation (see section 11-19-8 of this chapter). (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011)
11-19-6: OLD TOWN PRESERVATION DISTRICT:
Fencing or screening proposed to be installed within the old town preservation district shall be subject to the regulations contained in chapter 11
of this title specific to the district. Permit shall be obtained prior to installation (see section 11-19-8 of this chapter). (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011)
11-19-7: FENCE AND SCREEN CONSTRUCTION/PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Material: Fences or screens proposed to be constructed of wood shall be naturally resistant to insects and decay, or approved treated wood.
No fence or screen shall contain any barbed wire, electrification or be designed, constructed or installed in any way to cause injury. Metallic
fences shall have a green, brown or black protective finish or coating applied by the manufacturer, without slats, and shall not be permitted
within a front yard. Fence or screen materials and finish color are subject to final review and approval by the building commissioner.
B. Footings: Constructed fence and screen support footings shall be a minimum of forty two inches (42") in depth and are to be inspected prior
to concrete placement. Soil from fence posthole footing excavation is to be removed from the property prior to the inspection for concrete
placement.
C. Orientation: Constructed fences or screens shall have their finished side (best or decorative) face the exterior of the lot.
D. Obstructions: No obstruction to the vision of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, including, but not limited to, fencing and screening, shall be
permitted on corner lots if located within the area of a triangle, two (2) legs of which are a distance of twenty feet (20') each when measured
along each of the intersecting front lot lines and from a point where such lines intersect. See section 11-19-16, illustrations (H) and (I) of this
chapter. No obstruction to the vision of vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be permitted at driveways, parking access drives or sidewalks
adjacent to vehicular traffic areas. The bottom edge of solid fences or screens shall be a minimum of three inches (3") above grade if
necessary to provide for stormwater drainage.
E. Temporary Safety And Snow Fencing: Temporary safety fencing shall be required to enclose construction and excavation sites large enough
to be considered a hazard or an attractive nuisance to the public. Temporary snow fencing placed to prevent against the drifting of snow may
be approved at the discretion of the building commissioner. A fence permit is required for the installation of any type of temporary fencing. At
no time shall a temporary fence installation as approved by permit fall into disrepair. As a condition of each temporary fence permit, the
village reserves the right to make repairs or remove the fencing at the property owner's expense. In all cases temporary fencing shall be
removed based on the expiration date for the temporary fence permit. Snow fencing, allowed only by permit, shall be installed no earlier than
November 1 and shall be removed no later than May 1 each year. (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011)
11-19-8: PERMITS AND FEES:
No person shall commence construction or installation of any type of fence or screen, permanent or temporary, without first having obtained a
permit. To obtain a permit, the property owner or his representative shall file an application on a form furnished by the village for that purpose.
Application shall include such plans, property survey, specifications and additional information as required for proper representation of the
proposed work, and to ensure compliance with this chapter and all other applicable village codes and ordinances. Fees associated with the
construction or installation of a fence or screen shall be assessed in accordance with the village of Bloomingdale permit, fee and bond
regulations ordinance. Fence installation contractors are to be bonded and insured for the work to be performed. (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011)
11-19-9: INSPECTIONS:
The building commissioner, or other authorized representative, is hereby authorized and directed to periodically inspect fencing or screening
regulated by this chapter to ensure compliance with the requirements set forth herein. If, after inspection, the building commissioner finds that
the installation, use or maintenance of a fence or screen does not meet the requirements and regulations imposed by this chapter, said fence or
screen installation shall be removed from the property. Inspections during the construction or installation of a fence or screen shall be performed
based on the type of installation and as required by the conditions of the permit. (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011)
11-19-10: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
No fence or screen not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption hereof shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of the adoption of
this chapter; and to the extent and manner said unlawful fence or screen is in conflict with the requirements of this chapter, said fence or screen
remains unlawful.
Any nonconforming fence or screen which existed lawfully at the time of the adoption of this chapter or any amendment thereto, provided that all
applicable fees arising from the erection of such nonconforming fence or screen have been paid to the village, may be continued subject to the
provisions of section 11-19-9 of this chapter and this section. Ordinary repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming fence or screen,
but such nonconforming fence or screen may not be enlarged, moved, or structurally altered, unless the fence or screen is thereby made to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 532/548
conform to all the regulations set forth in this chapter. It shall be unlawful to design, construct, alter, move, enlarge, replace, repair, demolish,
remove, use or maintain a fence or screen dangerous to life or detrimental to health in the village. (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011)
11-19-11: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
Where the restrictions of this chapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by the applicable village
zoning ordinance regulations and all amendments thereto, or by any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the
regulations which are more restrictive, or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. The specific terms and conditions of this
chapter shall prevail against any existing ordinance of the village that does not provide for specific fence or screen regulations, except that
safety barrier requirements within this code regulating swimming pools, spas, hot tubs and portable or temporary pools shall apply when
pertaining to life safety requirements for safety barriers around those installations. (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011)
11-19-12: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a penalty in the amount of one hundred
percent (100%) of any unpaid fee and, in addition, shall be subject to a penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. Each day
that a violation of this chapter occurs shall be deemed to be a complete and separate offense. In addition, the appropriate authorities of the
village may take such other action as they deem proper to enforce the terms and provisions of this chapter, including, without limitation, an
action at law or in equity to compel compliance with its terms. Any person violating the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be subject, in
addition to the foregoing penalties, to the payment of court costs and reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011)
11-19-13: SEVERABILITY:
If any portion of this chapter or of the regulations incorporated herein by reference is declared or held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such declaration or finding of invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion of this chapter or the regulations incorporated herein
which may be given effect without such invalid provisions, and to that end the provisions of this chapter are severable. (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-
2011)
11-19-14: PRIOR VIOLATION:
Neither the enactment of this chapter nor the repeal of any ordinance or parts of ordinances as provided for herein shall be construed to affect
or abate any action or cause of action for violation of said prior ordinance or ordinances. (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011)
11-19-15: CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY:
This chapter shall not be construed to extend to or affect any construction activity for which a permit was issued or application for permit filed
prior to the effective date hereof, except for fees not yet due or payable, unless the building commissioner determines that any provisions of this
chapter or the regulations incorporated herein by reference should be applied for reasons of public health and safety. (Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-
2011)
11-19-16: ILLUSTRATIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 533/548
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 534/548
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 535/548
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 536/548
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 537/548
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 538/548
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 539/548
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 540/548
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 541/548
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 542/548
(Ord. 2011-38, 11-14-2011)
Chapter 20
EXTERIOR LIGHTING
11-20-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to: a) increase overnight health, safety, utility, and security; b) promote business development by setting
standards for ambient lighting in parking lots and in other locations; c) conserve energy and resources; and d) minimize glare, light trespass,
and sky glow. (Ord. 2013-19, 4-22-2013)
11-20-2: CONFORMANCE WITH APPLICABLE CODES:
All outdoor illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of this code, the building code, the electrical code, and the
sign code of the village of Bloomingdale as applicable and under appropriate permit and inspection. (Ord. 2013-19, 4-22-2013)
11-20-3: APPLICABILITY:
Applies to all applications for site plan review, zoning code or development ordinance amendment, planned development, special use permit,
site plan review, and zoning variations for new lighting installations in all zoning districts, while excluding applications for zoning variations
located in single-family residential districts and in the single-family portions of planned developments and planned development districts. (Ord.
2013-19, 4-22-2013)
11-20-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, terms used shall be defined as follows:
AVG:MIN OR AVERAGE:MINIMUM RATIO: A measurement of the uniformity of light distribution on a horizontal surface achieved by dividing
the average light output on the paved surface by the minimum light output on that surface.
BACKSIDE SHIELD OR SHIELD: A device which is added or attached to a light fixture made from an opaque material which prevents light from
being emitted in certain directions, and is commonly applied to prevent light from entering an adjacent property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 543/548
COLOR RENDITION INDEX OR CRI: A measure of the ability of a light source to reproduce the colors of various objects faithfully in
comparison with an ideal or natural light source. A CRI of 100 is the maximum score and indicates a true replication of the color of an object in
natural light conditions.
COLOR TEMPERATURE: A measurement in kelvin that indicates the hue of a specific type of light source for the purpose of comparing a
proposed light source to natural daylight.
FIXTURE OR FIXTURE, LIGHT (Also Called LUMINAIRE): The complete lighting assembly (including the lamp(s), housing, ballasts, photocells,
reflectors or refractors, lenses, sensors and shields) less the support assembly of pole, mounting bracket and base, consisting of one or more
lamps together with the parts designed to distribute light, position and protect the lamp, and connect the lamp to a source of power. Light
fixtures are evaluated for safety by Underwriters Laboratory and are "rated" to certain wattage limits, as affixed by a UL issued label. (See
definition of UL Rating.)
FOOT-CANDLE (FC): A unit of measurement used to determine the amount of light incident on a surface, also known as "illuminance". One
foot-candle (1 FC) is equivalent to one lumen evenly distributed over one square foot of surface area at a distance of one foot (1'). Foot-candle
measurements can be taken with a handheld light meter.
FOOT-CANDLE LIGHT METER: A portable instrument which measures light levels in foot-candle (FC) units emitted from a light source on a
horizontal or vertical surface.
FULL OR FULLY CUT OFF: A light fixture or luminaire designed, constructed and installed in such a manner that all light emitted from the
fixture, either directly from the lamp(s) or a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the fixture, is projected
below the horizontal plane through the fixture's lowest light emitting part.
GLARE: A visual disturbance produced by a direct view of a distinct light source within the visual field that is sufficiently brighter than the level to
which the eyes are adapted to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility; blinding light.
ILLUMINANCE: Measure of incident light. The amount of light, evaluated according to its capacity to produce visual stimulation, that reaches a
unit of surface area during a unit of time. It is measured in lux, or in foot-candles when evaluated on a square foot basis.
ILLUMINATING ENGINEERING SOCIETY OF NORTH AMERICA (IESNA OR IES): A nonprofit organization founded in 1906 with a mission to
improve the lighted environment by bringing together engineers, lighting designers, consultants, lighting equipment manufacturers, sales
professionals, electrical contractors, and academics to conduct research and promote best practices with the publication of reference guides for
a variety of specific lighting applications.
LAMP: The source of light being emitted from a luminaire, such as a bulb.
LIGHT LEVEL: The illuminance as measured by a light meter as reported in photometry.
LIGHT OUTPUT: The amount of light which is emitted by a lamp or fixture.
LIGHT POLLUTION: Any unnecessary or adverse effect of artificial light including, but not limited to: glare, light trespass, excessive or
unnecessary lighting, uplighting and sky glow; and any artificial light that unnecessarily diminishes the ability to view the night sky or is
disruptive to the natural environment.
LIGHT SOURCE OR SOURCE: The light emitting part or parts of a light fixture, consisting of the lamp or lamps, and any transparent or
translucent covering over the lamp, as well as any refractors, reflectors, prismatic lenses, mirrors, or diffusers which emit or transmit light.
LIGHT TRESPASS: Light that falls on neighboring properties or produces glare or distraction for observers away from the area for which the
light is intended.
LIGHTING: Any or all parts of a luminaire that function to produce light, or light produced by a manmade source, including, but not limited to,
electric lamps, gas lamps, and solar lamps.
LIGHTING, DECORATIVE: Lights that have an aesthetic purpose to illuminate the architectural features of a building, site or landscaping and
produce generally low levels of light (less than 100 watts for traditional incandescent lights, or less than 1600 to 1800 lumens) including, but not
limited to, "gooseneck" lights, sconce lights, recessed lighting in roof soffits, and silhouette lights.
LIGHTING, ESSENTIAL: Light that is used for a specified period of time which is necessary for a specific task or purpose while said task or
purpose is actively being performed.
LIGHTING, EXCESSIVE: Illuminance which exceeds the amount of light which is permitted by the provisions, requirements and specifications
contained herein.
LIGHTING, EXTERIOR: Temporary or permanent lighting that is installed, located or used in such a manner to cause light rays to shine
outdoors. For the purposes of this chapter, fixtures which are located indoors, but which are intended to illuminate something outside are
considered exterior lighting.
LIGHTING, HID (HIGH INTENSITY DISCHARGE): A high intensity discharge family of lighting that includes high pressure sodium, fluorescent,
mercury vapor, metal halide and ceramic metal halide type bulbs. These types require a warmup time, usually require a ballast exclusive to the
light source, and have a higher lumen output per watt than incandescent or halogen lamps.
LIGHTING, HOLIDAY: Temporary lighting installed in connection with a holiday or religious observances and intended to be removed thereafter.
LIGHTING INSTALLATION: The whole system of exterior lighting, including light poles, mounting systems, and lighting fixture elements
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 544/548
(including light sources, such as incandescent, metal halide, mercury vapor lamps, and light emitting diodes (LED)) that provide illumination to a
given building exterior, parking lot or other paved structure, or unpaved area.
LIGHTING INSTALLATION, NEW: A new lighting installation occurs in one or both of the following circumstances:
A. In a new development or redevelopment, where exterior lighting, including mounting poles, brackets, and fixtures are proposed to be
affixed to or erected upon: 1) a new structure, including building, patio, canopy, sidewalk, parking lot or other paved area, or 2) an
unpaved area;
B. When all exterior lighting, including mounting poles, brackets, and fixtures, affixed to or erected upon: 1) an existing structure, including
building, patio, canopy, sidewalk, parking lot or other paved area, or 2) an unpaved area, are removed and replaced or renovated with new
exterior lighting, including mounting poles, brackets, and fixtures.
LIGHTING, LANDSCAPE: Exterior lighting for the purpose of illuminating trees, shrubbery, plants, flowerbeds, waterways, gardens and
nonstructural, manmade features, including, but not limited to, sculptures, fountains, trellises, statuaries, tree houses and other features.
LIGHTING, NONCONFORMING: Lighting which does not meet the provisions, requirements and specifications contained herein.
LIGHTING, NONESSENTIAL: Lighting which is unnecessary for pedestrian passage and not generally useful (e.g., aesthetic, decorative or
landscape lighting). This includes lighting intended for a specific task or purpose when said task or purpose is not being actively performed
(e.g., parking lot illumination and wall mounted perimeter lights after business hours).
LIGHTING, SPECIAL EVENT: Lighting approved by the village for use at a temporary special event.
LIGHTING, SPORTS: Light fixtures used to illuminate courts, arenas, riding arenas, fields, tracks and other recreational areas generally utilizing
high light output fixtures, higher light levels and are mounted on higher than average freestanding poles.
LUMEN: The unit of measurement used to quantify the amount of light produced by a lamp or emitted from a fixture (as distinct from "watt"
which is a measurement of the electrical power).
LUMINAIRE: See definition of Fixture Or Fixture, Light.
LUMINOUS FLUX: The power emitted from a source of electromagnetic radiation, such as a light bulb or light transmitting elements, in the form
of visible light. Luminous flux is measured in lumens (lux) and is typically specified by the manufacturer for a given lamp or fixture. Typical
luminous flux values for incandescent bulbs are 100W: 1550 lumens, 75W: 1080 lumens, 60W: 780 lumens and 40W: 450 lumens.
LUMINOUS TRANSMITTANCE: A measure of the amount of light that passes through a sample of transparent material, generally plastic. This
measurement forms a basis for directly comparing the transparency of various grades and types of plastics. A haze meter and/or a recording
spectrophotometer are used in the test. ASTM D-1003.
MAINTAINED FOOT-CANDLES: Illuminance of lighting fixtures adjusted for a maintenance factor accounting for dirt buildup and lamp output
depreciation. The maintenance factor used in the design process to account for this depreciation cannot be lower than 0.64 of the initial lumen
output for metal halide and mercury vapor lamps.
MOTION SENSOR: A sensor which causes a luminaire to become illuminated automatically upon the presence of motion or infrared radiation,
or a combination thereof, within its field of view.
MOUNTING HEIGHT: The height above normal grade to the lowest light emitting part of an installed fixture.
PHOTOMETRY: A technical test report that indicates light distribution and performance of a fixture. A photometric plan may include
candlepower distribution data, cutoff classification, foot-candle chart, etc., some of which are generally available directly from the manufacturer,
and which may have been produced by an independent laboratory.
SEARCHLIGHT: Lighting installation, either ground or vehicle mounted, designed to project a high intensity beam of light that is typically used to
sweep the sky for promotional purposes.
SHIELD OR SHIELDED: When applied to lighting, an opaque barrier which does not allow light to be transmitted in certain directions.
SKY GLOW: The brightening of the night sky or the overhead glow from artificial light that is directed upward or reflected off moisture and dust
particles in the atmosphere, reducing the ability to view the natural night sky.
UL RATING: A reference to "Underwriters Laboratory", a commercial agency that certifies the maximum safe wattage for fixtures and other
electrical devices. A UL label indicating the maximum safe wattage is affixed or imprinted on all light fixtures which are offered for sale.
UNIFORMITY RATIO: A ratio that describes uniformity of illuminance across an area.
UNSHIELDED: The luminaire only incorporates clear glass, which permits all light to escape. (Ord. 2013-19, 4-22-2013)
11-20-5: FORMAL ZONING REVIEW OR PERMIT APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
As part of submittal for zoning relief as spelled out in section 11-20-2 of this chapter, applicants shall include the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 545/548
A. A site plan with all existing and proposed structures, which should show location, height, pole foundation details and mounting methods.
B. Lighting plans shall show foot-candle readings on a five foot (5') grid.
C. The grid shall include the location and installed height of each existing and proposed fixture, i.e., pole mounted, wall mounted, on-street
lights, and overall lights in foot-candles.
D. Grid should extend twenty feet (20') beyond the property lines and indicate the zoning of adjacent properties.
E. Photometrics shall be prepared by the fixture manufacturer or other professional, and shall provide calculation of the following:
1. Maximum and minimum foot-candle readings.
2. Average maintained foot-candle readings.
3. Average to minimum uniformity ratio.
F. A description of each light fixture should be provided, including:
1. Manufacturer, model number.
2. A photo of the fixture and manufacturer cut sheet, indicating pole and fixture size, color and finish.
3. Detailed IES formatted photometric data.
4. Description of the cutoff characteristics of each fixture.
5. Light output in initial lumens and lamp type, verifying any compliance requirements specified.
G. Mounting height shall be indicated with distance to nearest property line, including pole foundation dimension.
H. Shielding or glare reduction devices and all mounting details, including base.
I. Types of timing devices or motion sensor devices used to control the fixtures and a schedule of the proposed hours when each fixture will be
operated. (Ord. 2013-19, 4-22-2013)
11-20-6: POSTCONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
Prior to issuance of a final certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall schedule an on site inspection and observation with the building and
zoning official during hours of darkness to confirm that the new lighting installation does not cause glare. The building and zoning official may, at
his discretion, require a postinstallation photometric plan or verify measurements from a foot-candle light meter to compare with the approved
photometric plan. If glare is observed, or if the foot-candle readings are not consistent with the approved photometric plan, the applicant shall
provide a plan to the building and zoning official to remedy the problem, and shall implement the plan to the satisfaction of the building and
zoning official. (Ord. 2013-19, 4-22-2013)
11-20-7: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Requirements For All Exterior Lighting Fixtures:
1. Light Measurements: All electrical light sources shall have a color rendition index ("CRI") of 65 or more, and a color temperature ranging
from three thousand (3000) to five thousand five hundred (5500) kelvin. The building and zoning official may, at his discretion, permit
measurements outside of these ranges for specific lighting applications.
2. Fixtures Prohibited:
a. Exposed luminous tube lighting, whether neon, LED, or fluorescent.
b. Strobe lights.
c. Laser lights.
d. Blinking, flickering, scrolling, rolling, pulsating, and tracing lights, or revolving lighting, including on signs.
e. Searchlights, except as required by law enforcement, or permitted as part of a temporary land use permit for a grand opening or similar
event.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 546/548
3. Fixture Color And Finish: All light poles, fixtures, and external housing shall be black or dark bronze in color, with a matte, or nonglossy
finish.
B. Parking Lot And Access Drive Lighting:
1. Uniform Illumination: During business hours, parking lots shall be uniformly illuminated such that vehicular license plates, addresses, and
directional, instructional, and regulatory signs are plainly visible without blind spots or excessive distortion of color.
2. Automatic Controls: Lighting shall have automatic controls capable of being turned off when sufficient daylight is available or when lighting
is not required during nighttime hours. Lighting not designated for dusk to dawn operation shall be controlled by time switch or photo
sensor. The aforementioned controls shall not apply to exit lighting as required by life safety regulations.
3. Full Cutoff Fixtures: All luminaires serving parking lots shall be full cutoff fixtures as defined by the IESNA "Lighting Handbook". (Ord.
2013-19, 4-22-2013)
4. Light Source: All luminaires shall be metal halide, mercury vapor, or light emitting diode (LED) light source. (Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
5. Mounting Heights, Including Base: Parking lot light poles shall have a minimum height of twenty feet (20'), and a maximum height of
twenty eight feet (28') above grade. Notwithstanding this limitation, in a planned unit development with a floor area in excess of three
hundred thousand (300,000) square feet, the village board may allow a height of up to forty feet (40') if all of the following apply:
a. There is no residential use or no overnight occupancy within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the parking lot perimeter;
b. The buildings at the perimeter of the parking lot are configured so that the lighting is shielded from the residential uses or overnight
occupancy; and
c. The site measures ten (10) acres or greater.
6. Fixture Setback: The setback distance for freestanding light fixtures to the property line in any nonresidential district shall be no less than
three (3) times the mounting height unless it can be demonstrated, on a lighting plan, that with the use of a backside shield, all light
trespass limits are met.
7. Method Of Measurement: Unless otherwise specified, light levels shall be measured on the horizontal plane at grade level within the site.
8. Glare: The village may require a change in fixture type if there are concerns and/or complaints of excessive glare for fixtures installed
without the requisite building or electrical permit.
9. Illuminance Values For Parking Lots:
a. Paved Areas: The following levels of illumination apply to parking lots in nonresidential areas, and in multi-family planned developments
in the R-4 multiple-family dwelling residence district and the R-5 multiple-family high rise residence district:
PHOTOMETRIC REQUIREMENTS FOR PAVED
AREAS OF OFF STREET PARKING LOTS
Land Use
Minimum
Foot-Candle
Average
Foot-Candle*
Average:Minimum
Ratio
High intensity uses: Shopping centers greater than 300,000 sq. ft. of GLA 0.9 3.0 - 4.0 4:1
Medium: Commercial uses (retail, office, and business park) in excess of 5,000 sq.
ft. Public parks in excess of 50 parking spaces
0.6 2.0 - 3.0 4:1
Low: Multi-family residential uses, commercial uses (retail, office, and business
park) 5,000 sq. ft. or less. Public parks 50 spaces or less
0.2 1.0 - 2.0 4:1
b. Light Trespass, Lighting Transition, And Entrance Drives: To the greatest extent possible, light levels at a property line should be
compatible with the surrounding property, especially at the point where the access drive meets the right of way. The primary intent is to
assist motorists and pedestrians in locating the access drive, and avoiding an excessive contrast between the light levels of the
driveway and the roadway that could impair visual acuity in this area.
If the proposed development is adjacent to residential uses, institutional uses, or hotels and motels where there are patients, residents,
or guests, the light levels at the property line shall not exceed the lesser of 0.2 FC or the light level of the adjacent property.
Landscaping shall be provided to buffer direct view of fixture.
If adjacent to a commercial use with a similar land use and existing illuminance at the property line, then light levels at this location
should not exceed the lesser of 2.0 FC or the light level of the adjacent property.
The light levels at an entrance drive, at the point at which the drive intersects with the public street, shall be the lesser of: 1) one
hundred fifty percent (150%) of the average maintained light levels on the site, or 2) the light levels currently existing in the street right of
way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 547/548
C. Automobile Service Station And Drive-Through Establishments: (Maximum values in FC, measured horizontal at grade.)
Dark Surroundings Light Surroundings
Driveway 2.50 3.0
Service areas 4.0 4.0
Under canopy (includes gas stations and other drive-through businesses) 15.0 20.0
Lighting under the canopy shall be recessed, with fixtures flush with the underside of the canopy. The canopy shall contain a buffer incorporated
into the architectural style of the canopy, to block direct view of the fixtures from passing motorists and pedestrians.
D. Building Mounted Security Or Functional Lighting: All fixtures shall be full or fully cut off. (Ord. 2013-19, 4-22-2013)
E. Building Or Canopy Mounted Lighting Of An Architectural Or Decorative Nature:
1. Lighting fixtures shall be selected, located, aimed, and shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the building or canopy
facade, plantings, and other intended site features, and away from adjoining properties and public street rights of way.
2. Illumination on a vertical surface or angular roof shall not exceed 5.0 FC average maintained.
3. To the extent practical, lighting shall be directed downward rather than upward.
4. If upward lighting is to be allowed, low wattage fixtures with shields shall be placed as close to the building as possible to avoid glare from
windows and other surfaces. (Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
5. Notwithstanding the restrictions as set out in subsections E1 through E4 of this section, canopies for automobile gas stations may consist
of some or all of the following methods of illumination: indirect silhouette lighting, reflective lighting, or internally lit elements, subject to the
approval of the village board, who may, at their discretion, refer any proposed canopy lighting to the planning and zoning commission for a
prior review at a public meeting in the manner of a site plan review as provided for elsewhere in this code. In that case, the planning and
zoning commission will prepare a finding of fact to be submitted to the board containing its review of the revised exterior lighting plans.
(Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
6. Proposals for canopy lighting shall include technical details of all proposed lighting installations, including lumen output, color rendition
index, and Kelvin temperature. (Ord. 2013-33, 10-28-2013)
F. Permanent Sign Lighting:
1. Freestanding, Not Interior Lit: Lighting fixtures that illuminate signs shall be aimed and shielded so that direct illumination is focused
directly on the sign. Signs may be illuminated by a ground mounted light not to exceed the lumens generated by a one hundred (100) watt
incandescent lamp (typically 1600 to 1800 lumens), or its equivalent metal halide fixture. If necessary, landscaping shall be installed to
screen motorists and pedestrians from glare associated with any light spillage from the light illuminating the signs.
2. Internally Lit: Internally illuminated freestanding signs are permitted so long as the sign meets the following requirements:
a. Signs shall consist of light lettering (or symbols) on a dark background;
b. The lettering or symbols shall constitute no more than forty percent (40%) of the surface area of the sign;
c. The luminous transmittance for the lettering and symbols shall not exceed thirty five percent (35%) of the surface area of the sign;
d. The luminous transmittance for the background portion of the sign shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the surface area of the sign.
e. Light sources shall be fluorescent tubes, spaced at least twelve inches (12") on center, mounted 3.5 inches from the translucent surface
material. (Ord. 2013-19, 4-22-2013)
G. Decorative Lighting Or Pedestrian Scale Lighting: All installations for decorative street and parking lot lighting, or pedestrian walkway lighting,
whether or not they are part of a formal petition for zoning review, shall require a review by the planning and zoning commission and
approval by the village board of trustees. Said review shall require a public hearing if it is part of a larger petition for zoning relief that would
require a public hearing. If the installation does not otherwise require a public hearing, then the review can be accomplished through a public
meeting process. (Ord. 2013-19, 4-22-2013; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
1. The height of fixtures may be less than the minimum height of twenty feet (20') pending a determination that the photometrics indicate that
light levels will be well distributed, glare will be avoided, and the fixtures will be well integrated with the parking lot and walkway layout.
2. The petitioner shall demonstrate that additional light poles, fixtures and luminaires will be purchased and stored to address eventual
problems with damaged poles and burned out luminaires.
3. Special emphasis will be needed on eliminating glare. A written explanation shall accompany the plans that address how glare will be
minimized through fixture design or placement. Where appropriate, a luminaire shall be coated to minimize glare.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=943 548/548
4. All aspects of the light fixtures shall comply with IESNA standards for decorative fixtures. (Ord. 2013-19, 4-22-2013)
11-20-8: NONCONFORMING LIGHTING:
A. Any freestanding lighting fixture, light source, or lighting installation lawfully in place or approved by the village prior to the adoption of this
chapter shall be exempt from these requirements. At the time that a fixture (see definition of "fixture or fixture, light") or light source that does
not comply with the standards of this chapter, and is not exempt, is replaced, moved, upgraded, or otherwise changed, the fixture or light
source must be brought into compliance with the requirements of this chapter for light fixtures and light sources. At the time that a lighting
installation becomes a new lighting installation, it must be brought into compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. If a fixture does not conform to the standards of this chapter, and is not exempt, and was installed without the required building or electrical
permit, and has been reported to the village or otherwise observed by the village to be causing glare to the extent it is a danger to public
safety, it shall be considered a violation of the standards of this chapter. Both the owner of the property and the business operating on the
premises shall be notified in writing of the violation. The fixture must be brought into conformance with the provisions of this chapter within
thirty (30) days, with such extensions as the building and zoning official deems reasonable.
C. Where a lighting installation is damaged or destroyed by fire or other casualty, or act of God, to the extent that the cost of restoration will
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the cost of the installation if new, the provisions of chapter 12, "Nonconforming Buildings, Structures And
Uses", of this title shall apply.
D. When redevelopment occurs in a planned development in excess of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross leasable area and
there is need to replace a portion of the exterior parking lot lighting, the new lighting fixtures shall be compatible with the lighting in the
remainder of the development. (Ord. 2013-19, 4-22-2013)
11-20-9: EXCEPTIONS:
Requests for relief from the provisions of this chapter shall require a review by the planning and zoning commission at a public meeting and
approval by the village board. (Ord. 2013-19, 4-22-2013; amd. Ord. 2014-48, 10-27-2014)
11-20-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any portion of this chapter or of the regulations incorporated herein by reference is declared or held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such declaration or finding of invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion of this chapter or the regulations incorporated herein
which may be given effect without such invalid provisions, and to that end the provisions of this chapter are severable. (Ord. 2013-19, 4-22-
2013)
11-20-11: ABROGATION:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any greater restrictions imposed on existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. Whenever the provisions of any other law, ordinance, or regulation impose higher standards than are required by the provisions of
this chapter, the provision of such law, ordinance, or regulation shall govern. (Ord. 2013-19, 4-22-2013)
11-20-12: INSTALLATIONS IN PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS:
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 11-20-11 of this chapter, property owners in planned developments desirous of replacing their
approved installations to include light source that will achieve the light levels permitted under this chapter shall require the necessary permits in
compliance with applicable codes as specified in section 11-20-2 of this chapter, but said owners will not require a formal amendment of their
development ordinance. (Ord. 2013-19, 4-22-2013)